"

It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna Pavlovna
Scherer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Marya Fedorovna.
 With
these words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a man of high rank and
importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception.
 Anna Pavlovna
had had a cough for some days.
 She was, as she said, suffering from la
grippe; grippe being then a new word in St.
 He spoke in that
refined French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and
with the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance
who had grown old in society and at court.
 Set your friend's mind
at rest," said he without altering his tone, beneath the politeness
and affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could be
discerned.
 "You are staying the
whole evening, I hope?"

"And the fete at the English ambassador's? Today is Wednesday.
 I must
put in an appearance there," said the prince.
"

"I thought today's fete had been canceled.


"Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev's
dispatch? You know everything.
"

"What can one say about it?" replied the prince in a cold, listless
tone.
 "What has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte has
burnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours.
 Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
overflowed with animation and impulsiveness.
 To be an enthusiast had
become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not
feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the
expectations of those who knew her.
 The subdued smile which, though it
did not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expressed,
as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect,
which she neither wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, to
correct.
 Our gracious sovereign
recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it.
 That is the one
thing I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform
the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble that God will
not forsake him.
 He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of
revolution, which has become more terrible than ever in the person of
this murderer and villain! We alone must avenge the blood of the just
one.
.
.
 Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?.
.
.
 She has refused to evacuate Malta.
 The English have not understood and cannot
understand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing for
himself, but only desires the good of mankind.
 And what have they
promised? Nothing! And what little they have promised they will not
perform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible, and
that all Europe is powerless before him.
.
.
 And I don't believe a
word that Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either.
 This famous Prussian
neutrality is just a trap.
 I have faith only in God and the lofty
destiny of our adored monarch.
 You are so eloquent.
 Will you give me a
cup of tea?"

"In a moment.
 He is one of the genuine emigres, the good ones.
 And
also the Abbe Morio.
 Do you know that profound thinker? He has been
received by the Emperor.
"

Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were
trying through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it for the
baron.


Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor
anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or was
pleased with.


As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed an
expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
patroness.
 She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke
beaucoup d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
 But, with the womanly and
courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pavlovna wished
both to rebuke him (for daring to speak he had done of a man recommended
to the Empress) and at the same time to console him, so she said:

"Now about your family.
"

The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.
 Why has fate given you two such splendid children? I don't
speak of Anatole, your youngest.
 I don't like him," she added in a tone
admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows.
 "Two such charming
children.
 And really you appreciate them less than anyone, and so you
don't deserve to have them.
"

And she smiled her ecstatic smile.


"I can't help it," said the prince.
"

"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you.
.
.
.


"What would you have me do?" he said at last.
 "You know I did all a
father could for their education, and they have both turned out fools.

Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one.
 That
is the only difference between them.
" He said this smiling in a way more
natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth
very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.


"And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a father
there would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna Pavlovna,
looking up pensively.
 It is the cross I have to bear.
 That
is how I explain it to myself.
 "They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though I
don't feel that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who is
very unhappy with her father.
 She is a relation of yours, Princess Mary
Bolkonskaya.
"

Prince Vasili did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and
perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of
the head that he was considering this information.


"Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad
current of his thoughts, "that Anatole is costing me forty thousand
rubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be in five
years, if he goes on like this?" Presently he added: "That's what we
fathers have to put up with.
.
 Is this princess of yours rich?"

"Her father is very rich and stingy.
 He lives in the country.
 He is the
well-known Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the army under the
late Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.
 "Arrange that affair for
me and I shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe with an f, as
a village elder of mine writes in his reports.
 It shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start my
apprenticeship as old maid.
 The youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya, known as la
femme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg, * was also there.



     * The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.



To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not yet seen my aunt,"
or "You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted him or her to
a little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap, who had come
sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive;
and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pavlovna
mentioned each one's name and then left them.
 The aunt spoke to each of them in
the same words, about their health and her own, and the health of Her
Majesty, "who, thank God, was better today.
" And each visitor, though
politeness prevented his showing impatience, left the old woman with a
sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not return
to her the whole evening.


The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a
gold-embroidered velvet bag.
 Old men and dull dispirited young ones
who looked at her, after being in her company and talking to her a
little while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full of life
and health.
 All who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smile
and the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in a
specially amiable mood that day.


The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swaying
steps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat
down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was a
pleasure to herself and to all around her.
 "I have brought my work,"
said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing all present.

"Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me," she
added, turning to her hostess.
 "You wrote that it was to be quite a
small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed.
" And she spread
out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray dress,
girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.


"You know," said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in
French, turning to a general, "my husband is deserting me? He is going
to get himself killed.
 Tell me what this wretched war is for?" she
added, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an answer she
turned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Helene.


"What a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Prince Vasili to
Anna Pavlovna.
 The young man
had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had only
just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his
first appearance in society.
 Anna Pavlovna greeted him with the nod she
accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room.
 But in spite of
this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sight
of something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her face
when she saw Pierre enter.
 Though he was certainly rather bigger than
the other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to
the clever though shy, but observant and natural, expression which
distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
 On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little
princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.


Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the
aunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health.
"

"Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very
interesting but hardly feasible.
"

"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and
get away to attend to her duties as hostess.
 But Pierre now committed
a reverse act of impoliteness.
 First he had left a lady before she had
finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak to another who
wished to get away.
 With his head bent, and his big feet spread apart,
he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbe's plan chimerical.


And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she
resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready
to help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag.
 As
the foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes
round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that
creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check the
machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pavlovna moved about her
drawing room, approaching now a silent, now a too-noisy group, and by a
word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,
proper, and regular motion.
 She kept an anxious watch on him when he approached
the group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there, and
again when he passed to another group whose center was the abbe.






CHAPTER III


Anna Pavlovna's reception was in full swing.
 The spindles hummed
steadily and ceaselessly on all sides.
 With the exception of the aunt,
beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn face
was rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company had
settled into three groups.
 One, chiefly masculine, had formed round the
abbe.
 Another, of young people, was grouped round the beautiful Princess
Helene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the little Princess Bolkonskaya,
very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for her age.


The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and polished
manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of
politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in
which he found himself.


"Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pavlovna, with a
pleasant feeling that there was something a la Louis XV in the sound of
that sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte.
"

The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to
comply.
 Anna Pavlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone to
listen to his tale.
 "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she to another.

"How evidently he belongs to the best society," said she to a third;
and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest and most
advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef on a hot
dish.


The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.


"Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to the beautiful
young princess who was sitting some way off, the center of another
group.
 With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss
and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling
diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not looking
at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the
privilege of admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders,
back, and bosom--which in the fashion of those days were very much
exposed--and she seemed to bring the glamour of a ballroom with her as
she moved toward Anna Pavlovna.
 She
seemed to wish, but to be unable, to diminish its effect.


"Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he, smilingly
inclining his head.
 She smilingly waited.
 From time
to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the story
produced an effect she glanced at Anna Pavlovna, at once adopted just
the expression she saw on the maid of honor's face, and again relapsed
into her radiant smile.


The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene.


"Wait a moment, I'll get my work.
.
.
 Now then, what are you thinking
of?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte.


Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle and
moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
 His eyes, nose, and
mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms
and legs always fell into unnatural positions.


"Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone which
showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he had
uttered them.


He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be sure
whether what he said was very witty or very stupid.
 It was an anecdote, then current,
to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to visit
Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte, who also
enjoyed the famous actress' favors, and that in his presence Napoleon
happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was subject,
and was thus at the duc's mercy.


The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point
where the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies looked
agitated.


"Charming!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring glance at the little
princess.


"Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into her
work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story
prevented her from going on with it.


The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully
prepared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept a
watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was
talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried to the
rescue.
 Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbe about
the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the young
man's simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pet theory.
 Both were
talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why Anna
Pavlovna disapproved.


"The means are.
 The Italian's
face instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugary
expression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.






CHAPTER IV


Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew
Bolkonski, the little princess' husband.
 He was a very handsome young
man, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features.
 It was
evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but had
found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to
them.


"General Kutuzov," said Bolkonski, speaking French and stressing the
last syllable of the general's name like a Frenchman, "has been pleased
to take me as an aide-de-camp.
.
.
"

"Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?"

"Andre," said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquettish
manner in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has been telling us
such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"

Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away.
 Pierre, who from
the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm.
 Before he looked round
Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beaming face he gave him an
unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.


"There now!.
.

"This unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives me of a pleasure,
and obliges me to interrupt you.
 I am very sorry to leave your
enchanting party," said he, turning to Anna Pavlovna.


His daughter, Princess Helene, passed between the chairs, lightly
holding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more
radiantly on her beautiful face.
 Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,
almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.


"Very," said Pierre.


In passing Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna Pavlovna:
"Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me a whole month
and this is the first time I have seen him in society.
 Nothing is so
necessary for a young man as the society of clever women.
"

Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand.
 She knew his
father to be a connection of Prince Vasili's.
 The elderly lady who had
been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasili
in the anteroom.
 All the affectation of interest she had assumed had
left her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety and
fear.
 Tell me what news I
may take back to my poor boy.
"

Although Prince Vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely to
the elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an
ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not go
away.


"Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answered Prince
Vasili, "but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor.
 I should advise
you to appeal to Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn.

It was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasili that she had obtained an
invitation to Anna Pavlovna's reception and had sat listening to the
vicomte's story.
 "I have never yet asked you for
anything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my
father's friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God's sake to
do this for my son--and I shall always regard you as a benefactor," she
added hurriedly.
 "No, don't be angry, but promise! I have asked Golitsyn
and he has refused.


"Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turning her beautiful
head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she stood
waiting by the door.
 But in
Princess Drubetskaya's case he felt, after her second appeal, something
like qualms of conscience.
 This last consideration moved him.


"My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity and
weariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask;
but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father's memory,
I will do the impossible--your son shall be transferred to the Guards.

Here is my hand on it.
 Are you satisfied?"

"My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you--I knew your
kindness!" He turned to go.


"Wait--just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards.
.
.
.

recommend Boris to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at rest, and
then.
.
"

Prince Vasili smiled.


"No, I won't promise that.
 He told me himself that all the
Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants.
"

"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor.
.
"

"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went,
with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably came
naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.


Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed
all the old feminine arts.
 Her task was
accomplished.
"

Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with a sarcastic
smile.
 Guai a chi la tocchi!'"


     * God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!


"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run
over," Anna Pavlovna continued.
"

"The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, polite but
hopeless: "The sovereigns, madame.
.
.
"

And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.
 He explained this to her with as much gravity
as if she had asked him to do it.


The princess listened, smiling.
"

He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands.


"That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew.
 "Monsieur le Vicomte quite
rightly supposes that matters have already gone too far.
 I think it will
be difficult to return to the old regime.
"

"From what I have heard," said Pierre, blushing and breaking into the
conversation, "almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to
Bonaparte's side.
 "At the present time it is difficult to know the real
state of French public opinion.
"

"Bonaparte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile.


"'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,'" Prince
Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting Napoleon's words.

"'I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.
' I do not know how far
he was justified in saying so.
 "After the murder of the
duc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero.
 If to some
people," he went on, turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero,
after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one
hero less on earth.
"

"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.
 Do you consider that assassination shows
greatness of soul?" said the little princess, smiling and drawing her
work nearer to her.


"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.


"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his knee
with the palm of his hand.


The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders.
 Pierre looked solemnly at his
audience over his spectacles and continued.


"I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fled
from the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone
understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good,
he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life.
"

"Won't you come over to the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.


"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, "Napoleon is great because
he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved all
that was good in it--equality of citizenship and freedom of speech and
of the press--and only for that reason did he obtain power.
 The people only gave him power that he might rid
them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man.
 The
Revolution was a grand thing!" continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying by
this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his
wish to express all that was in his mind.


"What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?.
.
.
 But
won't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.


"I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas.


"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important.

What is important are the rights of man, emancipation from prejudices,
and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has retained
in full force.
"

"Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at last
deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were,
"high-sounding words which have long been discredited.
 Who does not love
liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality.

Have people since the Revolution become happier? On the contrary.
 We
wanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it.
 In the first moment of
Pierre's outburst Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, was
horror-struck.


"He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.


Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled.
 His
smile was unlike the half-smile of other people.


The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that
this young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested.

"Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish between
his acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor.
"

"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of this
reinforcement.
.


Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend,
and asking them all to be seated began:

"I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it.

Excuse me, Vicomte--I must tell it in Russian or the point will be
lost.
.
.
.

Everyone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their
attention to his story.
 She said.
.
.
.
'"

Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his
audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator.
 Several
persons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, did however
smile.


"She went.
 Suddenly there was a great wind.
.
" Here he could contain himself no longer and
went on, between gasps of laughter: "And the whole world knew.
.
.
.
"

And so the anecdote ended.
 Though it was unintelligible why he had told
it, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pavlovna and the
others appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in so agreeably ending
Pierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst.
 After the anecdote the
conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last and
next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when and
where.


Pierre was ungainly.
 Stout, about the average height, broad, with huge
red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawing
room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say something
particularly agreeable before going away.
 When he rose to go, he took up instead of his own, the
general's three-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at the plume, till
the general asked him to restore it.
 All his absent-mindedness and
inability to enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by
his kindly, simple, and modest expression.
"

When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again everybody
saw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions are
opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am.
 Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnant
princess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.


"Go in, Annette, or you will catch cold," said the little princess,
taking leave of Anna Pavlovna.
 "It is settled," she added in a low
voice.


Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she
contemplated between Anatole and the little princess' sister-in-law.

"Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter.
 Au
revoir!"--and she left the hall.


Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face
close to her, began to whisper something.


Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and a
cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish.
 The princess as usual
spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.


"I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's," said Prince Hippolyte
"-so dull-.
 "All the pretty women in society will be there.
"

"Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolyte
smiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he
even pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess.
 Either from
awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after the
shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, as
though embracing her.


Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at her
husband.
 Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
seem.


"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.


Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion
reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch
following the princess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage.


"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well as
with his feet.


The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the dark
carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under
pretense of helping, was in everyone's way.


"I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently and
affectionately.


The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled.
 Prince Hippolyte
laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte
whom he had promised to take home.


"Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, having seated himself beside
Hippolyte in the carriage, "your little princess is very nice, very nice
indeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of his fingers.


"Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,"
continued the vicomte.
"


Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like
one quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took
from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was Caesar's
Commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.


Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak.
 He lifted his eager
face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
.
.
.
.
 not by a balance of political power.
.
.
.
 Well, have you
at last decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a
diplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.


Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.


"Really, I don't yet know.
 I don't like either the one or the other.
"

"But you must decide on something! Your father expects it.
"

Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor,
and had remained away till he was twenty.
 When he returned to Moscow
his father dismissed the abbe and said to the young man, "Now go to
Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession.
 I will agree to
anything.
 Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money.
" Pierre had
already been choosing a career for three months, and had not decided
on anything.


"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbe whom he had
met that evening.


"That is all nonsense.
" Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let us
talk business.
 Have you been to the Horse Guards?"

"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to
tell you.
 There is a war now against Napoleon.
 If it were a war for
freedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the army;
but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is
not right.
"

Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childish words.
 He
put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such nonsense,
but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other answer than
the one Prince Andrew gave to this naive question.


"If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no wars,"
he said.


"And that would be splendid," said Pierre.


"Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about.
.
"

"Well, why are you going to the war?" asked Pierre.
.

"I am going because the life I am leading here does not suit me!"





CHAPTER VII


The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room.
 Prince Andrew
shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it had had
in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room.
 Pierre removed his feet from the sofa.

The princess came in.
 Prince Andrew rose and politely placed a
chair for her.


"How is it," she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly and
fussily in the easy chair, "how is it Annette never got married? How
stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for saying so,
but you have no sense about women.
 What an argumentative fellow you are,
Monsieur Pierre!"

"And I am still arguing with your husband.
 I can't understand why he
wants to go to the war," replied Pierre, addressing the princess with
none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their
intercourse with young women.


The princess started.


"Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she.
 "I don't understand it; I
don't in the least understand why men can't live without wars.
 I always tell him: Here he is Uncle's
aide-de-camp, a most brilliant position.
 He is so well known, so much
appreciated by everyone.
 The other day at the Apraksins' I heard a lady
asking, 'Is that the famous Prince Andrew?' I did indeed.
" She laughed.

"He is so well received everywhere.
 He might easily become aide-de-camp
to the Emperor.
 You know the Emperor spoke to him most graciously.
 "Today when I
remembered that all these delightful associations must be broken off.
.
.
" (she looked significantly at her husband)
"I'm afraid, I'm afraid!" she whispered, and a shudder ran down her
back.


Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides
Pierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a tone of
frigid politeness.
"

"With my father and sister, remember," said Prince Andrew gently.


"Alone all the same, without my friends.
.
.
 And he expects me not to be
afraid.
"

Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not a
joyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression.
 She paused as if she
felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, though the
gist of the matter lay in that.


The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.


"No, Andrew, I must say you have changed.
 Oh, how you have.
.
"

The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered.


Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise, now at him and
now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.


"Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?" exclaimed the little
princess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful
grimace.
 "I have long wanted to ask you, Andrew, why you have changed
so to me? What have I done to you? You are going to the war and have no
pity for me.
 Why is it?"

"Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said.
 But she went on hurriedly:

"You treat me like an invalid or a child.
 I see it all! Did you behave
like that six months ago?"

"Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more emphatically.


"Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because.
.
.
 I assure you
I myself have experienced.
 and so.
.
.
 because.
.
.
.
 No, don't distress yourself.
.

Good-by!"

Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.


"No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of the
pleasure of spending the evening with you.
"

"No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess without
restraining her angry tears.


Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' pretty
face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear.


"Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with one hand
she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
 Pierre
continually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead
with his small hand.


They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room.

Everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and glass bore
that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married.

Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on
his face, began to talk--as one who has long had something on his mind
and suddenly determines to speak out.
 Marry when you are old and good for nothing--or all that is
good and noble in you will be lost.
.
.
 But what's the good?.
.


"My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one of those
rare women with whom a man's honor is safe; but, O God, what would I
not give now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one to whom I
mention this, because I like you.
"

As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski who
had lolled in Anna Pavlovna's easy chairs and with half-closed eyes had
uttered French phrases between his teeth.
 Every muscle of his thin face
was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which the fire
of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant light.
 It
was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times, the more
impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid irritation.


"You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is the
whole story of life.
 You talk of Bonaparte and his career," said he
(though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), "but Bonaparte when he
worked went step by step toward his goal.
 But tie yourself up with
a woman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! And all you
have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with
regret.
 Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and triviality--these are
the enchanted circle I cannot escape from.
 I am now going to the war,
the greatest war there ever was, and I know nothing and am fit for
nothing.

Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everything--that's what women are
when you see them in their true colors! When you meet them in society it
seems as if there were something in them, but there's nothing, nothing,
nothing! No, don't marry, my dear fellow; don't marry!" concluded Prince
Andrew.
.
"

He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he
thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.
 Pierre was always astonished at Prince
Andrew's calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary memory,
his extensive reading (he had read everything, knew everything, and had
an opinion about everything), but above all at his capacity for work and
study.
 And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew's lack of capacity
for philosophical meditation (to which he himself was particularly
addicted), he regarded even this not as a defect but as a sign of
strength.
 "What's the use of talking
about me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silence, smiling at
his reassuring thoughts.
 "What am I? An illegitimate son!" He suddenly
blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a great effort to say
this.
 "Without a name and without means.
.
.
 And it really.
.
" But he
did not say what "it really" was.
"

Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance--friendly and
affectionate as it was--expressed a sense of his own superiority.


"I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among our
whole set.
 Yes, you're all right! Choose what you will; it's all the
same.
 But look here: give up visiting
those Kuragins and leading that sort of life.
 "Women, my dear fellow; women!"

"I don't understand it," replied Prince Andrew.
 "Women who are comme il
faut, that's a different matter; but the Kuragins' set of women, 'women
and wine' I don't understand!"

Pierre was staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin's and sharing the dissipated
life of his son Anatole, the son whom they were planning to reform by
marrying him to Prince Andrew's sister.


"Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy thought,
"seriously, I have long been thinking of it.
 Leading such a life I
can't decide or think properly about anything.
 He asked me for tonight, but I won't go.
"

"You give me your word of honor not to go?"

"On my honor!"





CHAPTER IX


It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend.
 It was a cloudless,
northern, summer night.
 Pierre took an open cab intending to drive
straight home.
 But the nearer he drew to the house the more he felt the
impossibility of going to sleep on such a night.
 It was light enough to
see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like morning
or evening than night.
 On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole Kuragin
was expecting the usual set for cards that evening, after which there
was generally a drinking bout, finishing with visits of a kind Pierre
was very fond of.


But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go
there.
 The thought immediately occurred to him that his
promise to Prince Andrew was of no account, because before he gave it he
had already promised Prince Anatole to come to his gathering; "besides,"
thought he, "all such 'words of honor' are conventional things with no
definite meaning, especially if one considers that by tomorrow one may
be dead, or something so extraordinary may happen to one that honor and
dishonor will be all the same!" Pierre often indulged in reflections
of this sort, nullifying all his decisions and intentions.
 He went to
Kuragin's.


Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards' barracks, in which
Anatole lived, Pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended the stairs,
and went in at the open door.

Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in which were the
remains of supper.


"I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one.


"Mind, no holding on!" cried another.


"I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third.
 "Kuragin, you part our hands.
"

"There, leave Bruin alone; here's a bet on.
"

"At one draught, or he loses!" shouted a fourth.


"Jacob, bring a bottle!" shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellow who
stood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine linen
shirt unfastened in front.
 "Wait a bit, you fellows.
.
.
.


Another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes,
particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober ring,
cried from the window: "Come here; part the bets!" This was Dolokhov,
an officer of the Semenov regiment, a notorious gambler and duelist, who
was living with Anatole.
 Pierre smiled, looking about him merrily.
 What's it all about?"

"Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here," said Anatole, taking a
glass from the table he went up to Pierre.
 Anatole kept on refilling Pierre's glass while
explaining that Dolokhov was betting with Stevens, an English naval
officer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledge
of the third floor window with his legs hanging out.


"Go on, you must drink it all," said Anatole, giving Pierre the last
glass, "or I won't let you go!"

"No, I won't," said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and he went up to the
window.


Dolokhov was holding the Englishman's hand and clearly and distinctly
repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself particularly to
Anatole and Pierre.


Dolokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blue eyes.
 He
was about twenty-five.
 Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache,
so that his mouth, the most striking feature of his face, was clearly
seen.
 The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved.
 The middle
of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm
lower one, and something like two distinct smiles played continually
round the two corners of the mouth; this, together with the resolute,
insolent intelligence of his eyes, produced an effect which made it
impossible not to notice his face.
 Dolokhov was a man of small means and
no connections.
 Yet, though Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles,
Dolokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a footing that
all who knew them, including Anatole himself, respected him more than
they did Anatole.

However much he drank, he never lost his clearheadedness.
 The window frame which prevented anyone
from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen, who
were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of
the gentlemen around.


Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window.
 He wanted to
smash something.
 He smashed a pane.


"You have a try, Hercules," said he, turning to Pierre.


Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame out with
a crash.


"Is the Englishman bragging?.
.


"First-rate," said Pierre, looking at Dolokhov, who with a bottle of rum
in his hand was approaching the window, from which the light of the sky,
the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.


Dolokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the window
sill.
 All were silent.


"I bet fifty imperials"--he spoke French that the Englishman might
understand him, but he did, not speak it very well--"I bet fifty
imperials.
.


"No, fifty," replied the latter.


"All right.
.
 that I will drink a whole bottle of rum
without taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window on this
spot" (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window)
"and without holding on to anything.
 Is that right?"

"Quite right," said the Englishman.
 Do you understand?"

The Englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether he intended to
accept this challenge or not.
 Anatole did not release him, and though
he kept nodding to show that he understood, Anatole went on translating
Dolokhov's words into English.


"Oh! Oh! Oh!" he muttered, looking down from the window at the stones of
the pavement.


"Shut up!" cried Dolokhov, pushing him away from the window.


Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily,
Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered his
legs.
 Everyone crowded to the window, the Englishman in front.
 One man, older than the others present,
suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted to seize
hold of Dolokhov's shirt.


"I say, this is folly! He'll be killed," said this more sensible man.


"Don't touch him! You'll startle him and then he'll be killed.
 Eh?.
.
.

What then?.
.
 Eh?"

Dolokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands, arranged
himself on his seat.


"If anyone comes meddling again," said he, emitting the words separately
through his thin compressed lips, "I will throw him down there.
 Now
then!"

Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the bottle
and lifted it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised his free hand
to balance himself.
 Anatole stood erect with staring eyes.

The Englishman looked on sideways, pursing up his lips.
 The man who had
wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw himself
on a sofa with his face to the wall.
 Pierre hid his face, from which a
faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed horror
and fear.
 All were still.
 Pierre took his hands from his eyes.
 Dolokhov
still sat in the same position, only his head was thrown further back
till his curly hair touched his shirt collar, and the hand holding the
bottle was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the effort.
 The
bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head
tilting yet further back.
 It seemed
to him that more than half an hour had elapsed.
 One hand moved as if to clutch the window sill, but
refrained from touching it.
 Pierre again covered his eyes and thought he
would never open them again.
 Suddenly he was aware of a stir all around.

He looked up: Dolokhov was standing on the window sill, with a pale but
radiant face.
"

He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it neatly.


"Well done!.
.
 Fine fellow!.
.
 There's a bet for you!.
.
.
 Devil take
you!" came from different sides.


The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money.

Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak.
 Pierre jumped upon the window
sill.


"Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I'll do the same thing!" he
suddenly cried.
.
.
 Bring a bottle!"

"Let him do it, let him do it," said Dolokhov, smiling.
.
 No one would let you!.
.
 Why, you go
giddy even on a staircase," exclaimed several voices.


They seized him by his arms; but he was so strong that everyone who
touched him was sent flying.
.
.
"

"Come on then," cried Pierre.
 "Come on!.
.
 And we'll take Bruin with
us.
 The matter was mentioned to the Emperor, an exception
made, and Boris transferred into the regiment of Semenov Guards with the
rank of cornet.
 He received, however, no appointment to Kutuzov's staff
despite all Anna Mikhaylovna's endeavors and entreaties.
 The Guards had already left Petersburg on the tenth of August, and
her son, who had remained in Moscow for his equipment, was to join them
on the march to Radzivilov.


It was St.
 Ever since
the morning, carriages with six horses had been coming and going
continually, bringing visitors to the Countess Rostova's big house on
the Povarskaya, so well known to all Moscow.
 The countess herself and
her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing-room with the visitors
who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one another in
relays.


The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental type
of face, evidently worn out with childbearing--she had had twelve.

A languor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness, gave her a
distinguished air which inspired respect.
 The young
people were in one of the inner rooms, not considering it necessary to
take part in receiving the visitors.
 The count met the guests and saw
them off, inviting them all to dinner.


"I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher," or "ma chere"--he called
everyone without exception and without the slightest variation in his
tone, "my dear," whether they were above or below him in rank--"I thank
you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name day we are keeping.

But mind you come to dinner or I shall be offended, ma chere! On
behalf of the whole family I beg you to come, mon cher!" These words he
repeated to everyone without exception or variation, and with the same
expression on his full, cheerful, clean-shaven face, the same firm
pressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows.
 Sometimes on his
way back from the anteroom he would pass through the conservatory and
pantry into the large marble dining hall, where tables were being set
out for eighty people; and looking at the footmen, who were bringing in
silver and china, moving tables, and unfolding damask table linen, he
would call Dmitri Vasilevich, a man of good family and the manager of
all his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the enormous table
would say: "Well, Dmitri, you'll see that things are all as they should
be? That's right! The great thing is the serving, that's it.
" And with a
complacent sigh he would return to the drawing room.


"Marya Lvovna Karagina and her daughter!" announced the countess'
gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing room.
 The
countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox with
her husband's portrait on it.


"I'm quite worn out by these callers.

She is so affected.


"Dear Countess, what an age.
 She has been laid up, poor child.
.

at the Razumovski's ball.
.
.
.
 I was so
delighted.
.
.
.
.
 Mamma's health.
.
 and Countess Apraksina.
.
.
" and
then, again rustling, pass into the anteroom, put on cloaks or mantles,
and drive away.
 The conversation was on the chief topic of the day: the
illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of Catherine's day, Count
Bezukhov, and about his illegitimate son Pierre, the one who had behaved
so improperly at Anna Pavlovna's reception.


"I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor.
 "He is in such bad
health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill him!"

"What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what the
visitor alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause of
Count Bezukhov's distress some fifteen times.
"

"You don't say so!" replied the countess.
 "Prince
Vasili's son, he, and a certain Dolokhov have, it is said, been up to
heaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it.
 Dolokhov
has been degraded to the ranks and Bezukhov's son sent back to Moscow.
"

"But what have they been up to?" asked the countess.


"They are regular brigands, especially Dolokhov," replied the visitor.


"Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?"

Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.


"It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued the
visitor.
 "And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's son who
amuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be so well
educated and clever.
 This is all that his foreign education has done for
him! I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him, in spite of his
money.
 "His
children are all illegitimate.
 I think Pierre also is illegitimate.
"

The visitor made a gesture with her hand.


"I should think he has a score of them.
"

Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation, evidently
wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in
society.
.
.
"

"How handsome the old man still was only a year ago!" remarked the
countess.
 "I have never seen a handsomer man.
 Lorrain has come from
Petersburg--no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune, Pierre
or Prince Vasili.


"Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday.


"Yes, but between ourselves," said the princess, "that is a pretext.
 The
fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladimirovich, hearing how ill he
is.
 "I can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman cut!"

And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly form
again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who always eats
well and, in particular, drinks well.
 "So do come and dine with us!" he
said.






CHAPTER XI


Silence ensued.
 The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably,
but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they now
rose and took their leave.

My dear pet!"

"Ma chere, there is a time for everything," said the countess with
feigned severity.
 "What a charming child," she added, addressing
the mother.
 She laughed, and in
fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced
from the folds of her frock.


"Do you see?.
.
.
 Mimi.
.
.
" was all Natasha managed
to utter (to her everything seemed funny).
"

Natasha, raising her face for a moment from her mother's mantilla,
glanced up at her through tears of laughter, and again hid her face.


"Tell me, my dear," said she to Natasha, "is Mimi a relation of yours? A
daughter, I suppose?"

Natasha did not like the visitor's tone of condescension to childish
things.
 She did not reply, but looked at her seriously.
 Evidently in the back rooms, from which they
had dashed out so impetuously, the conversation had been more amusing
than the drawing-room talk of society scandals, the weather, and
Countess Apraksina.
 Now and then they glanced at one another, hardly
able to suppress their laughter.


The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood,
were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike.
 Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression.
 Nicholas blushed when he entered
the drawing room.
 Boris did not laugh.


"Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready," she answered, returning
his smile.


Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha.
 The plump
boy ran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had been
disturbed.
 By the grace of her movements, by the softness and
flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain coyness and reserve of
manner, she reminded one of a pretty, half-grown kitten which promises
to become a beautiful little cat.
 And there was a place
and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department! Isn't that
friendship?" remarked the count in an inquiring tone.


"They've been saying so a long while," said the count, "and they'll say
so again and again, and that will be the end of it.
 My dear, there's
friendship for you," he repeated.
 "It is not from friendship
at all; I simply feel that the army is my vocation.
"

He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they were both
regarding him with a smile of approbation.


"Schubert, the colonel of the Pavlograd Hussars, is dining with us
today.
 He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with
him.
 It can't be helped!" said the count, shrugging his shoulders and
speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.
 But I know I am no use anywhere except in the
army; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk.
--I don't know how to
hide what I feel.


The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment
to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.
 "He always flares up! This
Buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he rose
from an ensign and became Emperor.


The elders began talking about Bonaparte.
 Julie Karagina turned to young
Rostov.


"What a pity you weren't at the Arkharovs' on Thursday.
 It was so dull
without you," said she, giving him a tender smile.


The young man, flattered, sat down nearer to her with a coquettish
smile, and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversation
without at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart
of Sonya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally.
 All Nicholas' animation
vanished.



     * Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.



"Yes," said the countess when the brightness these young people had
brought into the room had vanished; and as if answering a question no
one had put but which was always in her mind, "and how much suffering,
how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in
them now! And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy.
 One is
always, always anxious! Especially just at this age, so dangerous both
for girls and boys.
"

"It all depends on the bringing up," remarked the visitor.


"Yes, you're quite right," continued the countess.
 "Till now I have
always, thank God, been my children's friend and had their full
confidence," said she, repeating the mistake of so many parents who
imagine that their children have no secrets from them.
 "I know I shall
always be my daughters' first confidante, and that if Nicholas, with his
impulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy can't help it), he will
all the same never be like those Petersburg young men.
 "Just fancy: wants to be an hussar.
 What's one
to do, my dear?"

"What a charming creature your younger girl is," said the visitor; "a
little volcano!"

"Yes, a regular volcano," said the count.
 "Takes after me! And what a
voice she has; though she's my daughter, I tell the truth when I say
she'll be a singer, a second Salomoni! We have engaged an Italian to
give her lessons.
"

"Isn't she too young? I have heard that it harms the voice to train it
at that age.
"

"Oh no, not at all too young!" replied the count.
 Just fancy!" said the countess
with a gentle smile, looking at Boris' and went on, evidently concerned
with a thought that always occupied her: "Now you see if I were to be
severe with her and to forbid it.
.
 goodness knows what they might be up
to on the sly" (she meant that they would be kissing), "but as it is,
I know every word she utters.
 Perhaps I spoil her, but
really that seems the best plan.
 With her elder sister I was stricter.
"

"Yes, I was brought up quite differently," remarked the handsome elder
daughter, Countess Vera, with a smile.
 Vera was good-looking, not at all stupid, quick at learning,
was well brought up, and had a pleasant voice; what she said was
true and appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone--the visitors and
countess alike--turned to look at her as if wondering why she had said
it, and they all felt awkward.
 "Well, what of that? She's turned out
splendidly all the same," he added, winking at Vera.


The guests got up and took their leave, promising to return to dinner.


"What manners! I thought they would never go," said the countess, when
she had seen her guests out.






CHAPTER XIII


When Natasha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the
conservatory.
 There she paused and stood listening to the conversation
in the drawing room, waiting for Boris to come out.
 At this Natasha dashed swiftly among the
flower tubs and hid there.


Boris paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed a little
dust from the sleeve of his uniform, and going up to a mirror examined
his handsome face.
 Natasha, very still, peered out from her ambush,
waiting to see what he would do.
 He stood a little while before the
glass, smiled, and walked toward the other door.
 Natasha was about
to call him but changed her mind.
 "Let him look for me," thought she.
 Natasha checked her first impulse to
run out to her, and remained in her hiding place, watching--as under an
invisible cap--to see what went on in the world.
 She was experiencing
a new and peculiar pleasure.
 It opened and Nicholas came in.


"Sonya, what is the matter with you? How can you?" said he, running up
to her.


"Ah, I know what it is.


Sonya did not pull it away, and left off crying.
 Natasha, not stirring
and scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes.


"Sonya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are everything!"
said Nicholas.
 "And I will prove it to you.
"

"I don't like you to talk like that.
"

"Well, then, I won't; only forgive me, Sonya!" He drew her to him and
kissed her.


"Boris, come here," said she with a sly and significant look.
 "I
have something to tell you.
 Here, here!" and she led him into the
conservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding.


She grew confused, glanced round, and, seeing the doll she had thrown
down on one of the tubs, picked it up.


"Don't you want to? Well, then, come here," said she, and went further
in among the plants and threw down the doll.
 "Closer, closer!" she
whispered.


She caught the young officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnity and
fear appeared on her flushed face.


"And me? Would you like to kiss me?" she whispered almost inaudibly,
glancing up at him from under her brows, smiling, and almost crying from
excitement.


Boris blushed.


Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher than he, embraced him so
that both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck, and, tossing
back her hair, kissed him full on the lips.


"Natasha," he said, "you know that I love you, but.
.
"

"You are in love with me?" Natasha broke in.


"Yes, I am, but please don't let us do like that.
.
.
.


"Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen," she counted on her slender
little fingers.


"Settled!" replied Boris.






CHAPTER XIV


After receiving her visitors, the countess was so tired that she gave
orders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to invite
to dinner all who came "to congratulate.
" The countess wished to have
a tete-a-tete talk with the friend of her childhood, Princess Anna
Mikhaylovna, whom she had not seen properly since she returned from
Petersburg.
 Anna Mikhaylovna, with her tear-worn but pleasant face, drew
her chair nearer to that of the countess.


"With you I will be quite frank," said Anna Mikhaylovna.
 "There are not
many left of us old friends! That's why I so value your friendship.


"Vera," she said to her eldest daughter who was evidently not a
favorite, "how is it you have so little tact? Don't you see you are not
wanted here? Go to the other girls, or.


But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couples sitting,
one pair at each window.
 She stopped and smiled scornfully.
 Sonya was
sitting close to Nicholas who was copying out some verses for her, the
first he had ever written.
 Boris and Natasha were at the other window
and ceased talking when Vera entered.
 Sonya and Natasha looked at Vera
with guilty, happy faces.


It was pleasant and touching to see these little girls in love; but
apparently the sight of them roused no pleasant feeling in Vera.


"How often have I asked you not to take my things?" she said.
 "You have
a room of your own," and she took the inkstand from Nicholas.


"In a minute, in a minute," he said, dipping his pen.

"You came rushing into the drawing room so that everyone felt ashamed of
you.
 She lingered in the
room with the inkstand in her hand.


She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate to
everyone.
 "I am ashamed of you.
 Secrets indeed!"

"All have secrets of their own," answered Natasha, getting warmer.
 "We
don't interfere with you and Berg.
"

"Natalya Ilynichna behaves very well to me," remarked Boris.


"I shall at any rate not run after a young man before visitors.
"

"Madame de Genlis! Madame de Genlis!" shouted laughing voices through
the door.


The handsome Vera, who produced such an irritating and unpleasant effect
on everyone, smiled and, evidently unmoved by what had been said to her,
went to the looking glass and arranged her hair and scarf.

Don't I know that at the rate we are living our means won't last long?
It's all the Club and his easygoing nature.
 How did you
get things settled? I couldn't possibly do it.
"

"Ah, my love," answered Anna Mikhaylovna, "God grant you never know
what it is to be left a widow without means and with a son you love
to distraction! One learns many things then," she added with a certain
pride.
 I don't mind what they think of me.
"

"Well, and to whom did you apply about Bory?" asked the countess.
 "You
see yours is already an officer in the Guards, while my Nicholas is
going as a cadet.
 To whom
did you apply?"

"To Prince Vasili.
 He was so kind.
 He at once agreed to everything,
and put the matter before the Emperor," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
enthusiastically, quite forgetting all the humiliation she had endured
to gain her end.
 "I have not seen him
since we acted together at the Rumyantsovs' theatricals.


"He is just the same as ever," replied Anna Mikhaylovna, "overflowing
with amiability.
 His position has not turned his head at all.
 He said to
me, 'I am sorry I can do so little for you, dear Princess.

"My wretched lawsuit takes all I have and makes no progress.
 Would you
believe it, I have literally not a penny and don't know how to equip
Boris.
 "I need five
hundred rubles, and have only one twenty-five-ruble note.
 I am in such a
state.
.

If he will not assist his godson--you know he is Bory's godfather--and
allow him something for his maintenance, all my trouble will have been
thrown away.
.
.
 I shall not be able to equip him.
"

The countess' eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence.


"I often think, though, perhaps it's a sin," said the princess, "that
here lives Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov so rich, all alone.
.
 that
tremendous fortune.
.
.
 and what is his life worth? It's a burden to him,
and Bory's life is only just beginning.
.
.
"

"Surely he will leave something to Boris," said the countess.
" The princess rose.
 There will just be time.
"

And like a practical Petersburg lady who knows how to make the most of
time, Anna Mikhaylovna sent someone to call her son, and went into the
anteroom with him.
 He has been to the house, you
know, and danced with the children.
 Be sure to invite him, my dear.

We will see how Taras distinguishes himself today.
 He says Count Orlov
never gave such a dinner as ours will be!"





CHAPTER XV


"My dear Boris," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna to her son as Countess
Rostova's carriage in which they were seated drove over the straw
covered street and turned into the wide courtyard of Count Cyril
Vladimirovich Bezukhov's house.
 "My dear Boris," said the mother,
drawing her hand from beneath her old mantle and laying it timidly and
tenderly on her son's arm, "be affectionate and attentive to him.
"

"If only I knew that anything besides humiliation would come of it.
.
"
answered her son coldly.
 "But I have promised and will do it for your
sake.


"We may as well go back," said the son in French.


Boris said no more, but looked inquiringly at his mother without taking
off his cloak.


"My friend," said Anna Mikhaylovna in gentle tones, addressing the hall
porter, "I know Count Cyril Vladimirovich is very ill.
.
 that's why I
have come.
.
.
 I am a relation.
.
.
 I
only need see Prince Vasili Sergeevich: he is staying here, is he not?
Please announce me.


The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before a large
Venetian mirror in the wall, and in her trodden-down shoes briskly
ascended the carpeted stairs.


They entered the large hall, from which one of the doors led to the
apartments assigned to Prince Vasili.


Just as the mother and son, having reached the middle of the hall, were
about to ask their way of an elderly footman who had sprung up as they
entered, the bronze handle of one of the doors turned and Prince Vasili
came out--wearing a velvet coat with a single star on his breast, as
was his custom when at home--taking leave of a good-looking, dark-haired
man.
.
.



"Very well, very well.
.
"

Seeing Anna Mikhaylovna and her son, Prince Vasili dismissed the doctor
with a bow and approached them silently and with a look of inquiry.


"Ah, Prince! In what sad circumstances we meet again! And how is our
dear invalid?" said she, as though unaware of the cold offensive look
fixed on her.


"Is it possible?" exclaimed Anna Mikhaylovna.
 "Oh, how awful! It is
terrible to think.
.
.
 "He
wanted to thank you himself.
"

Boris bowed again politely.
 "I am glad.
.
.
.
 Are you here on leave?" he went on in his
usual tone of indifference.


"Are you living with your mother?"

"I am living at Countess Rostova's," replied Boris, again adding, "your
excellency.


"I know, I know," answered Prince Vasili in his monotonous voice.

"I never could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that
unlicked bear! A perfectly absurd and stupid fellow, and a gambler too,
I am told.
"

"But a very kind man, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a pathetic
smile, as though she too knew that Count Rostov deserved this censure,
but asked him not to be too hard on the poor old man.
 "What do the
doctors say?" asked the princess after a pause, her worn face again
expressing deep sorrow.


"And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his kindness to me and
Boris.
 Anna Mikhaylovna saw that
he was afraid of finding in her a rival for Count Bezukhov's fortune,
and hastened to reassure him.
.
 but you see he has no one with him
except the young princesses.
.
.
 They are still young.
.
" She bent
her head and continued in a whisper: "Has he performed his final duty,
Prince? How priceless are those last moments! It can make things no
worse, and it is absolutely necessary to prepare him if he is so ill.
 We
women, Prince," and she smiled tenderly, "always know how to say these
things.
 I
am used to suffering.
"

Evidently the prince understood her, and also understood, as he had
done at Anna Pavlovna's, that it would be difficult to get rid of Anna
Mikhaylovna.
 The doctors are expecting a
crisis.
 Ah, it is awful: the duties of a
Christian.
.
.
"

A door of one of the inner rooms opened and one of the princesses, the
count's niece, entered with a cold, stern face.
 The length of her body
was strikingly out of proportion to her short legs.


"Well, how is he?"

"Still the same; but what can you expect, this noise.
.
.
 "I have come, and am at
your service to help you nurse my uncle.
 I imagine what you have gone
through," and she sympathetically turned up her eyes.


"Boris," she said to her son with a smile, "I shall go in to see the
count, my uncle; but you, my dear, had better go to Pierre meanwhile
and don't forget to give him the Rostovs' invitation.
.
 Here
he is, and the count has not once asked for him.
 The story told about him at Count Rostov's was true.

Pierre had taken part in tying a policeman to a bear.
 He had now been
for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his father's house.

Though he expected that the story of his escapade would be already known
in Moscow and that the ladies about his father--who were never favorably
disposed toward him--would have used it to turn the count against him,
he nevertheless on the day of his arrival went to his father's part of
the house.
 Entering the drawing room, where the princesses spent most
of their time, he greeted the ladies, two of whom were sitting at
embroidery frames while a third read aloud.
 The two younger ones were
embroidering: both were rosy and pretty and they differed only in that
one had a little mole on her lip which made her much prettier.
 Pierre
was received as if he were a corpse or a leper.
 The eldest princess
paused in her reading and silently stared at him with frightened eyes;
the second assumed precisely the same expression; while the youngest,
the one with the mole, who was of a cheerful and lively disposition,
bent over her frame to hide a smile probably evoked by the amusing scene
she foresaw.
 She drew her wool down through the canvas and, scarcely
able to refrain from laughing, stooped as if trying to make out the
pattern.
 "You don't recognize me?"

"I recognize you only too well, too well.
"

"Can I see the count?" Pierre again asked.
.
.
.
 Pierre stood looking at the sisters; then he bowed and
said: "Then I will go to my rooms.
"

And he left the room, followed by the low but ringing laughter of the
sister with the mole.


Next day Prince Vasili had arrived and settled in the count's house.
 He
sent for Pierre and said to him: "My dear fellow, if you are going to
behave here as you did in Petersburg, you will end very badly; that is
all I have to say to you.
 The count is very, very ill, and you must not
see him at all.
"

Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the whole time in
his rooms upstairs.


When Boris appeared at his door Pierre was pacing up and down his room,
stopping occasionally at a corner to make menacing gestures at the wall,
as if running a sword through an invisible foe, and glaring savagely
over his spectacles, and then again resuming his walk, muttering
indistinct words, shrugging his shoulders and gesticulating.


"England is done for," said he, scowling and pointing his finger at
someone unseen.
 Pitt, as a traitor to the nation and to the rights
of man, is sentenced to.
.
" But before Pierre--who at that moment
imagined himself to be Napoleon in person and to have just effected the
dangerous crossing of the Straits of Dover and captured London--could
pronounce Pitt's sentence, he saw a well-built and handsome young
officer entering his room.
 Pierre paused.


"Do you remember me?" asked Boris quietly with a pleasant smile.
 "I have
come with my mother to see the count, but it seems he is not well.


Boris felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider it
necessary to introduce himself, and without experiencing the least
embarrassment looked Pierre straight in the face.
 Do you remember how we
went to the Sparrow Hills with Madame Jacquot?.
.
.
.
.
"

"You are mistaken," said Boris deliberately, with a bold and slightly
sarcastic smile.
 "I am Boris, son of Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
Drubetskaya.
 Rostov, the father, is Ilya, and his son is Nicholas.
 I
never knew any Madame Jacquot.


"Oh dear, what am I thinking about? I've mixed everything up.
 And what do you think of the Boulogne expedition?
The English will come off badly, you know, if Napoleon gets across the
Channel.
 I think the expedition is quite feasible.
 If only Villeneuve
doesn't make a mess of things!"

Boris knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not read the
papers and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve's name.


"We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandal
than with politics," said he in his quiet ironical tone.
 "I know nothing
about it and have not thought about it.
 Moscow is chiefly busy with
gossip," he continued.
 "Everybody
is wondering to whom the count will leave his fortune, though he may
perhaps outlive us all, as I sincerely hope he will.
.


"And it must seem to you," said Boris flushing slightly, but not
changing his tone or attitude, "it must seem to you that everyone is
trying to get something out of the rich man?"

"So it does," thought Pierre.


"But I just wish to say, to avoid misunderstandings, that you are quite
mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people.
"

For a long time Pierre could not understand, but when he did, he jumped
up from the sofa, seized Boris under the elbow in his quick, clumsy
way, and, blushing far more than Boris, began to speak with a feeling of
mingled shame and vexation.


"Well, this is strange! Do you suppose I.
.
.
 who could think?.
.
.
.
"

But Boris again interrupted him.
 Perhaps you did not like it? You
must excuse me," said he, putting Pierre at ease instead of being put
at ease by him, "but I hope I have not offended you.
.
.
 Well, what answer am I to take? Will you come to
dinner at the Rostovs'?"

And Boris, having apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty and
extricated himself from an awkward situation and placed another in it,
became quite pleasant again.


"No, but I say," said Pierre, calming down, "you are a wonderful fellow!
What you have just said is good, very good.

We have not met for such a long time.
.
.
 not since we were children.
 You
might think that I.
.
.
 It's queer," he added after
a pause, "that you should have suspected me!" He began to laugh.
 "Do you know, I have not once been in to see the count.
.
.
 I am sorry for him as a man, but what can one do?"

"And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across?" asked
Boris with a smile.


Pierre saw that Boris wished to change the subject, and being of the
same mind he began explaining the advantages and disadvantages of the
Boulogne expedition.
 Pierre, in
order to make Boris' better acquaintance, promised to come to dinner,
and warmly pressing his hand looked affectionately over his spectacles
into Boris' eyes.
 After he had gone Pierre continued pacing up and down
the room for a long time, no longer piercing an imaginary foe with
his imaginary sword, but smiling at the remembrance of that pleasant,
intelligent, and resolute young man.


As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads a lonely
life, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man and made up
his mind that they would be friends.


Prince Vasili saw the princess off.
 She held a handkerchief to her eyes
and her face was tearful.


"It is dreadful, dreadful!" she was saying, "but cost me what it may I
shall do my duty.
 Every moment is precious.
 I can't think why his nieces put
it off.
.
.
"

"Adieu, ma bonne," answered Prince Vasili turning away from her.
 "He hardly recognizes anybody.
"

"I don't understand, Mamma--what is his attitude to Pierre?" asked the
son.
"

"But why do you expect that he will leave us anything?"

"Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poor!"

"Well, that is hardly a sufficient reason, Mamma.
.
.
"

"Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!" exclaimed the mother.






CHAPTER XVII


After Anna Mikhaylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count Cyril
Vladimirovich Bezukhov, Countess Rostova sat for a long time all alone
applying her handkerchief to her eyes.
 At last she rang.


"What is the matter with you, my dear?" she said crossly to the maid who
kept her waiting some minutes.
 "Don't you wish to serve me? Then I'll
find you another place.
"

The countess was upset by her friend's sorrow and humiliating poverty,
and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with her always
found expression in calling her maid "my dear" and speaking to her with
exaggerated politeness.


"Ask the count to come to me.
 The thousand rubles I paid for Taras were not
ill-spent.
 He is worth it!"

He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands ruffling
his gray hair.


"What are your commands, little countess?"

"You see, my dear.
.
"

Her face became sad.


"Oh, little countess!".
.
.


"I want a great deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles," and taking out
her cambric handkerchief she began wiping her husband's waistcoat.
 "Send Dmitri to me!"

Dmitri, a man of good family who had been brought up in the count's
house and now managed all his affairs, stepped softly into the room.
.
" he reflected a moment, "yes,
bring me seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don't bring me such
tattered and dirty notes as last time, but nice clean ones for the
countess.
"

"Yes, Dmitri, clean ones, please," said the countess, sighing deeply.


"When would you like them, your excellency?" asked Dmitri.
.
.
 "I was forgetting.
.
.
 Do you wish it brought at once?"

"Yes, yes; just so! Bring it.
 Give it to the countess.
"

"What a treasure that Dmitri is," added the count with a smile when
the young man had departed.

That's a thing I hate! Everything is possible.
 "But I am in great need of this sum.
"

"You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift," said the count,
and having kissed his wife's hand he went back to his study.


When Anna Mikhaylovna returned from Count Bezukhov's the money, all
in clean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess'
little table, and Anna Mikhaylovna noticed that something was agitating
her.


"Well, my dear?" asked the countess.


"Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he is so
ill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word.
.


Anna Mikhaylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be ready
to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.


"This is for Boris from me, for his outfit.
 They wept because they were friends, and because they were
kindhearted, and because they--friends from childhood--had to think
about such a base thing as money, and because their youth was over.
.
.

But those tears were pleasant to them both.






CHAPTER XVIII


Countess Rostova, with her daughters and a large number of guests, was
already seated in the drawing room.
 The count took the gentlemen into
his study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes.
 Marya Dmitrievna was known to the
Imperial family as well as to all Moscow and Petersburg, and both cities
wondered at her, laughed privately at her rudenesses, and told good
stories about her, while none the less all without exception respected
and feared her.
 None
of them had yet seen the manifesto, but they all knew it had appeared.
 He neither smoked nor talked, but bending his head first to one
side and then to the other watched the smokers with evident pleasure
and listened to the conversation of his two neighbors, whom he egged on
against each other.


One of them was a sallow, clean-shaven civilian with a thin and wrinkled
face, already growing old, though he was dressed like a most fashionable
young man.

The latter, a fresh, rosy officer of the Guards, irreproachably washed,
brushed, and buttoned, held his pipe in the middle of his mouth and with
red lips gently inhaled the smoke, letting it escape from his handsome
mouth in rings.
 This was Lieutenant Berg, an officer in the Semenov
regiment with whom Boris was to travel to join the army, and about
whom Natasha had, teased her elder sister Vera, speaking of Berg as her
"intended.
" The count sat between them and listened attentively.
 His
favorite occupation when not playing boston, a card game he was very
fond of, was that of listener, especially when he succeeded in setting
two loquacious talkers at one another.


"Well, then, old chap, mon tres honorable Alphonse Karlovich," said
Shinshin, laughing ironically and mixing the most ordinary Russian
expressions with the choicest French phrases--which was a peculiarity of
his speech.
 "Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur l'etat; * you want
to make something out of your company?"


     * You expect to make an income out of the government.



"No, Peter Nikolaevich; I only want to show that in the cavalry the
advantages are far less than in the infantry.
 Just consider my own
position now, Peter Nikolaevich.
"

Berg always spoke quietly, politely, and with great precision.
 He could remain silent for hours without being at all put
out of countenance himself or making others uncomfortable, but as
soon as the conversation concerned himself he would begin to talk
circumstantially and with evident satisfaction.
 Were I in the cavalry I should
get not more than two hundred rubles every four months, even with the
rank of lieutenant; but as it is I receive two hundred and thirty," said
he, looking at Shinshin and the count with a joyful, pleasant smile,
as if it were obvious to him that his success must always be the chief
desire of everyone else.


"Besides that, Peter Nikolaevich, by exchanging into the Guards I shall
be in a more prominent position," continued Berg, "and vacancies occur
much more frequently in the Foot Guards.
 Then just think what can be
done with two hundred and thirty rubles! I even manage to put a little
aside and to send something to my father," he went on, emitting a smoke
ring.


"La balance y est.
.



      * So that squares matters.



The count burst out laughing.
 The other guests seeing that Shinshin was
talking came up to listen.


"Well, my boy, you'll get along wherever you go--foot or horse--that
I'll warrant," said Shinshin, patting him on the shoulder and taking his
feet off the sofa.


Berg smiled joyously.


It was just the moment before a big dinner when the assembled guests,
expecting the summons to zakuska, * avoid engaging in any long
conversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, in order
to show that they are not at all impatient for their food.
 The host and
hostess look toward the door, and now and then glance at one another,
and the visitors try to guess from these glances who, or what, they are
waiting for--some important relation who has not yet arrived, or a dish
that is not yet ready.



Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly in the
middle of the drawing room on the first chair he had come across,
blocking the way for everyone.
 The countess tried to make him talk, but
he went on naively looking around through his spectacles as if in search
of somebody and answered all her questions in monosyllables.
 Most of the
guests, knowing of the affair with the bear, looked with curiosity at
this big, stout, quiet man, wondering how such a clumsy, modest fellow
could have played such a prank on a policeman.


"You have only lately arrived?" the countess asked him.


"You have not yet seen my husband?"

"Non, madame.
"

"Very interesting.
"

The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikhaylovna.
 The latter
understood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, and
sitting down beside him she began to speak about his father; but he
answered her, as he had the countess, only in monosyllables.
 The other
guests were all conversing with one another.
 "The Razumovskis.
.
.
 It was
charming.
.
.
 You are very kind.
.
.
 Countess Apraksina.
.
 The countess rose and went into the ballroom.


"Marya Dmitrievna?" came her voice from there.


"Herself," came the answer in a rough voice, and Marya Dmitrievna
entered the room.
 Marya Dmitrievna paused at the door.
 Tall and stout,
holding high her fifty-year-old head with its gray curls, she stood
surveying the guests, and leisurely arranged her wide sleeves as if
rolling them up.


"Health and happiness to her whose name day we are keeping and to her
children," she said, in her loud, full-toned voice which drowned all
others.
 "Well, you old sinner," she went on, turning to the count who
was kissing her hand, "you're feeling dull in Moscow, I daresay? Nowhere
to hunt with your dogs? But what is to be done, old man? Just see how
these nestlings are growing up," and she pointed to the girls.
.
.
"

"Well," said she, "how's my Cossack?" (Marya Dmitrievna always called
Natasha a Cossack) and she stroked the child's arm as she came up
fearless and gay to kiss her hand.


"Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit," said she, assuming a soft high tone
of voice.
 "Come here, my friend.
.
" and she ominously tucked up her
sleeves still higher.
 Pierre approached, looking at her in a childlike
way through his spectacles.


"Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tell
your father the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it's my
evident duty.
 All were silent, expectant of what was to
follow, for this was clearly only a prelude.


"A fine lad! My word! A fine lad!.
.
.
 His father lies on his deathbed and
he amuses himself setting a policeman astride a bear! For shame, sir,
for shame! It would be better if you went to the war.
 Berg gave his arm to Vera.
 Then the strains of the count's household band were replaced by
the clatter of knives and forks, the voices of visitors, and the soft
steps of the footmen.
 At the other end sat the count,
with the hussar colonel on his left and Shinshin and the other male
visitors on his right.
 Midway down the long table on one side sat the
grownup young people: Vera beside Berg, and Pierre beside Boris; and on
the other side, the children, tutors, and governesses.
 From behind the
crystal decanters and fruit vases the count kept glancing at his wife
and her tall cap with its light-blue ribbons, and busily filled his
neighbors' glasses, not neglecting his own.
 The countess in turn,
without omitting her duties as hostess, threw significant glances from
behind the pineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed
by their redness to contrast more than usual with his gray hair.
 At the
ladies' end an even chatter of voices was heard all the time, at the
men's end the voices sounded louder and louder, especially that of the
colonel of hussars who, growing more and more flushed, ate and drank so
much that the count held him up as a pattern to the other guests.
 Berg
with tender smiles was saying to Vera that love is not an earthly but a
heavenly feeling.
 Boris was telling his new friend Pierre who the guests
were and exchanging glances with Natasha, who was sitting opposite.

Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces, and ate a great deal.

Of the two soups he chose turtle with savory patties and went on to the
game without omitting a single dish or one of the wines.
.
 "Hungarian".
.
.
 Of the four crystal glasses
engraved with the count's monogram that stood before his plate,
Pierre held out one at random and drank with enjoyment, gazing with
ever-increasing amiability at the other guests.
 Natasha, who sat
opposite, was looking at Boris as girls of thirteen look at the boy they
are in love with and have just kissed for the first time.
 Sometimes that
same look fell on Pierre, and that funny lively little girl's look made
him inclined to laugh without knowing why.


Nicholas sat at some distance from Sonya, beside Julie Karagina, to
whom he was again talking with the same involuntary smile.
 Sonya wore
a company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; now she turned
pale, now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas
and Julie were saying to one another.
 The governess kept looking round
uneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that might be put upon the
children.
 The German tutor was trying to remember all the dishes, wines,
and kinds of dessert, in order to send a full description of the dinner
to his people in Germany; and he felt greatly offended when the butler
with a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed him by.
 He frowned, trying to
appear as if he did not want any of that wine, but was mortified because
no one would understand that it was not to quench his thirst or from
greediness that he wanted it, but simply from a conscientious desire for
knowledge.






CHAPTER XIX


At the men's end of the table the talk grew more and more animated.
 The
colonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared in
Petersburg and that a copy, which he had himself seen, had that day been
forwarded by courier to the commander in chief.


"And why the deuce are we going to fight Bonaparte?" remarked Shinshin.

"He has stopped Austria's cackle and I fear it will be our turn next.
 He resented Shinshin's remark.
 He declares in ze
manifessto zat he cannot fiew wiz indifference ze danger vreatening
Russia and zat ze safety and dignity of ze Empire as vell as ze sanctity
of its alliances.
.
" he spoke this last word with particular emphasis as
if in it lay the gist of the matter.


Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him he
repeated from the opening words of the manifesto:

.
.
 and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor's sole and absolute
aim--to establish peace in Europe on firm foundations--has now decided
him to despatch part of the army abroad and to create a new condition
for the attainment of that purpose.


"Zat, my dear sir, is vy.
" he concluded, drinking a tumbler of wine
with dignity and looking to the count for approval.


"Connaissez-vous le Proverbe: * 'Jerome, Jerome, do not roam, but turn
spindles at home!'?" said Shinshin, puckering his brows and smiling.



     *Do you know the proverb?

     *(2) That suits us down to the ground.


     *(4) I just ask you that.
 And ve must discuss it as little as po-o-ossible".
.
 he dwelt
particularly on the word possible.
.
.
 "as po-o-ossible," he ended, again
turning to the count.
 "Zat is how ve old hussars look at it, and zere's
an end of it! And how do you, a young man and a young hussar, how do you
judge of it?" he added, addressing Nicholas, who when he heard that the
war was being discussed had turned from his partner with eyes and ears
intent on the colonel.


"I am quite of your opinion," replied Nicholas, flaming up, turning his
plate round and moving his wineglasses about with as much decision and
desperation as though he were at that moment facing some great danger.

"I am convinced that we Russians must die or conquer," he concluded,
conscious--as were others--after the words were uttered that his remarks
were too enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion and were therefore
awkward.


"What you said just now was splendid!" said his partner Julie.


Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and down
to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking.


Pierre listened to the colonel's speech and nodded approvingly.


"That's fine," said he.


"The young man's a real hussar!" shouted the colonel, again thumping the
table.


"What are you making such a noise about over there?" Marya Dmitrievna's
deep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of the table.


"It's all about the war," the count shouted down the table.
 It is all in
God's hands.


"That's true!"

Once more the conversations concentrated, the ladies' at the one end and
the men's at the other.


"You won't ask," Natasha's little brother was saying; "I know you won't
ask!"

"I will," replied Natasha.


Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution.
 She half
rose, by a glance inviting Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen to what
was coming, and turning to her mother:

"Mamma!" rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice,
audible the whole length of the table.


The conversation was hushed.


"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" and Natasha's voice sounded
still more firm and resolute.
 Marya Dmitrievna shook her
fat finger.


"Cossack!" she said threateningly.


"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" Natasha again cried boldly,
with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be taken in good part.


"You see! I have asked," whispered Natasha to her little brother and to
Pierre, glancing at him again.


"Ice pudding, but you won't get any," said Marya Dmitrievna.


Natasha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved even
Marya Dmitrievna.
"

"Carrot ices.
 Everyone laughed, not at Marya Dmitrievna's answer but at the
incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who had dared to
treat Marya Dmitrievna in this fashion.
 Before the ices, champagne was served round.






CHAPTER XX


The card tables were drawn out, sets made up for boston, and the count's
visitors settled themselves, some in the two drawing rooms, some in the
sitting room, some in the library.


The count, holding his cards fanwise, kept himself with difficulty from
dropping into his usual after-dinner nap, and laughed at everything.

The young people, at the countess' instigation, gathered round the
clavichord and harp.
 Julie by general request played first.
 After she
had played a little air with variations on the harp, she joined the
other young ladies in begging Natasha and Nicholas, who were noted for
their musical talent, to sing something.
 Natasha, who was treated as
though she were grown up, was evidently very proud of this but at the
same time felt shy.


"What shall we sing?" she said.


"'The Brook,'" suggested Nicholas.


"Well, then, let's be quick.
 Boris, come here," said Natasha.
 The chest in the passage was the place
of mourning for the younger female generation in the Rostov household.
 Natasha's face, which had been so
radiantly happy all that saint's day, suddenly changed: her eyes became
fixed, and then a shiver passed down her broad neck and the corners of
her mouth drooped.


"Sonya! What is it? What is the matter?.
.
.
 Oo.
.
.
 Oo.
.
 Oo.
.
.
!" And
Natasha's large mouth widened, making her look quite ugly, and she began
to wail like a baby without knowing why, except that Sonya was crying.

Sonya tried to lift her head to answer but could not, and hid her face
still deeper in the bed.
 With an effort Sonya sat up and
began wiping her eyes and explaining.


"Nicholas is going away in a week's time, his.
.
 papers.
.
.

he told me himself.
.
.
.
 no one can understand.
.
.
 what
a soul he has!"

And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul.


"It's all very well for you.
.
 I am not envious.
.
.
 But Nicholas is my cousin.
.
.
 one would
have to.
.
.
 the Metropolitan himself.
.
 and even then it can't be done.
.
.
.
.
 And what for? What have I done to her? I am so grateful to you
that I would willingly sacrifice everything, only I have nothing.
 Natasha began consoling her, but her face showed that she
understood all the gravity of her friend's trouble.


"Sonya," she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the true reason
of her friend's sorrow, "I'm sure Vera has said something to you since
dinner? Hasn't she?"

"Yes, these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied some others, and
she found them on my table and said she'd show them to Mamma, and that
I was ungrateful, and that Mamma would never allow him to marry me,
but that he'll marry Julie.
.

Natasha, what have I done to deserve it?.
.
.


"Sonya, don't believe her, darling! Don't believe her! Do you remember
how we and Nicholas, all three of us, talked in the sitting room after
supper? Why, we settled how everything was to be.
 I don't quite remember
how, but don't you remember that it could all be arranged and how nice
it all was? There's Uncle Shinshin's brother has married his first
cousin.
 And we are only second cousins, you know.
 And Boris says it
is quite possible.
 And he is so
clever and so good!" said Natasha.
 "Don't you cry, Sonya, dear love,
darling Sonya!" and she kissed her and laughed.
 "Vera's spiteful; never
mind her! And all will come right and she won't say anything to Mamma.

Nicholas will tell her himself, and he doesn't care at all for Julie.
"

Natasha kissed her on the hair.


"Do you think so?.
.


Both laughed.


"Well, let's go and sing 'The Brook.
'"

"Come along!"

"Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny!" said
Natasha, stopping suddenly.
 "I feel so happy!"

And she set off at a run along the passage.


Sonya, shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away the
verses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest, ran
after Natasha down the passage into the sitting room with flushed face
and light, joyous steps.
 At the visitors' request the young people sang
the quartette, "The Brook," with which everyone was delighted.
 Then
Nicholas sang a song he had just learned:


   At nighttime in the moon's fair glow
     How sweet, as fancies wander free,
   To feel that in this world there's one
     Who still is thinking but of thee!

   That while her fingers touch the harp
     Wafting sweet music o'er the lea,
   It is for thee thus swells her heart,
     Sighing its message out to thee.


   A day or two, then bliss unspoilt,
     But oh! till then I cannot live!.
.
.



He had not finished the last verse before the young people began to
get ready to dance in the large hall, and the sound of the feet and the
coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery.



Pierre was sitting in the drawing-room where Shinshin had engaged him,
as a man recently returned from abroad, in a political conversation in
which several others joined but which bored Pierre.
"

"I am afraid of mixing the figures," Pierre replied; "but if you will
be my teacher.
.
" And lowering his big arm he offered it to the slender
little girl.
 Natasha was perfectly happy;
she was dancing with a grown-up man, who had been abroad.

She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had given her to hold.


Natasha blushed and laughed.
 First came
Marya Dmitrievna and the count, both with merry countenances.
 The count,
with playful ceremony somewhat in ballet style, offered his bent arm to
Marya Dmitrievna.
)

"Look at Papa!" shouted Natasha to the whole company, and quite
forgetting that she was dancing with a grown-up partner she bent her
curly head to her knees and made the whole room ring with her laughter.
 As soon as the provocatively gay
strains of Daniel Cooper (somewhat resembling those of a merry peasant
dance) began to sound, all the doorways of the ballroom were suddenly
filled by the domestic serfs--the men on one side and the women on the
other--who with beaming faces had come to see their master making merry.


"Just look at the master! A regular eagle he is!" loudly remarked the
nurse, as she stood in one of the doorways.


The count danced well and knew it.

But if the count, getting more and more into the swing of it, charmed
the spectators by the unexpectedness of his adroit maneuvers and the
agility with which he capered about on his light feet, Marya Dmitrievna
produced no less impression by slight exertions--the least effort
to move her shoulders or bend her arms when turning, or stamp her
foot--which everyone appreciated in view of her size and habitual
severity.
 The dance grew livelier and livelier.
 The other couples could
not attract a moment's attention to their own evolutions and did not
even try to do so.
 All were watching the count and Marya Dmitrievna.

Natasha kept pulling everyone by sleeve or dress, urging them to "look
at Papa!" though as it was they never took their eyes off the couple.

In the intervals of the dance the count, breathing deeply, waved and
shouted to the musicians to play faster.
 Faster, faster, and faster;
lightly, more lightly, and yet more lightly whirled the count, flying
round Marya Dmitrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels; until,
turning his partner round to her seat, he executed the final pas,
raising his soft foot backwards, bowing his perspiring head, smiling
and making a wide sweep with his arm, amid a thunder of applause and
laughter led by Natasha.
 Both partners stood still, breathing heavily
and wiping their faces with their cambric handkerchiefs.






CHAPTER XXI


While in the Rostovs' ballroom the sixth anglaise was being danced, to a
tune in which the weary musicians blundered, and while tired footmen and
cooks were getting the supper, Count Bezukhov had a sixth stroke.
 After a mute confession,
communion was administered to the dying man, preparations made for the
sacrament of unction, and in his house there was the bustle and thrill
of suspense usual at such moments.
 Outside the house, beyond the gates,
a group of undertakers, who hid whenever a carriage drove up, waited in
expectation of an important order for an expensive funeral.
 The Military
Governor of Moscow, who had been assiduous in sending aides-de-camp to
inquire after the count's health, came himself that evening to bid a
last farewell to the celebrated grandee of Catherine's court, Count
Bezukhov.
 Prince
Vasili, who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days,
escorted him to the door, repeating something to him several times in
low tones.


When the Military Governor had gone, Prince Vasili sat down all alone on
a chair in the ballroom, crossing one leg high over the other, leaning
his elbow on his knee and covering his face with his hand.
 After sitting
so for a while he rose, and, looking about him with frightened eyes,
went with unusually hurried steps down the long corridor leading to the
back of the house, to the room of the eldest princess.


Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervous
whispers, and, whenever anyone went into or came from the dying man's
room, grew silent and gazed with eyes full of curiosity or expectancy at
his door, which creaked slightly when opened.


"The limits of human life.
.


"I wonder, is it not too late to administer unction?" asked the lady,
adding the priest's clerical title, as if she had no opinion of her own
on the subject.


"Ah, madam, it is a great sacrament," replied the priest, passing his
hand over the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his bald
head.
 "How young-looking he is!"

"Yes, and he is over sixty.
 Lorrain, who was sitting in a
graceful pose under a portrait of Catherine, leaning his elbow on a
table.


"Beautiful," said the doctor in answer to a remark about the weather.

"The weather is beautiful, Princess; and besides, in Moscow one feels as
if one were in the country.
 "So he may have
something to drink?"

Lorrain considered.
"

The doctor glanced at his watch.


"Dere has neffer been a gase," a German doctor was saying to an
aide-de-camp, "dat one liffs after de sird stroke.
"

"And what a well-preserved man he was!" remarked the aide-de-camp.
 "And
who will inherit his wealth?" he added in a whisper.


Everyone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the second
princess went in with the drink she had prepared according to Lorrain's
instructions.
 The German doctor went up to Lorrain.


Lorrain, pursing up his lips, waved a severely negative finger before
his nose.


"Tonight, not later," said he in a low voice, and he moved away with a
decorous smile of self-satisfaction at being able clearly to understand
and state the patient's condition.



Meanwhile Prince Vasili had opened the door into the princess' room.

The room was crowded with small pieces of furniture, whatnots,
cupboards, and little tables.
 The quilt of a high, white feather bed was
just visible behind a screen.
 A small dog began to bark.


"Ah, is it you, cousin?"

She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual so extremely smooth
that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and covered with
varnish.


"Has anything happened?" she asked.
 "I am so terrified.
 I only came to have a talk about business,
Catiche," * muttered the prince, seating himself wearily on the chair
she had just vacated.
 "You have made the place warm, I must say," he
remarked.
"


     *Catherine.


"I wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but I can't.
"

"Well, my dear?" said Prince Vasili, taking her hand and bending it
downwards as was his habit.


It was plain that this "well?" referred to much that they both
understood without naming.


The princess, who had a straight, rigid body, abnormally long for her
legs, looked directly at Prince Vasili with no sign of emotion in her
prominent gray eyes.
 This might have been taken as an expression of sorrow and
devotion, or of weariness and hope of resting before long.
 Prince Vasili
understood it as an expression of weariness.
 His eyes too seemed
strange; at one moment they looked impudently sly and at the next
glanced round in alarm.
 One must think of the future, of all of you.
.
"

The princess continued to look at him without moving, and with the same
dull expression.


"And then of course my family has also to be considered," Prince Vasili
went on, testily pushing away a little table without looking at her.

"You know, Catiche, that we--you three sisters, Mamontov, and my
wife--are the count's only direct heirs.
 I know, I know how hard it is
for you to talk or think of such matters.
 Do
you know I have sent for Pierre? The count," pointing to his portrait,
"definitely demanded that he should be called.
"

Prince Vasili looked questioningly at the princess, but could not make
out whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she was
simply looking at him.


"There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant, mon cousin," she
replied, "and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow his
noble soul peacefully to leave this.
.
 "But.
.
.
.
"

"He has made wills enough!" quietly remarked the princess.
"

"But, my dear," said Prince Vasili suddenly, clutching the little table
and becoming more animated and talking more rapidly: "what if a letter
has been written to the Emperor in which the count asks for Pierre's
legitimation? Do you understand that in consideration of the count's
services, his request would be granted?.
.
.
"

The princess smiled as people do who think they know more about the
subject under discussion than those they are talking with.


"I can tell you more," continued Prince Vasili, seizing her hand, "that
letter was written, though it was not sent, and the Emperor knew of it.

The only question is, has it been destroyed or not? If not, then as soon
as all is over," and Prince Vasili sighed to intimate what he meant by
the words all is over, "and the count's papers are opened, the will and
letter will be delivered to the Emperor, and the petition will certainly
be granted.
"

"And our share?" asked the princess smiling ironically, as if anything
might happen, only not that.


"But, my poor Catiche, it is as clear as daylight! He will then be the
legal heir to everything and you won't get anything.
 You must know, my
dear, whether the will and letter were written, and whether they have
been destroyed or not.
 And if they have somehow been overlooked, you
ought to know where they are, and must find them, because.
.
 "I am a woman, and you think we are
all stupid; but I know this: an illegitimate son cannot inherit.
.
.
"

At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess' ideas; her
thin lips grew white, though her eyes did not change, and her voice
when she began to speak passed through such transitions as she herself
evidently did not expect.


"That would be a fine thing!" said she.
"

She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress.
 "It's splendid! Fine! I
don't want anything, Prince.
"

"Yes, but you are not the only one.
.
.
" replied
Prince Vasili.
 I knew that I could expect
nothing but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, and ingratitude--the
blackest ingratitude--in this house.
.


"Yes, I was a fool! I still believed in people, loved them, and
sacrificed myself.
 But only the base, the vile succeed! I know who has
been intriguing!"

The princess wished to rise, but the prince held her by the hand.

She gave her companion an angry glance.
"

"Who sacrificed everything for him," chimed in the princess, who would
again have risen had not the prince still held her fast, "though he
never could appreciate it.
 No, mon cousin," she added with a sigh, "I
shall always remember that in this world one must expect no reward, that
in this world there is neither honor nor justice.
"

"Now come, come! Be reasonable.
"

"No, I have a wicked heart.
 "I value your friendship and
wish you to have as good an opinion of me.
 Don't upset yourself, and let
us talk sensibly while there is still time, be it a day or be it but an
hour.
.
 Tell me all you know about the will, and above all where it is.

You must know.
 We will take it at once and show it to the count.
 He has,
no doubt, forgotten it and will wish to destroy it.
 You understand that
my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his wishes; that is my
only reason for being here.
.
.
"

"Ah, don't talk to me! Last winter she wheedled herself in here and
told the count such vile, disgraceful things about us, especially about
Sophie--I can't repeat them--that it made the count quite ill and he
would not see us for a whole fortnight.
"

"We've got to it at last--why did you not tell me about it sooner?"

"It's in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow," said the
princess, ignoring his question.
 "Now I know! Yes; if I have a sin,
a great sin, it is hatred of that vile woman!" almost shrieked the
princess, now quite changed.
 "And what does she come worming herself in
here for? But I will give her a piece of my mind.
 The time will come!"





CHAPTER XXII


While these conversations were going on in the reception room and the
princess' room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sent for) and
Anna Mikhaylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was driving
into the court of Count Bezukhov's house.
 As the wheels rolled softly
over the straw beneath the windows, Anna Mikhaylovna, having turned with
words of comfort to her companion, realized that he was asleep in
his corner and woke him up.
 Rousing himself, Pierre followed Anna
Mikhaylovna out of the carriage, and only then began to think of the
interview with his dying father which awaited him.
 While he
was getting down from the carriage steps two men, who looked like
tradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in the shadow of
the wall.
 Though he did not see why it was
necessary for him to go to the count at all, still less why he had to go
by the back stairs, yet judging by Anna Mikhaylovna's air of assurance
and haste, Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely necessary.

Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by some men who,
carrying pails, came running downstairs, their boots clattering.


"Yes," replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were now
permissible; "the door to the left, ma'am.
"

"Perhaps the count did not ask for me," said Pierre when he reached the
landing.
 "I'd better go to my own room.
"

Anna Mikhaylovna paused and waited for him to come up.


"Ah, my friend!" she said, touching his arm as she had done her son's
when speaking to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer no less than
you do, but be a man!"

"But really, hadn't I better go away?" he asked, looking kindly at her
over his spectacles.


"Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been done you.

Think that he is your father.
.
.
 perhaps in the agony of death.
" She
sighed.
"

Pierre did not understand a word, but the conviction that all this had
to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylovna who was
already opening a door.


This door led into a back anteroom.
 An old man, a servant of the
princesses, sat in a corner knitting a stocking.
 Pierre had never been
in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of
these rooms.
 Anna Mikhaylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying past
with a decanter on a tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked about the
princess' health and then led Pierre along a stone passage.
 The first
door on the left led into the princesses' apartments.
 Seeing them pass,
Prince Vasili drew back with obvious impatience, while the princess
jumped up and with a gesture of desperation slammed the door with all
her might.


"Be a man, my friend.
 They went into
the reception room familiar to Pierre, with two Italian windows opening
into the conservatory, with its large bust and full length portrait of
Catherine the Great.
 All became
silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna Mikhaylovna as she
entered, and at the big stout figure of Pierre who, hanging his head,
meekly followed her.


Anna Mikhaylovna's face expressed a consciousness that the decisive
moment had arrived.
 With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now,
keeping Pierre close beside her, entered the room even more boldly than
that afternoon.
 Casting a rapid
glance at all those in the room and noticing the count's confessor
there, she glided up to him with a sort of amble, not exactly bowing yet
seeming to grow suddenly smaller, and respectfully received the blessing
first of one and then of another priest.


"God be thanked that you are in time," said she to one of the priests;
"all we relatives have been in such anxiety.
 This young man is the
count's son," she added more softly.


"Dear doctor," said she, "this young man is the count's son.
 Anna Mikhaylovna with just the same movement raised her
shoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved away
from the doctor to Pierre.
 To him, in a particularly respectful and
tenderly sad voice, she said:

"Trust in His mercy!" and pointing out a small sofa for him to sit
and wait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyone was
watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.


Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, moved
toward the sofa she had indicated.
 As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna had
disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him
with something more than curiosity and sympathy.
 He noticed that they
whispered to one another, casting significant looks at him with a kind
of awe and even servility.
 A deference such as he had never before
received was shown him.
 A strange lady, the one who had been talking to
the priests, rose and offered him her seat; an aide-de-camp picked up
and returned a glove Pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfully
silent as he passed by, and moved to make way for him.
 At first Pierre
wished to take another seat so as not to trouble the lady, and also to
pick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors who were not
even in his way; but all at once he felt that this would not do, and
that tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful
rite which everyone expected of him, and that he was therefore bound
to accept their services.
 He took the glove in silence from the
aide-de-camp, and sat down in the lady's chair, placing his huge hands
symmetrically on his knees in the naive attitude of an Egyptian statue,
and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that in
order not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act on his
own ideas tonight, but must yield himself up entirely to the will of
those who were guiding him.


Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasili with head erect
majestically entered the room.
 He was wearing his long coat with three
stars on his breast.
 He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning;
his eyes seemed larger than usual when he glanced round and noticed
Pierre.
.
" and hesitated, not
knowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man "the count,"
yet ashamed to call him "father.
 Courage, my friend.
.
.
"

Pierre's mind was in such a confused state that the word "stroke"
suggested to him a blow from something.
 The eldest princess followed him, and
the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door.

Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about, and at
last Anna Mikhaylovna, still with the same expression, pale but resolute
in the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre lightly on the arm
said:

"The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be administered.
"

Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticed
that the strange lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, all
followed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission to
enter that room.






CHAPTER XXIII


Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, its
walls hung round with Persian carpets.
 The part of the room behind the
columns, with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side and
on the other an immense case containing icons, was brightly illuminated
with red light like a Russian church during evening service.
 Under
the gleaming icons stood a long invalid chair, and in that chair
on snowy-white smooth pillows, evidently freshly changed, Pierre
saw--covered to the waist by a bright green quilt--the familiar,
majestic figure of his father, Count Bezukhov, with that gray mane of
hair above his broad forehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep
characteristically noble wrinkles of his handsome, ruddy face.
 He lay
just under the icons; his large thick hands outside the quilt.
 Into the
right hand, which was lying palm downwards, a wax taper had been thrust
between forefinger and thumb, and an old servant, bending over from
behind the chair, held it in position.
 By the chair stood the priests,
their long hair falling over their magnificent glittering vestments,
with lighted tapers in their hands, slowly and solemnly conducting the
service.
 A little behind them stood the two younger princesses holding
handkerchiefs to their eyes, and just in front of them their eldest
sister, Catiche, with a vicious and determined look steadily fixed on
the icons, as though declaring to all that she could not answer
for herself should she glance round.
 Anna Mikhaylovna, with a meek,
sorrowful, and all-forgiving expression on her face, stood by the door
near the strange lady.
 "If you do not understand these
sentiments," he seemed to be saying, "so much the worse for you!"

Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants;
the men and women had separated as in church.
 All were silently crossing
themselves, and the reading of the church service, the subdued chanting
of deep bass voices, and in the intervals sighs and the shuffling of
feet were the only sounds that could be heard.
 Anna Mikhaylovna, with an
air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she was
about, went across the room to where Pierre was standing and gave him
a taper.


Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the mole,
watched him.
 She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remained
with it hidden for awhile; then looking up and seeing Pierre she
again began to laugh.
 She evidently felt unable to look at him
without laughing, but could not resist looking at him: so to be out of
temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns.
 Anna Mikhaylovna stepped forward
and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to Lorrain from behind her
back.
 The French doctor held no taper; he was leaning against one of the
columns in a respectful attitude implying that he, a foreigner, in spite
of all differences of faith, understood the full importance of the rite
now being performed and even approved of it.
 He now approached the
sick man with the noiseless step of one in full vigor of life, with his
delicate white fingers raised from the green quilt the hand that was
free, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected a moment.
 The
sick man was given something to drink, there was a stir around him, then
the people resumed their places and the service continued.
 During this
interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasili left the chair on which he
had been leaning, and--with an air which intimated that he knew what he
was about and if others did not understand him it was so much the worse
for them--did not go up to the dying man, but passed by him, joined the
eldest princess, and moved with her to the side of the room where stood
the high bedstead with its silken hangings.
 The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before.
 Around
him everyone began to stir: steps were audible and whispers, among which
Anna Mikhaylovna's was the most distinct.


Pierre heard her say:

"Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be impossible.
.
.


"Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he heard one of the servants
say in a frightened whisper.
 This head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones,
its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was
not disfigured by the approach of death.
 But now this head was swaying helplessly with the uneven
movements of the bearers, and the cold listless gaze fixed itself upon
nothing.


After a few minutes' bustle beside the high bedstead, those who had
carried the sick man dispersed.
 Anna Mikhaylovna touched Pierre's hand
and said, "Come.
" Pierre went with her to the bed on which the sick
man had been laid in a stately pose in keeping with the ceremony just
completed.
 Pierre, carefully stretching his neck
so as not to touch the quilt, followed her suggestion and pressed his
lips to the large boned, fleshy hand.
 Neither the hand nor a
single muscle of the count's face stirred.
 Again Pierre fell into the naively
symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue, evidently distressed that his
stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing his utmost to look
as small as possible.
 He looked at the count, who still gazed at the
spot where Pierre's face had been before he sat down.
 Anna Mikhaylovna
indicated by her attitude her consciousness of the pathetic importance
of these last moments of meeting between the father and son.
 This lasted
about two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an hour.
 The eyes and face of the
sick man showed impatience.


Pierre rose to help him.


While the count was being turned over, one of his arms fell back
helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward.
 The
sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall.
 He sighed.


"He is dozing," said Anna Mikhaylovna, observing that one of the
princesses was coming to take her turn at watching.
 "Let us go.
"

Pierre went out.






CHAPTER XXIV


There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasili and the
eldest princess, who were sitting under the portrait of Catherine the
Great and talking eagerly.
"

"Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room," said Prince
Vasili to Anna Mikhaylovna.
 "Go and take something, my poor Anna
Mikhaylovna, or you will not hold out.
"

To Pierre he said nothing, merely giving his arm a sympathetic squeeze
below the shoulder.


"There is nothing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cup of this
delicious Russian tea," Lorrain was saying with an air of restrained
animation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate Chinese handleless
cup before a table on which tea and a cold supper were laid in the small
circular room.
 Around the table all who were at Count Bezukhov's house
that night had gathered to fortify themselves.

During balls given at the house Pierre, who did not know how to dance,
had liked sitting in this room to watch the ladies who, as they passed
through in their ball dresses with diamonds and pearls on their bare
shoulders, looked at themselves in the brilliantly lighted mirrors which
repeated their reflections several times.
 On one small table tea things and supper dishes
stood in disorder, and in the middle of the night a motley throng
of people sat there, not merrymaking, but somberly whispering, and
betraying by every word and movement that they none of them forgot what
was happening and what was about to happen in the bedroom.
 Pierre concluded that this also was essential, and after a
short interval followed her.
.
 His cheeks, which were so flabby
that they looked heavier below, were twitching violently; but he wore
the air of a man little concerned in what the two ladies were saying.
"

"I don't even know what is in this paper," said the younger of the two
ladies, addressing Prince Vasili and pointing to an inlaid portfolio she
held in her hand.
 "All I know is that his real will is in his writing
table, and this is a paper he has forgotten.
.
.
"

She tried to pass Anna Mikhaylovna, but the latter sprang so as to bar
her path.


"I know, my dear, kind princess," said Anna Mikhaylovna, seizing the
portfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let go easily.
 Their efforts in the struggle for the
portfolio were the only sounds audible, but it was evident that if
the princess did speak, her words would not be flattering to Anna
Mikhaylovna.
 Though the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lost none
of its honeyed firmness and softness.


Prince Vasili rose.
 "Oh!" said he with reproach and surprise, "this is
absurd! Come, let go I tell you.
"

The princess let go.


"Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility.
 I myself will go
and ask him, I!.
.
.
"

"Vile woman!" shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at Anna
Mikhaylovna and snatching the portfolio from her.


Prince Vasili bent his head and spread out his hands.


"What are you doing!" she cried vehemently.
 "He is dying and you leave
me alone with him!"

Her sister dropped the portfolio.
 The eldest
princess and Prince Vasili, recovering themselves, followed her.
 At sight of Pierre her expression showed an
irrepressible hatred.
" And bursting into tears she hid her face in her
handkerchief and rushed from the room.


Prince Vasili came next.


"Ah, my friend!" said he, taking Pierre by the elbow; and there was
in his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it
before.
 "How often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I am
near sixty, dear friend.
.
.
 All will end in death, all! Death is
awful.
.
" and he burst into tears.


Anna Mikhaylovna came out last.


"Pierre!" she said.
 She kissed the young man on his
forehead, wetting him with her tears.
 Then after a pause she said:

"He is no more.
.
"

Pierre looked at her over his spectacles.


"Come, I will go with you.
 Try to weep, nothing gives such relief as
tears.
"

She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one could
see his face.


In the morning Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre:

"Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you.
 But
God will support you: you are young, and are now, I hope, in command of
an immense fortune.
 The will has not yet been opened.
 I know you well
enough to be sure that this will not turn your head, but it imposes
duties on you, and you must be a man.


"Perhaps later on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had not been
there, God only knows what would have happened! You know, Uncle promised
me only the day before yesterday not to forget Boris.
 But he had no
time.
 I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out your father's wish?"

Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly looked in
silence at Princess Anna Mikhaylovna.
 After her talk with Pierre, Anna
Mikhaylovna returned to the Rostovs' and went to bed.
 On waking in the
morning she told the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the details of
Count Bezukhov's death.
 She said the count had died as she would herself
wish to die, that his end was not only touching but edifying.
 As to the
last meeting between father and son, it was so touching that she could
not think of it without tears, and did not know which had behaved better
during those awful moments--the father who so remembered everything
and everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to the son, or
Pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he with grief,
though he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his dying father.

"It is painful, but it does one good.
 It uplifts the soul to see such
men as the old count and his worthy son," said she.
 Of the behavior of
the eldest princess and Prince Vasili she spoke disapprovingly, but in
whispers and as a great secret.






CHAPTER XXV


At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski's estate, the
arrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but
this expectation did not upset the regular routine of life in the
old prince's household.
 General in Chief Prince Nicholas Andreevich
(nicknamed in society, "the King of Prussia") ever since the Emperor
Paul had exiled him to his country estate had lived there continuously
with his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, Mademoiselle
Bourienne.
 He used to
say that there are only two sources of human vice--idleness and
superstition, and only two virtues--activity and intelligence.
 He was himself always occupied: writing his memoirs, solving
problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe, working
in the garden, or superintending the building that was always going on
at his estate.
 He always came to table under precisely the same conditions,
and not only at the same hour but at the same minute.
 Although he was
in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs, every high
official appointed to the province in which the prince's estate lay
considered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamber
just as the architect, gardener, or Princess Mary did, till the prince
appeared punctually to the appointed hour.
 Everyone sitting in this
antechamber experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when
the enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather
small old man, with powdered wig, small withered hands, and bushy gray
eyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd,
youthfully glittering eyes.


On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive, Princess
Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the
morning greeting, crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a
silent prayer.
 Every morning she came in like that, and every morning
prayed that the daily interview might pass off well.
"

Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe.
 The princess timidly
opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily.
 She paused at the
entrance.
 The prince was working at the lathe and after glancing round
continued his work.
 The motion of the small foot
shod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver, and the firm pressure
of the lean sinewy hand, showed that the prince still possessed the
tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age.
 After a few more turns
of the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal, wiped his chisel,
dropped it into a leather pouch attached to the lathe, and, approaching
the table, summoned his daughter.
 He never gave his children a blessing,
so he simply held out his bristly cheek (as yet unshaven) and, regarding
her tenderly and attentively, said severely:

"Quite well? All right then, sit down.


"For tomorrow!" said he, quickly finding the page and making a scratch
from one paragraph to another with his hard nail.


The princess bent over the exercise book on the table.


"Wait a bit, here's a letter for you," said the old man suddenly, taking
a letter addressed in a woman's hand from a bag hanging above the table,
onto which he threw it.
 She took it quickly and bent her head over it.


"I'll let two more letters pass, but the third I'll read," said the
prince sternly; "I'm afraid you write much nonsense.
 "Now, madam, these triangles
are equal; please note that the angle ABC.
.
 The old man
was beside himself: moved the chair on which he was sitting noisily
backward and forward, made efforts to control himself and not become
vehement, but almost always did become vehement, scolded, and sometimes
flung the exercise book away.


The princess gave a wrong answer.


"Well now, isn't she a fool!" shouted the prince, pushing the book aside
and turning sharply away; but rising immediately, he paced up and down,
lightly touched his daughter's hair and sat down again.


He drew up his chair, and continued to explain.


"This won't do, Princess; it won't do," said he, when Princess Mary,
having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day's lesson,
was about to leave: "Mathematics are most important, madam! I don't want
to have you like our silly ladies.
 Get used to it and you'll like it,"
and he patted her cheek.


"Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise has sent
you.
 I have looked
at it.
 Go.
"

He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.
 She
sat down at her writing table, on which stood miniature portraits and
which was littered with books and papers.
 The princess was as untidy as
her father was tidy.
 She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke
the seal of her letter.
 It was from her most intimate friend from
childhood; that same Julie Karagina who had been at the Rostovs'
name-day party.


Julie wrote in French:


Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing is
separation! Though I tell myself that half my life and half my happiness
are wrapped up in you, and that in spite of the distance separating us
our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels against
fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I cannot
overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since
we parted.
 Why are we not together as we were last summer, in your big
study, on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa? Why cannot I now, as
three months ago, draw fresh moral strength from your look, so gentle,
calm, and penetrating, a look I loved so well and seem to see before me
as I write?


Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror
which stood on her right.
 It reflected a weak, ungraceful figure and
thin face.
 Her eyes, always sad, now looked with particular hopelessness
at her reflection in the glass.
 "She flatters me," thought the princess,
turning away and continuing to read.
 But Julie did not flatter her
friend, the princess' eyes--large, deep and luminous (it seemed as if at
times there radiated from them shafts of warm light)--were so beautiful
that very often in spite of the plainness of her face they gave her an
attraction more powerful than that of beauty.
 But the princess never saw
the beautiful expression of her own eyes--the look they had when she
was not thinking of herself.
 One of my two brothers is already
abroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting on their march
to the frontier.
 Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought
intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war.
 God grant
that the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may
be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty, in His
goodness, to give us as sovereign! To say nothing of my brothers, this
war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart.
 I mean
young Nicholas Rostov, who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain
inactive and has left the university to join the army.

Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then.

That is still too fresh.
 But enough of
this! The chief news, about which all Moscow gossips, is the death of
old Count Bezukhov, and his inheritance.
 It is rumored that Prince Vasili played
a very despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersburg
quite crestfallen.


I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills and
inheritance; but I do know that since this young man, whom we all used
to know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count Bezukhov and the
owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia, I am much amused to
watch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by
marriageable daughters, and of the young ladies themselves, toward
him, though, between you and me, he always seemed to me a poor sort
of fellow.
 As for the past two years people have amused themselves
by finding husbands for me (most of whom I don't even know), the
matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future Countess
Bezukhova.
 A
propos of marriages: do you know that a while ago that universal auntie
Anna Mikhaylovna told me, under the seal of strict secrecy, of a plan of
marriage for you.
 He is said to be very handsome and a terrible
scapegrace.
 That is all I have been able to find out about him.
 I am at the end of my second sheet of paper,
and Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins'.
 Read the
mystical book I am sending you; it has an enormous success here.
 Though
there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp, it
is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul.
 I embrace you as I love you.
S.



The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous
eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed.
 Then she suddenly
rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table.
 She took a sheet of
paper and her hand moved rapidly over it.
 So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of which
you say so much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual effect
on you.
 You complain of our separation.
 Why do you
suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that young
man? On such matters I am only severe with myself.


The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your letter and
my father was much affected by it.
 God preserve us from that terrible misfortune!

I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child.
 As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince
Vasili, it is very sad for both.
 I pity Prince Vasili but am still more sorry for Pierre.
 So young,
and burdened with such riches--to what temptations he will be exposed!
If I were asked what I desire most on earth, it would be to be poorer
than the poorest beggar.

I never could understand the fondness some people have for confusing
their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken their
doubts and excite their imagination, giving them a bent for exaggeration
quite contrary to Christian simplicity.


My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told me that
he has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasili.
 In
regard to this project of marriage for me, I will tell you, dear sweet
friend, that I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we must
conform.
 However painful it may be to me, should the Almighty lay
the duties of wife and mother upon me I shall try to perform them as
faithfully as I can, without disquieting myself by examining my feelings
toward him whom He may give me for husband.
 This pleasure will be but a brief one,
however, for he will leave, us again to take part in this unhappy war
into which we have been drawn, God knows how or why.
 My father talks of nothing but marches and
countermarches, things of which I understand nothing; and the day
before yesterday during my daily walk through the village I witnessed a
heartrending scene.
.
 You should have seen the state of
the mothers, wives, and children of the men who were going and should
have heard the sobs.
 I have written to my poor mother," said the smiling Mademoiselle
Bourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r's.


"Princess, I must warn you," she added, lowering her voice and evidently
listening to herself with pleasure, and speaking with exaggerated
grasseyement, "the prince has been scolding Michael Ivanovich.
 He is in
a very bad humor, very morose.
 Be prepared.
"

"Ah, dear friend," replied Princess Mary, "I have asked you never to
warn me of the humor my father is in.
 I do not allow myself to judge him
and would not have others do so.
"

The princess glanced at her watch and, seeing that she was five minutes
late in starting her practice on the clavichord, went into the sitting
room with a look of alarm.






CHAPTER XXVI


The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring of
the prince, who was in his large study.
 Prince Andrew got out of the carriage, helped his little wife to
alight, and let her pass into the house before him.
 Old Tikhon, wearing
a wig, put his head out of the door of the antechamber, reported in
a whisper that the prince was sleeping, and hastily closed the door.

Tikhon knew that neither the son's arrival nor any other unusual event
must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day.
 Prince Andrew
apparently knew this as well as Tikhon; he looked at his watch as if to
ascertain whether his father's habits had changed since he was at home
last, and, having assured himself that they had not, he turned to his
wife.


"He will get up in twenty minutes.
 Let us go across to Mary's room," he
said.


The little princess had grown stouter during this time, but her eyes
and her short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just as
merrily and prettily as ever.


"Is that Mary practicing? Let's go quietly and take her by surprise.
"

Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.


Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord
came, the pretty, fair haired Frenchwoman, Mademoiselle Bourienne,
rushed out apparently beside herself with delight.
"

"No, no, please not.
.
.
 You are Mademoiselle Bourienne," said the little
princess, kissing her.
 "I know you already through my sister-in-law's
friendship for you.
 She was not expecting us?"

They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound
of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata.
 Prince Andrew stopped and
made a grimace, as if expecting something unpleasant.


The little princess entered the room.
 The passage broke off in the
middle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary's heavy tread and the sound
of kissing.
 The two women let go of one
another, and then, as if afraid of being too late, seized each other's
hands, kissing them and pulling them away, and again began kissing each
other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew's surprise both began to
cry and kissed again.
 Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry.
 Prince
Andrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women it seemed quite
natural that they should cry, and apparently it never entered their
heads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting.


"Ah! my dear!.
.
.

"I dreamed last night.
" "Ah! Mary,
you have got thinner?.
.
.
.
.


"And I had no idea!.
.
.
" exclaimed Princess Mary.
"

Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and
he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever.
 Princess Mary had
turned toward her brother, and through her tears the loving, warm,
gentle look of her large luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment,
rested on Prince Andrew's face.


The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip
continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary
and drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile of
glittering teeth and sparkling eyes.
 She told of an accident they had
had on the Spasski Hill which might have been serious for her in her
condition, and immediately after that informed them that she had left
all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she would have
to dress in here; and that Andrew had quite changed, and that Kitty
Odyntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Mary,
a real one, but that they would talk of that later.
 It was plain that she was following a train of
thought independent of her sister-in-law's words.
.
"

Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train of
thought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure.
.
.
 She brought her face close to her sister-in-law's and
unexpectedly again began to cry.


"She needs rest," said Prince Andrew with a frown.
 How is he? Just the same?"

"Yes, just the same.


"The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics and my
geometry lessons," said Princess Mary gleefully, as if her lessons in
geometry were among the greatest delights of her life.


When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old
prince to get up, Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father.
 The old prince always dressed in old-fashioned
style, wearing an antique coat and powdered hair; and when Prince Andrew
entered his father's dressing room (not with the contemptuous look and
manner he wore in drawing rooms, but with the animated face with which
he talked to Pierre), the old man was sitting on a large leather-covered
chair, wrapped in a powdering mantle, entrusting his head to Tikhon.


"You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he goes on like this
he'll soon have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?" And he held out
his cheek.


The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner.
 (He used
to say that a nap "after dinner was silver--before dinner, golden.
 He made no reply on his father's favorite
topic--making fun of the military men of the day, and more particularly
of Bonaparte.


"Yes, Father, I have come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant,"
said Prince Andrew, following every movement of his father's face with
an eager and respectful look.
 "How is your health?"

"Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy.
 You know me: I am busy from
morning till night and abstemious, so of course I am well.


"God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on," he continued, returning to
his hobby; "tell me how the Germans have taught you to fight Bonaparte
by this new science you call 'strategy.
'"

Prince Andrew smiled.
 "The house
for your wife is ready.
 Princess Mary will take her there and show her
over, and they'll talk nineteen to the dozen.
 That's their woman's
way! I am glad to have her.
 About Mikhelson's army
I understand--Tolstoy's too.
.
.
 But what's
the southern army to do? Prussia is neutral.
.
.
 I know that.
 What about
Austria?" said he, rising from his chair and pacing up and down the room
followed by Tikhon, who ran after him, handing him different articles of
clothing.
 "What of Sweden? How will they cross Pomerania?"

Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began--at first
reluctantly, but gradually with more and more animation, and from habit
changing unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on--to explain
the plan of operation for the coming campaign.
 He explained how an army,
ninety thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia so as to bring her out
of her neutrality and draw her into the war; how part of that army was
to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how two hundred and twenty
thousand Austrians, with a hundred thousand Russians, were to operate in
Italy and on the Rhine; how fifty thousand Russians and as many English
were to land at Naples, and how a total force of five hundred thousand
men was to attack the French from different sides.
 The old man began to sing, in the cracked voice of old age:
"Malbrook s'en va-t-en guerre.
 Dieu sait quand reviendra.
"


His son only smiled.


"I don't say it's a plan I approve of," said the son; "I am only telling
you what it is.
"

"Well, you've told me nothing new," and the old man repeated,
meditatively and rapidly:

"Dieu sait quand reviendra.
" At dinner the prince usually spoke to the
taciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone else.
 Prince Andrew was looking at a large
gilt frame, new to him, containing the genealogical tree of the Princes
Bolkonski, opposite which hung another such frame with a badly painted
portrait (evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate)
of a ruling prince, in a crown--an alleged descendant of Rurik and
ancestor of the Bolkonskis.


Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise.
 She did not understand
what he was laughing at.


"Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew.
 "Fancy, with
his powerful mind, indulging in such nonsense!"

Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother's
criticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were heard
coming from the study.
 At that moment the great clock
struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing
room.
 The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyes from under
their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on
the little princess.
 He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of
her neck.


"I'm glad, glad, to see you," he said, looking attentively into her
eyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down.
 "Sit down, sit
down! Sit down, Michael Ianovich!"

He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law.
 A footman moved
the chair for her.

"You've been in a hurry.


"You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," he said.
 She was
silent and seemed confused.
 He asked about mutual acquaintances, and
she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings
from various people and retailing the town gossip.


As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly,
and suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a
definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivanovich.
"

Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said such
things about Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as a peg on
which to hang the prince's favorite topic, he looked inquiringly at the
young prince, wondering what would follow.


"He is a great tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointing to the
architect.
 The old prince seemed convinced not
only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the
A B C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was an insignificant
little Frenchy, successful only because there were no longer any
Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him; but he was also convinced that
there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war, but
only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing,
pretending to do something real.
 Prince Andrew gaily bore with his
father's ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to him
with evident pleasure.
 "Suvorov!" And he jerked
away his plate, which Tikhon briskly caught.
.
.
 Consider,
Prince Andrew.
 Two.
 Frederick and Suvorov; Moreau!.
 It would have puzzled
the devil himself! When you get there you'll find out what those
Hofs-kriegs-wurst-Raths are! Suvorov couldn't manage them so what chance
has Michael Kutuzov? No, my dear boy," he continued, "you and your
generals won't get on against Buonaparte; you'll have to call in the
French, so that birds of a feather may fight together.
 The German,
Pahlen, has been sent to New York in America, to fetch the Frenchman,
Moreau," he said, alluding to the invitation made that year to Moreau
to enter the Russian service.
.
.
.
 "Wonderful!.
.
 Were the Potemkins,
Suvorovs, and Orlovs Germans? No, lad, either you fellows have all lost
your wits, or I have outlived mine.
 May God help you, but we'll see what
will happen.
.
"

"I don't at all say that all the plans are good," said Prince Andrew, "I
am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte.
"

"To be sure, your excellency," replied the architect.


"Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth.
 And only
idlers have failed to beat the Germans.
 Since the world began everybody
has beaten the Germans.
 They beat no one--except one another.
 He
listened, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how this
old man, living alone in the country for so many years, could know and
discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and
political events.


"You think I'm an old man and don't understand the present state of
affairs?" concluded his father.
 "But it troubles me.
 I don't sleep
at night.
 Come now, where has this great commander of yours shown his
skill?" he concluded.


"That would take too long to tell," answered the son.


"Well, then go to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, here's
another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours," he exclaimed in
excellent French.
.


The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of
the dinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her
father-in-law and now at Princess Mary.


"What a clever man your father is," said she; "perhaps that is why I am
afraid of him.
"

"Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.
 The old prince, not altering
his routine, retired as usual after dinner.
 Only those things he always kept
with him remained in his room; a small box, a large canteen fitted with
silver plate, two Turkish pistols and a saber--a present from his
father who had brought it from the siege of Ochakov.
 All these traveling
effects of Prince Andrew's were in very good order: new, clean, and in
cloth covers carefully tied with tapes.


When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life, men capable
of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind.
 At such moments
one reviews the past and plans for the future.
 With his hands behind him he paced
briskly from corner to corner of the room, looking straight before him
and thoughtfully shaking his head.


"I hear you have given orders to harness," she cried, panting (she had
apparently been running), "and I did so wish to have another talk with
you alone! God knows how long we may again be parted.
 You are not angry
with me for coming? You have changed so, Andrusha," she added, as if to
explain such a question.
" It was obviously
strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be
Andrusha--the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in
childhood.


"And where is Lise?" he asked, answering her question only by a smile.
 Oh,
Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have," said she, sitting down on
the sofa, facing her brother.
 I have grown so fond of her.
"

Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical and
contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.


"One must be indulgent to little weaknesses; who is free from them,
Andrew? Don't forget that she has grown up and been educated in
society, and so her position now is not a rosy one.
 We should enter into
everyone's situation.
 * Think
what it must be for her, poor thing, after what she has been used to,
to be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country, in her
condition! It's very hard.



Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we
think we thoroughly understand.


"I.
 that's different.
 Why speak of me? I don't want any other life,
and can't, for I know no other.
 But think, Andrew: for a young society
woman to be buried in the country during the best years of her life,
all alone--for Papa is always busy, and I.
.
.
 well, you know what poor
resources I have for entertaining a woman used to the best society.
.
"

"I don't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all," said Prince Andrew.


"No? She is very nice and kind and, above all, she's much to be pitied.

She has no one, no one.
 To tell the truth, I don't need her, and she's
even in my way.
 You know I always was a savage, and now am even more
so.
 I like being alone.
.
.
 She and Michael
Ivanovich are the two people to whom he is always gentle and kind,
because he has been a benefactor to them both.
 As Sterne says: 'We don't
love people so much for the good they have done us, as for the good we
have done them.
' Father took her when she was homeless after losing her
own father.
 She is very good-natured, and my father likes her way of
reading.


Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question.


"For me? For me?.
.
 Trying for me!.
.


"He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he's getting very
trying," said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their father
in order to puzzle or test his sister.


"The only thing that is hard for me.
 I will tell you the truth,
Andrew.
 is Father's way of treating religious subjects.
 I don't
understand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is
as clear as day, and can go so far astray.
 But even in this I can see lately a shade of
improvement.
 His satire has been less bitter of late, and there was a
monk he received and had a long talk with.
"

"Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your powder,"
said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.
.
"
she said timidly after a moment's silence, "I have a great favor to ask
of you.
"

"What is it, dear?"

"No--promise that you will not refuse! It will give you no trouble
and is nothing unworthy of you, but it will comfort me.
 Promise,
Andrusha!.
.


"Even if it were a great deal of trouble.
.
.
" answered Prince Andrew, as
if guessing what it was about.
 Think as
you please, but do this for my sake! Please do! Father's father, our
grandfather, wore it in all his wars.
 Do you promise?"

"If it does not weigh a hundredweight and won't break my neck.
.
 To
please you.
.
.
 But immediately, noticing the pained
expression his joke had brought to his sister's face, he repented and
added: "I am glad; really, dear, I am very glad.
"

"Against your will He will save and have mercy on you and bring you
to Himself, for in Him alone is truth and peace," said she in a voice
trembling with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands before her
brother a small, oval, antique, dark-faced icon of the Saviour in a gold
setting, on a finely wrought silver chain.
.
.
 Andrew understood,
crossed himself and kissed the icon.
" She kissed him on the forehead and sat down again
on the sofa.
 They were silent for a while.


"As I was saying to you, Andrew, be kind and generous as you always
used to be.
 Don't judge Lise harshly," she began.
"

"I do not think I have complained of my wife to you, Masha, or blamed
her.
 Why do you say all this to me?"

Red patches appeared on Princess Mary's face and she was silent as if
she felt guilty.
 And I
am sorry for that," he went on.
 She tried to
say something but could not.
 Her brother had guessed right: the little
princess had been crying after dinner and had spoken of her forebodings
about her confinement, and how she dreaded it, and had complained of her
fate, her father-in-law, and her husband.
 Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister.


"Know this, Masha: I can't reproach, have not reproached, and never
shall reproach my wife with anything, and I cannot reproach myself
with anything in regard to her; and that always will be so in whatever
circumstances I may be placed.
 But if you want to know the truth.
.
 if
you want to know whether I am happy? No! Is she happy? No! But why this
is so I don't know.
.
 His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful, kindly, and
unaccustomed brightness, but he was looking not at his sister but over
her head toward the darkness of the open doorway.


"Let us go to her, I must say good-by.
 Or--go and wake and I'll come
in a moment.
 Petrushka!" he called to his valet: "Come here, take these
away.
 Put this on the seat and this to the right.
"

Princess Mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said:
"Andrew, if you had faith you would have turned to God and asked Him
to give you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have been
answered.
"

"Well, may be!" said Prince Andrew.
 "Go, Masha; I'll come immediately.
 It was the third time that day that, with an ecstatic and
artless smile, she had met him in secluded passages.


"Oh! I thought you were in your room," she said, for some reason
blushing and dropping her eyes.


Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenly
came over his face.
 She was speaking as
usual in French, and as if after long self-restraint she wished to make
up for lost time.
.
.
.
 He entered the room softly.
 Prince
Andrew came up, stroked her hair, and asked if she felt rested after
their journey.
 She answered him and continued her chatter.

Servants with lanterns were bustling about in the porch.
 The immense
house was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windows.
 The
domestic serfs were crowding in the hall, waiting to bid good-by to
the young prince.
 The members of the household were all gathered in
the reception hall: Michael Ivanovich, Mademoiselle Bourienne, Princess
Mary, and the little princess.
 Prince Andrew had been called to his
father's study as the latter wished to say good-by to him alone.
 All
were waiting for them to come out.
 He glanced round.


"Going?" And he went on writing.
"

"Kiss me here," and he touched his cheek: "Thanks, thanks!"

"What do you thank me for?"

"For not dilly-dallying and not hanging to a woman's apron strings.
 Thanks, thanks!" And he went on writing, so
that his quill spluttered and squeaked.
 "If you have anything to say,
say it.


"About my wife.
.
.
.
"

"Why talk nonsense? Say what you want.
"

"When her confinement is due, send to Moscow for an accoucheur.
.
.
.
.
"

The old prince stopped writing and, as if not understanding, fixed his
stern eyes on his son.
 "I know that out of a million cases
only one goes wrong, but it is her fancy and mine.
 They have been
telling her things.
 She has had a dream and is frightened.
 Hm.
.
"

He signed with a flourish and suddenly turning to his son began to
laugh.


"It's a bad business, eh?"

"What is bad, Father?"

"The wife!" said the old prince, briefly and significantly.


"No, it can't be helped, lad," said the prince.
"

He seized his son by the hand with small bony fingers, shook it, looked
straight into his son's face with keen eyes which seemed to see through
him, and again laughed his frigid laugh.


The son sighed, thus admitting that his father had understood him.
 The
old man continued to fold and seal his letter, snatching up and throwing
down the wax, the seal, and the paper, with his accustomed rapidity.


"What's to be done? She's pretty! I will do everything.
 Make your mind
easy," said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.
 The old man got up and gave the letter to his son.
 * I have
written that he should make use of you in proper places and not keep you
long as an adjutant: a bad position! Tell him I remember and like him.
 Nicholas Bolkonski's son need not serve under anyone if he is in
disfavor.



He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but his son
was accustomed to understand him.


"I shall probably die before you.
 Here are some jottings for you to read
when I am gone.
 You will find them useful.
"

Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long time
yet.
 He felt that he must not say it.


"I will do it all, Father," he said.


"Well, now, good-by!" He gave his son his hand to kiss, and embraced
him.
 "Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me,
your old father.


The old man was silent.


"I also wanted to ask you," continued Prince Andrew, "if I'm killed
and if I have a son, do not let him be taken away from you--as I said
yesterday.
.
 let him grow up with you.
.
.
.
 Please.
 The old man's sharp eyes were
fixed straight on his son's.


"We've said good-by.


"Well!" he said, turning to his wife.
"

"Andrew, already!" said the little princess, turning pale and looking
with dismay at her husband.


He embraced her.
 She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.


He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into her face,
and carefully placed her in an easy chair.


The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne chafing
her temples.
 Princess Mary, supporting her sister-in-law, still looked
with her beautiful eyes full of tears at the door through which Prince
Andrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in his direction.
 From
the study, like pistol shots, came the frequent sound of the old man
angrily blowing his nose.


"Gone? That's all right!" said he; and looking angrily at the
unconscious little princess, he shook his head reprovingly and slammed
the door.






BOOK TWO: 1805





CHAPTER I


In October, 1805, a Russian army was occupying the villages and towns of
the Archduchy of Austria, and yet other regiments freshly arriving from
Russia were settling near the fortress of Braunau and burdening the
inhabitants on whom they were quartered.


On October 11, 1805, one of the infantry regiments that had just reached
Braunau had halted half a mile from the town, waiting to be inspected
by the commander in chief.
" So the soldiers,
after a twenty-mile march, were kept mending and cleaning all night long
without closing their eyes, while the adjutants and company commanders
calculated and reckoned, and by morning the regiment--instead of the
straggling, disorderly crowd it had been on its last march the day
before--presented a well-ordered array of two thousand men each of whom
knew his place and his duty, had every button and every strap in place,
and shone with cleanliness.
 There was only one circumstance concerning which no one could be at
ease.


The commander of the regiment was an elderly, choleric, stout, and
thick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and wider from
chest to back than across the shoulders.
 He
had the air of a man happily performing one of the most solemn duties of
his life.
 He walked about in front of the line and at every step pulled
himself up, slightly arching his back.
 It was plain that the commander
admired his regiment, rejoiced in it, and that his whole mind was
engrossed by it, yet his strut seemed to indicate that, besides military
matters, social interests and the fair sex occupied no small part of his
thoughts.
 "We had our hands full last night.
 However, I think the
regiment is not a bad one, eh?"

The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony and laughed.


"It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsaritsin Meadow.
"

"What?" asked the commander.


At that moment, on the road from the town on which signalers had been
posted, two men appeared on horse back.
 They were an aide-de-camp
followed by a Cossack.


The aide-de-camp was sent to confirm the order which had not been
clearly worded the day before, namely, that the commander in chief
wished to see the regiment just in the state in which it had been on
the march: in their greatcoats, and packs, and without any preparation
whatever.


A member of the Hofkriegsrath from Vienna had come to Kutuzov the day
before with proposals and demands for him to join up with the army
of the Archduke Ferdinand and Mack, and Kutuzov, not considering this
junction advisable, meant, among other arguments in support of his view,
to show the Austrian general the wretched state in which the troops
arrived from Russia.


"There now! Didn't I tell you, Michael Mitrich, that if it was said
'on the march' it meant in greatcoats?" said he reproachfully to
the battalion commander.
 "Oh, my God!" he added, stepping resolutely
forward.
 "Sergeants major!.
.


"In an hour's time, I should say.
.
.
 On all sides soldiers were running to and fro, throwing
up their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders and pulling the straps
over their heads, unstrapping their overcoats and drawing the sleeves on
with upraised arms.
 The regimental commander walked with his jerky steps
to the front of the regiment and examined it from a distance.


"Whatever is this? This!" he shouted and stood still.
.
 commander to
the general.
.
 third company to the commander.
" The words passed along
the lines and an adjutant ran to look for the missing officer.


When the eager but misrepeated words had reached their destination in a
cry of: "The general to the third company," the missing officer appeared
from behind his company and, though he was a middle-aged man and not in
the habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on his toes toward the
general.
 Spots appeared on his nose,
the redness of which was evidently due to intemperance, and his mouth
twitched nervously.
 "What have you been after? The
commander in chief is expected and you leave your place? Eh? I'll teach
you to dress the men in fancy coats for a parade.
 Eh.
.
.
?"

The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior,
pressed two fingers more and more rigidly to his cap, as if in this
pressure lay his only hope of salvation.


"Your excellency.
.
"

"Your excellency, you gave him leave yourself, on the march.
.
.
.
.
 He was evidently pleased at his own display of
anger and walking up to the regiment wished to find a further excuse for
wrath.


Dolokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight with his
clear, insolent eyes in the general's face.
.
 Sergeant major! Change his coat.
.
.
.


"General, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure.
.
.
" Dolokhov
hurriedly interrupted.


"No talking in the ranks!.
.
.
 No talking, no talking!"

"Not bound to endure insults," Dolokhov concluded in loud, ringing
tones.
 The general became silent,
angrily pulling down his tight scarf.


"I request you to have the goodness to change your coat," he said as he
turned away.
 The regiment fluttered like a bird
preening its plumage and became motionless.


"Att-ention!" shouted the regimental commander in a soul-shaking voice
which expressed joy for himself, severity for the regiment, and welcome
for the approaching chief.
 Behind the caleche galloped the suite and
a convoy of Croats.
 Beside Kutuzov sat an Austrian general, in a white
uniform that looked strange among the Russian black ones.
 The caleche
stopped in front of the regiment.
 Kutuzov and the Austrian general were
talking in low voices and Kutuzov smiled slightly as treading heavily
he stepped down from the carriage just as if those two thousand men
breathlessly gazing at him and the regimental commander did not exist.


The word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, as with a
jingling sound it presented arms.
.
.
.
.
.
 Thanks to the strictness and
assiduity of its commander the regiment, in comparison with others that
had reached Braunau at the same time, was in splendid condition.
 There
were only 217 sick and stragglers.


Kutuzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a few
friendly words to officers he had known in the Turkish war, sometimes
also to the soldiers.
 Behind Kutuzov, at a
distance that allowed every softly spoken word to be heard, followed
some twenty men of his suite.
 This was Prince Bolkonski.
 Nesvitski could hardly keep from
laughter provoked by a swarthy hussar officer who walked beside him.

This hussar, with a grave face and without a smile or a change in the
expression of his fixed eyes, watched the regimental commander's back
and mimicked his every movement.
 Nesvitski laughed and nudged the others to make them look at the
wag.


Kutuzov walked slowly and languidly past thousands of eyes which were
starting from their sockets to watch their chief.


"Another Ismail comrade," said he.
 "A brave officer! Are you satisfied
with him?" he asked the regimental commander.
 "He used to have a predilection for Bacchus.
"

The regimental commander was afraid he might be blamed for this and did
not answer.
 The hussar at that moment noticed the face of the red-nosed
captain and his drawn-in stomach, and mimicked his expression and pose
with such exactitude that Nesvitski could not help laughing.
 Kutuzov
turned round.


The third company was the last, and Kutuzov pondered, apparently trying
to recollect something.
 Prince Andrew stepped forward from among the
suite and said in French:

"You told me to remind you of the officer Dolokhov, reduced to the ranks
in this regiment.
"

"Where is Dolokhov?" asked Kutuzov.
 The shapely figure of the fair-haired soldier,
with his clear blue eyes, stepped forward from the ranks, went up to the
commander in chief, and presented arms.


"Ah!" said Kutuzov.
 "I hope this will be a lesson to you.
 Do your duty.
"

The clear blue eyes looked at the commander in chief just as boldly as
they had looked at the regimental commander, seeming by their expression
to tear open the veil of convention that separates a commander in chief
so widely from a private.


"One thing I ask of your excellency," Dolokhov said in his firm,
ringing, deliberate voice.
 The same smile of the eyes with which he had turned
from Captain Timokhin again flitted over his face.
 He turned away with
a grimace as if to say that everything Dolokhov had said to him and
everything he could say had long been known to him, that he was weary of
it and it was not at all what he wanted.
 He turned away and went to the
carriage.


The regiment broke up into companies, which went to their appointed
quarters near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots and clothes and
to rest after their hard marches.
 (The regimental
commander's face now that the inspection was happily over beamed with
irrepressible delight.
) "It's in the Emperor's service.
.
.
 it can't be
helped.
.
.
 one is sometimes a bit hasty on parade.
 Dolokhov that I won't forget him--he may be quite easy.

And tell me, please--I've been meaning to ask--how is he behaving
himself, and in general.
.
"

"As far as the service goes he is quite punctilious, your excellency;
but his character.
.
.
" said Timokhin.


"And what about his character?" asked the regimental commander.
 "One day he
is sensible, well educated, and good-natured, and the next he's a wild
beast.
.
.
.
"

"Oh, well, well!" remarked the regimental commander.
 You know he has important
connections.
.
.
 Well, then, you just.
.


"Well, of course, of course!"

The regimental commander sought out Dolokhov in the ranks and, reining
in his horse, said to him:

"After the next affair.
.
.
 epaulettes.
 "A cup of
vodka for the men from me," he added so that the soldiers could hear.

"I thank you all! God be praised!" and he rode past that company and
overtook the next one.


"Well, he's really a good fellow, one can serve under him," said
Timokhin to the subaltern beside him.


"In a word, a hearty one.
" said the subaltern, laughing (the
regimental commander was nicknamed King of Hearts).
 The company marched on gaily.
 The soldiers' voices could be
heard on every side.


"And they said Kutuzov was blind of one eye?"

"And so he is! Quite blind!"

"No, friend, he is sharper-eyed than you are.
 Boots and leg bands.
.
.
.
.
.
"

"And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he were smeared
with chalk--as white as flour! I suppose they polish him up as they do
the guns.
"

"I say, Fedeshon!.
.
 Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau.
"

"Buonaparte himself!.
.
.
 Just listen to the fool, what he doesn't know!
The Prussians are up in arms now.
 The Austrians, you see, are putting
them down.
.
.
 they will have their buckwheat cooked before
we reach our quarters.
"

"Give me a biscuit, you devil!"

"And did you give me tobacco yesterday? That's just it, friend! Ah,
well, never mind, here you are.
"

"They might call a halt here or we'll have to do another four miles
without eating.
"

"Wasn't it fine when those Germans gave us lifts! You just sit still and
are drawn along.
"

"Singers to the front" came the captain's order.
 A
drummer, their leader, turned round facing the singers, and flourishing
his arm, began a long-drawn-out soldiers' song, commencing with the
words: "Morning dawned, the sun was rising," and concluding: "On then,
brothers, on to glory, led by Father Kamenski.
" This song had been
composed in the Turkish campaign and now being sung in Austria, the only
change being that the words "Father Kamenski" were replaced by "Father
Kutuzov.
"

Having jerked out these last words as soldiers do and waved his arms
as if flinging something to the ground, the drummer--a lean, handsome
soldier of forty--looked sternly at the singers and screwed up his eyes.

Then having satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed on him, he raised
both arms as if carefully lifting some invisible but precious object
above his head and, holding it there for some seconds, suddenly flung it
down and began:

"Oh, my bower, oh, my bower.
!"

"Oh, my bower new.
 The commander in chief made a sign that the
men should continue to march at ease, and he and all his suite showed
pleasure at the sound of the singing and the sight of the dancing
soldier and the gay and smartly marching men.
 In the second file
from the right flank, beside which the carriage passed the company,
a blue-eyed soldier involuntarily attracted notice.
 It was Dolokhov
marching with particular grace and boldness in time to the song and
looking at those driving past as if he pitied all who were not at that
moment marching with the company.
 The hussar cornet of Kutuzov's suite
who had mimicked the regimental commander, fell back from the carriage
and rode up to Dolokhov.
 But now that Kutuzov had spoken
to the gentleman ranker, he addressed him with the cordiality of an old
friend.


"How am I?" Dolokhov answered coldly.
 "I am as you see.
"

The lively song gave a special flavor to the tone of free and easy
gaiety with which Zherkov spoke, and to the intentional coldness of
Dolokhov's reply.
"

Both were silent.


"She let the hawk fly upward from her wide right sleeve," went the song,
arousing an involuntary sensation of courage and cheerfulness.
 Their
conversation would probably have been different but for the effect of
that song.


"Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?" asked Dolokhov.


"I say, come round some evening and we'll have a game of faro!" said
Zherkov.


"Why, have you too much money?"

"Do come.
"

"I can't.
 I've sworn not to.
 I won't drink and won't play till I get
reinstated.
"

They were again silent.


"Come if you need anything.
.
.
 "Don't trouble.
 If I want anything, I won't beg--I'll
take it!"

"Well, never mind; I only.
.
.
"

"And I only.
.
"

"Good-by.
.
.
.
.
"


Zherkov touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedly from foot
to foot uncertain with which to start, then settled down, galloped past
the company, and overtook the carriage, still keeping time to the song.






CHAPTER III


On returning from the review, Kutuzov took the Austrian general into his
private room and, calling his adjutant, asked for some papers relating
to the condition of the troops on their arrival, and the letters that
had come from the Archduke Ferdinand, who was in command of the advanced
army.


"Ah!.
.
.


"All I can say, General," said he with a pleasant elegance of expression
and intonation that obliged one to listen to each deliberately spoken
word.
 It was evident that Kutuzov himself listened with pleasure to his
own voice.
 But circumstances are sometimes
too strong for us, General.
"

And Kutuzov smiled in a way that seemed to say, "You are quite at
liberty not to believe me and I don't even care whether you do or not,
but you have no grounds for telling me so.
 And that is the whole point.


"But that is my conviction, and judging by the last letter with which
His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I imagine that the
Austrian troops, under the direction of so skillful a leader as General
Mack, have by now already gained a decisive victory and no longer need
our aid," said Kutuzov.


The general frowned.
 Though there was no definite news of an Austrian
defeat, there were many circumstances confirming the unfavorable rumors
that were afloat, and so Kutuzov's suggestion of an Austrian victory
sounded much like irony.
 But Kutuzov went on blandly smiling with the
same expression, which seemed to say that he had a right to suppose so.

And, in fact, the last letter he had received from Mack's army informed
him of a victory and stated strategically the position of the army was
very favorable.
 Also,
as we are masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantage of
commanding both sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy not
cross the Lech, we can cross the Danube, throw ourselves on his line
of communications, recross the river lower down, and frustrate his
intention should he try to direct his whole force against our faithful
ally.



Kutuzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at the
member of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively.


"But you know the wise maxim your excellency, advising one to expect the
worst," said the Austrian general, evidently wishing to have done with
jests and to come to business.
 He involuntarily looked round at the
aide-de-camp.
 "Look here, my dear fellow, get from Kozlovski all the reports
from our scouts.
 Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and here is one
from His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are these," he said,
handing him several papers, "make a neat memorandum in French out of all
this, showing all the news we have had of the movements of the Austrian
army, and then give it to his excellency.
"

Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the
first not only what had been said but also what Kutuzov would have liked
to tell him.
 He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both, stepped
softly over the carpet and went out into the waiting room.
 In the expression of his face,
in his movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left of his former
affected languor and indolence.
 His face expressed more satisfaction
with himself and those around him, his smile and glance were brighter
and more attractive.



Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his industry,
firmness, and expedition.
 I consider myself fortunate to have such a
subordinate by me.
 Others, the majority, disliked him and
considered him conceited, cold, and disagreeable.
 But among these people
Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and even
feared him.


Coming out of Kutuzov's room into the waiting room with the papers in
his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-camp on duty,
Kozlovski, who was sitting at the window with a book.


"Well, Prince?" asked Kozlovski.


"I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we are not
advancing.
"

"If it were true that he has been beaten, news would have come.
"

"Probably," said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.


But at that instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat, with the
order of Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandage round his head,
who had evidently just arrived, entered quickly, slamming the door.


"Commander in Chief Kutuzov?" said the newly arrived general speaking
quickly with a harsh German accent, looking to both sides and advancing
straight toward the inner door.
 "Whom shall I
announce?"

The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlovski, who was
rather short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him.


"The commander in chief is engaged," repeated Kozlovski calmly.


The general's face clouded, his lips quivered and trembled.
 He took out
a notebook, hurriedly scribbled something in pencil, tore out the leaf,
gave it to Kozlovski, stepped quickly to the window, and threw himself
into a chair, gazing at those in the room as if asking, "Why do they
look at me?" Then he lifted his head, stretched his neck as if he
intended to say something, but immediately, with affected indifference,
began to hum to himself, producing a queer sound which immediately broke
off.
 The door of the private room opened and Kutuzov appeared in the
doorway.
 The general with the bandaged head bent forward as though
running away from some danger, and, making long, quick strides with his
thin legs, went up to Kutuzov.


"Vous voyez le malheureux Mack," he uttered in a broken voice.


Kutuzov's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly
immobile for a few moments.
 Then wrinkles ran over his face like a wave
and his forehead became smooth again, he bowed his head respectfully,
closed his eyes, silently let Mack enter his room before him, and closed
the door himself behind him.


The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beaten
and that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct.

Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with
orders which showed that the Russian troops, who had hitherto been
inactive, would also soon have to meet the enemy.


Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest
lay in the general progress of the war.
 When he saw Mack and heard the
details of his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost,
understood all the difficulties of the Russian army's position, and
vividly imagined what awaited it and the part he would have to
play.
 Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at the thought of the
humiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week's time he might,
perhaps, see and take part in the first Russian encounter with the
French since Suvorov met them.
 He feared that Bonaparte's genius might
outweigh all the courage of the Russian troops, and at the same time
could not admit the idea of his hero being disgraced.


Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward his
room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day.
 In the corridor
he met Nesvitski, with whom he shared a room, and the wag Zherkov; they
were as usual laughing.


"Why are you so glum?" asked Nesvitski noticing Prince Andrew's pale
face and glittering eyes.


Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov, there came toward them
from the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrian general who on
Kutuzov's staff in charge of the provisioning of the Russian army, and
the member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the previous evening.

There was room enough in the wide corridor for the generals to pass the
three officers quite easily, but Zherkov, pushing Nesvitski aside with
his arm, said in a breathless voice,

"They're coming!.
.
 they're coming!.
.
 Stand aside, make way, please
make way!"

The generals were passing by, looking as if they wished to avoid
embarrassing attentions.


"Your excellency," said he in German, stepping forward and addressing
the Austrian general, "I have the honor to congratulate you.


"I have the honor to congratulate you.
 General Mack has arrived, quite
well, only a little bruised just here," he added, pointing with a
beaming smile to his head.


The general frowned, turned away, and went on.


"If you, sir, choose to make a buffoon of yourself," he said sharply,
with a slight trembling of the lower jaw, "I can't prevent your doing
so; but I warn you that if you dare to play the fool in my presence, I
will teach you to behave yourself.
"

Nesvitski and Zherkov were so surprised by this outburst that they gazed
at Bolkonski silently with wide-open eyes.


"What's the matter? I only congratulated them," said Zherkov.


"I am not jesting with you; please be silent!" cried Bolkonski, and
taking Nesvitski's arm he left Zherkov, who did not know what to say.


"What's the matter?" exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in his
excitement.
 "Don't you understand that either we are officers serving
our Tsar and our country, rejoicing in the successes and grieving at
the misfortunes of our common cause, or we are merely lackeys who care
nothing for their master's business.
 Quarante mille hommes massacres et
l'armee de nos allies detruite, et vous trouvez la le mot pour rire," *
he said, as if strengthening his views by this French sentence.
 "C'est
bien pour un garcon de rien comme cet individu dont vous avez fait un
ami, mais pas pour vous, pas pour vous.
 The
squadron in which Nicholas Rostov served as a cadet was quartered in
the German village of Salzeneck.
 The best quarters in the village were
assigned to cavalry-captain Denisov, the squadron commander, known
throughout the whole cavalry division as Vaska Denisov.
 Denisov, who had been losing at cards all night,
had not yet come home when Rostov rode back early in the morning from
a foraging expedition.
 Rostov in his cadet uniform, with a jerk to his
horse, rode up to the porch, swung his leg over the saddle with a supple
youthful movement, stood for a moment in the stirrup as if loathe to
part from his horse, and at last sprang down and called to his orderly.


"Ah, Bondarenko, dear friend!" said he to the hussar who rushed up
headlong to the horse.
 "Walk him up and down, my dear fellow," he
continued, with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodhearted young
people show to everyone when they are happy.


"Yes, your excellency," answered the Ukrainian gaily, tossing his head.


"Splendid! What a horse he will be!" he thought with a smile, and
holding up his saber, his spurs jingling, he ran up the steps of the
porch.
 "Hoch Oestreicher! Hoch Russen! Kaiser
Alexander hoch!" *(2) said he, quoting words often repeated by the
German landlord.


"What about your master?" he asked Lavrushka, Denisov's orderly, whom
all the regiment knew for a rogue.


"Hasn't been in since the evening.
 Must have been losing," answered
Lavrushka.
"

Ten minutes later Lavrushka brought the coffee.
 "Now for trouble!" Rostov looked out of the window and saw Denisov
coming home.
 He came up to the porch gloomily, hanging his head.


"Long ago," answered Rostov, "I have already been for the hay, and have
seen Fraulein Mathilde.
 I lost yesterday like a damned
fool!" cried Denisov, not pronouncing his r's.
 "Such ill luck! Such ill
luck.
 As soon as you left, it began and went on.
 Hullo there! Tea!"

Puckering up his face though smiling, and showing his short strong
teeth, he began with stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up his thick
tangled black hair.

"Just fancy, he didn't let me win a single cahd, not one cahd.
"

He took the lighted pipe that was offered to him, gripped it in his
fist, and tapped it on the floor, making the sparks fly, while he
continued to shout.

Then he remained silent for a while, and all at once looked cheerfully
with his glittering, black eyes at Rostov.


"If at least we had some women here; but there's nothing foh one to do
but dwink.


"The squadron quartermaster!" said Lavrushka.


Denisov's face puckered still more.


"Wetched!" he muttered, throwing down a purse with some gold in it.


Rostov took the money and, mechanically arranging the old and new coins
in separate piles, began counting them.


"Where? At Bykov's, at the rat's.
.
.
 He behaved very well in
the regiment but was not liked; Rostov especially detested him and was
unable to overcome or conceal his groundless antipathy to the man.
 (Rook was a
young horse Telyanin had sold to Rostov.
)

The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight in the
face; his eyes continually wandered from one object to another.


"I saw you riding this morning.

"He's begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg," he added.


"The hoof's cracked! That's nothing.
"

"Yes, please do," said Rostov.
 And it's a horse
you'll thank me for.


In the passage Denisov, with a pipe, was squatting on the threshold
facing the quartermaster who was reporting to him.
 On seeing Rostov,
Denisov screwed up his face and pointing over his shoulder with his
thumb to the room where Telyanin was sitting, he frowned and gave a
shudder of disgust.


"Ugh! I don't like that fellow," he said, regardless of the
quartermaster's presence.


Rostov shrugged his shoulders as much as to say: "Nor do I, but what's
one to do?" and, having given his order, he returned to Telyanin.


Telyanin was sitting in the same indolent pose in which Rostov had left
him, rubbing his small white hands.


"Well there certainly are disgusting people," thought Rostov as he
entered.
"

"Let us go ourselves.
 Have you got it, Denisov?"

"Not yet.


They went through the porch and into the stable.
 The lieutenant
explained how to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters.
 Denisov was sitting there scratching with his pen on a sheet of
paper.
 Who's that now? Send him to the
devil, I'm busy!" he shouted to Lavrushka, who went up to him not in the
least abashed.


"Who should it be? You yourself told him to come.
 It's the quartermaster
for the money.
"

Denisov frowned and was about to shout some reply but stopped.
 "How much is left in the
puhse?" he asked, turning to Rostov.


"Seven new and three old imperials.
"

"Oh, it's wetched! Well, what are you standing there for, you sca'cwow?
Call the quahtehmasteh," he shouted to Lavrushka.


"Don't like bowwowing from my own fellows, I don't," growled Denisov.


"But if you won't accept money from me like a comrade, you will offend
me.


"No, I tell you.
"

And Denisov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow.
 The purse was not there.


"That's a miwacle.
"

"Wait, haven't you dropped it?" said Rostov, picking up the pillows one
at a time and shaking them.


He pulled off the quilt and shook it.
 The purse was not there.


"Dear me, can I have forgotten? No, I remember thinking that you kept
it under your head like a treasure," said Rostov.
 "I put it just here.

Where is it?" he asked, turning to Lavrushka.
 It must be where you put it.
"

"But it isn't?.
.

Feel in your pockets.
"

"No, if I hadn't thought of it being a treasure," said Rostov, "but I
remember putting it there.
"

Lavrushka turned all the bedding over, looked under the bed and under
the table, searched everywhere, and stood still in the middle of the
room.


"Wostov, you've not been playing schoolboy twicks.
.
 He could not draw breath.


"Now then, you devil's puppet, look alive and hunt for it!" shouted
Denisov, suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the man with a
threatening gesture.
"

Rostov, his eyes avoiding Denisov, began buttoning his coat, buckled on
his saber, and put on his cap.


"I must have that purse, I tell you," shouted Denisov, shaking his
orderly by the shoulders and knocking him against the wall.


"Denisov, let him alone, I know who has taken it," said Rostov, going
toward the door without raising his eyes.
 Denisov paused, thought a
moment, and, evidently understanding what Rostov hinted at, seized his
arm.


"Nonsense!" he cried, and the veins on his forehead and neck stood out
like cords.
 "You are mad, I tell you.
 I won't allow it.
 The purse is
here! I'll flay this scoundwel alive, and it will be found.


"And I tell you, don't you dahe to do it!" shouted Denisov, rushing at
the cadet to restrain him.


But Rostov pulled away his arm and, with as much anger as though Denisov
were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his face.

"There was no one else in the room except myself.
.
"

He could not finish, and ran out of the room.


Rostov went to Telyanin's quarters.
"

"You've only just missed him," said the orderly.
 There was
an inn in the village which the officers frequented.
 Rostov rode up to
it and saw Telyanin's horse at the porch.


In the second room of the inn the lieutenant was sitting over a dish of
sausages and a bottle of wine.


"Ah, you've come here too, young man!" he said, smiling and raising his
eyebrows.


"Yes," said Rostov as if it cost him a great deal to utter the word; and
he sat down at the nearest table.


Both were silent.
 There were two Germans and a Russian officer in the
room.


When Telyanin had finished his lunch he took out of his pocket a double
purse and, drawing its rings aside with his small, white, turned-up
fingers, drew out a gold imperial, and lifting his eyebrows gave it to
the waiter.


"Please be quick," he said.
 Rostov rose and went up to Telyanin.


"Yes, it's a nice purse.
 Yes, yes," he said, growing suddenly pale, and
added, "Look at it, young man.
"

Rostov took the purse in his hand, examined it and the money in it, and
looked at Telyanin.
 The lieutenant was looking about in his usual way
and suddenly seemed to grow very merry.
 "Well, let me have
it, young man, I'm going.
"

Rostov did not speak.
 "Now then, let me have it.
"

He stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse.
 Rostov let go of
it.
 Telyanin took the purse and began carelessly slipping it into the
pocket of his riding breeches, with his eyebrows lifted and his mouth
slightly open, as if to say, "Yes, yes, I am putting my purse in my
pocket and that's quite simple and is no one else's business.


Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Telyanin's eyes to Rostov's
and back, and back again and again in an instant.
.
.
" he
whispered just above Telyanin's ear.


"What? What? How dare you? What?" said Telyanin.


But these words came like a piteous, despairing cry and an entreaty for
pardon.
 He was glad, and at the same instant began to pity the
miserable man who stood before him, but the task he had begun had to be
completed.
.


"I.
.
 Don't ruin a young fellow.
.
.
.
 "O God," he said with tears in his eyes, "how could you do it?"

"Count.
.
" said Telyanin drawing nearer to him.


"Don't touch me," said Rostov, drawing back.
 "If you need it, take the
money," and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn.






CHAPTER V


That same evening there was an animated discussion among the squadron's
officers in Denisov's quarters.


"And I tell you, Rostov, that you must apologize to the colonel!" said
a tall, grizzly-haired staff captain, with enormous mustaches and
many wrinkles on his large features, to Rostov who was crimson with
excitement.


The staff captain, Kirsten, had twice been reduced to the ranks for
affairs of honor and had twice regained his commission.


"I will allow no one to call me a liar!" cried Rostov.
 "He told me I
lied, and I told him he lied.
 And there it rests.
.
.
"

"You just wait a moment, my dear fellow, and listen," interrupted the
staff captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache.
 "You
tell the colonel in the presence of other officers that an officer has
stolen.
.
"

"I'm not to blame that the conversation began in the presence of other
officers.
.
"

"That's all right.

Ask Denisov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to demand
satisfaction of his regimental commander?"

Denisov sat gloomily biting his mustache and listening to the
conversation, evidently with no wish to take part in it.


"You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other
officers," continued the staff captain, "and Bogdanich" (the colonel was
called Bogdanich) "shuts you up.
"

"Well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and must
apologize.
"

"Not on any account!" exclaimed Rostov.
 "You don't wish to apologize, but, man, it's not only to him
but to the whole regiment--all of us--you're to blame all round.
 Now what was the colonel to do? Have the officer tried and
disgrace the whole regiment? Disgrace the whole regiment because of one
scoundrel? Is that how you look at it? We don't see it like that.
 And
Bogdanich was a brick: he told you you were saying what was not true.
 And now, when one wants to smooth the thing over, some
conceit prevents your apologizing, and you wish to make the whole
affair public.
 You are offended at being put on duty a bit, but why not
apologize to an old and honorable officer? Whatever Bogdanich may be,
anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel! You're quick at taking
offense, but you don't mind disgracing the whole regiment!" The staff
captain's voice began to tremble.


"You value your own pride and don't wish to apologize," continued
the staff captain, "but we old fellows, who have grown up in and, God
willing, are going to die in the regiment, we prize the honor of the
regiment, and Bogdanich knows it.
 Oh, we do prize it, old fellow! And
all this is not right, it's not right! You may take offense or not but I
always stick to mother truth.


"That's twue, devil take it!" shouted Denisov, jumping up.
.
 you mustn't think.
.
 You're
wrong to think that of me.
.
.
.
 for me.
.
.
 Ah well, I'll show that in action, and for me the honor
of the flag.
.
.
 Well, never mind, it's true I'm to blame, to blame all
round.
 Well, what else do you want?.
.
"

"Come, that's right, Count!" cried the staff captain, turning round and
clapping Rostov on the shoulder with his big hand.
"

"That's better, Count," said the staff captain, beginning to address
Rostov by his title, as if in recognition of his confession.
 Yes, go!"

"Gentlemen, I'll do anything.
 No one shall hear a word from me," said
Rostov in an imploring voice, "but I can't apologize, by God I can't,
do what you will! How can I go and apologize like a little boy asking
forgiveness?"

Denisov began to laugh.


"It'll be worse for you.
 Bogdanich is vindictive and you'll pay for your
obstinacy," said Kirsten.


"No, on my word it's not obstinacy! I can't describe the feeling.
 I
can't.
.
.
 "And what has become
of that scoundrel?" he asked Denisov.


Just then Zherkov entered the room.


"What brings you here?" cried the officers turning to the newcomer.


"We're to go into action, gentlemen! Mack has surrendered with his whole
army.
"

"It's not true!"

"I've seen him myself!"

"What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?"

"Into action! Into action! Bring him a bottle for such news! But how did
you come here?"

"I've been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil, Mack.

An Austrian general complained of me.
 I congratulated him on Mack's
arrival.
.
 At midday the Russian
baggage train, the artillery, and columns of troops were defiling
through the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge.
 The turrets of a convent stood out beyond a
wild virgin pine forest, and far away on the other side of the Enns the
enemy's horse patrols could be discerned.
 A little behind them Nesvitski, who had been sent to the
rearguard by the commander in chief, was sitting on the trail of a gun
carriage.
 A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack and
a flask, and Nesvitski was treating some officers to pies and real
doppelkummel.
 The officers gladly gathered round him, some on their
knees, some squatting Turkish fashion on the wet grass.


"Yes, the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool.
 It's a
fine place! Why are you not eating anything, gentlemen?" Nesvitski was
saying.
 "It's a lovely place!
We passed close to the park and saw two deer.
.
 and what a splendid
house!"

"Look, Prince," said another, who would have dearly liked to take
another pie but felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examining the
countryside--"See, our infantrymen have already got there.

They'll ransack that castle," he remarked with evident approval.
 "No, but what I should like," added he,
munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth, "would be to slip in
over there.
"

He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed and
gleamed.


"That would be fine, gentlemen!"

The officers laughed.
 They say there are Italian girls among
them.


"Yes, so it is, so it is," said the general angrily, lowering the field
glass and shrugging his shoulders, "so it is! They'll be fired on at the
crossing.
 And why are they dawdling there?"

On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked eye, and from
their battery a milk-white cloud arose.
 Then came the distant report of
a shot, and our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing.


"Would not your excellency like a little refreshment?" he said.
"

"Hadn't I better ride over, your excellency?" asked Nesvitski.
"

"Very good," answered Nesvitski.


"I'll really call in on the nuns," he said to the officers who watched
him smilingly, and he rode off by the winding path down the hill.


"Now then, let's see how far it will carry, Captain.
 Just try!" said the
general, turning to an artillery officer.
 "Have a little fun to pass the
time.


Number one jumped briskly aside.
 The gun rang out with a deafening
metallic roar, and a whistling grenade flew above the heads of our
troops below the hill and fell far short of the enemy, a little smoke
showing the spot where it burst.


The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound.
 At the same instant the sun came fully
out from behind the clouds, and the clear sound of the solitary shot
and the brilliance of the bright sunshine merged in a single joyous and
spirited impression.






CHAPTER VII


Two of the enemy's shots had already flown across the bridge, where
there was a crush.
 Halfway across stood Prince Nesvitski, who had
alighted from his horse and whose big body was jammed against the
railings.
 He looked back laughing to the Cossack who stood a few
steps behind him holding two horses by their bridles.
 "What a fellow! You
can't wait a moment! Don't you see the general wants to pass?"

But the convoyman took no notice of the word "general" and shouted at
the soldiers who were blocking his way.
" But the soldiers, crowded together shoulder to
shoulder, their bayonets interlocking, moved over the bridge in a dense
mass.
 Looking down over the rails Prince Nesvitski saw the rapid, noisy
little waves of the Enns, which rippling and eddying round the piles of
the bridge chased each other along.


"It's as if a dam had burst," said the Cossack hopelessly.
 "Are there
many more of you to come?"

"A million all but one!" replied a waggish soldier in a torn coat, with
a wink, and passed on followed by another, an old man.


"If he" (he meant the enemy) "begins popping at the bridge now,"
said the old soldier dismally to a comrade, "you'll forget to scratch
yourself.


And he also passed on with the wagon.
 Then came some merry soldiers who
had evidently been drinking.


"And then, old fellow, he gives him one in the teeth with the butt end
of his gun.
.
.
.
" answered another with a loud laugh.
 He just sends a ball and they think they'll all
be killed," a sergeant was saying angrily and reproachfully.


"As it flies past me, Daddy, the ball I mean," said a young soldier with
an enormous mouth, hardly refraining from laughing, "I felt like dying
of fright.
 I did, 'pon my word, I got that frightened!" said he, as if
bragging of having been frightened.


That one also passed.
 Then followed a cart unlike any that had gone
before.
 It was a German cart with a pair of horses led by a German, and
seemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects.
 A fine brindled cow with
a large udder was attached to the cart behind.
 A woman with an unweaned
baby, an old woman, and a healthy German girl with bright red cheeks
were sitting on some feather beds.
 Evidently these fugitives were
allowed to pass by special permission.
 The eyes of all the soldiers
turned toward the women, and while the vehicle was passing at foot pace
all the soldiers' remarks related to the two young ones.


"Just see, the German sausage is making tracks, too!"

"Sell me the missis," said another soldier, addressing the German, who,
angry and frightened, strode energetically along with downcast eyes.


"See how smart she's made herself! Oh, the devils!"

"There, Fedotov, you should be quartered on them!"

"I have seen as much before now, mate!"

"Where are you going?" asked an infantry officer who was eating an
apple, also half smiling as he looked at the handsome girl.


The German closed his eyes, signifying that he did not understand.


"Take it if you like," said the officer, giving the girl an apple.
 Nesvitski like the rest of the men on the
bridge did not take his eyes off the women till they had passed.
 When
they had gone by, the same stream of soldiers followed, with the same
kind of talk, and at last all stopped.
 As often happens, the horses of
a convoy wagon became restive at the end of the bridge, and the whole
crowd had to wait.

"Where are you shoving to? Devil take you! Can't you wait? It'll
be worse if he fires the bridge.


Looking down at the waters of the Enns under the bridge, Nesvitski
suddenly heard a sound new to him, of something swiftly approaching.
.
.


"Just see where it carries to!" a soldier near by said sternly, looking
round at the sound.
 Nesvitski realized that it was a cannon ball.


"Hey, Cossack, my horse!" he said.
 "Now, then, you there! get out of the
way! Make way!"

With great difficulty he managed to get to his horse, and shouting
continually he moved on.
 The soldiers squeezed themselves to make way
for him, but again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg, and those
nearest him were not to blame for they were themselves pressed still
harder from behind.


"Nesvitski, Nesvitski! you numskull!" came a hoarse voice from behind
him.


Nesvitski looked round and saw, some fifteen paces away but separated by
the living mass of moving infantry, Vaska Denisov, red and shaggy, with
his cap on the back of his black head and a cloak hanging jauntily over
his shoulder.


"Tell these devils, these fiends, to let me pass!" shouted Denisov
evidently in a fit of rage, his coal-black eyes with their bloodshot
whites glittering and rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in a small
bare hand as red as his face.


"Ah, Vaska!" joyfully replied Nesvitski.
 "What's up with you?"

"The squadwon can't pass," shouted Vaska Denisov, showing his white
teeth fiercely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab, which twitched
its ears as the bayonets touched it, and snorted, spurting white foam
from his bit, tramping the planks of the bridge with his hoofs, and
apparently ready to jump over the railings had his rider let him.
.
.
.
.
 Stop there, you devil with the cart! I'll hack you with my
saber!" he shouted, actually drawing his saber from its scabbard and
flourishing it.
 But the devil knows what this is.


Denisov smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused
a smell of perfume, and put it to Nesvitski's nose.


"Of course.
 I'm going into action! I've shaved, bwushed my teeth, and
scented myself.
"

The imposing figure of Nesvitski followed by his Cossack, and
the determination of Denisov who flourished his sword and shouted
frantically, had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through
to the farther side of the bridge and stopped the infantry.
 Beside the
bridge Nesvitski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver the order,
and having done this he rode back.


The infantry who had been stopped crowded near the bridge in the
trampled mud and gazed with that particular feeling of ill-will,
estrangement, and ridicule with which troops of different arms usually
encounter one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved past them in
regular order.


"Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!" said one.


"What good are they? They're led about just for show!" remarked another.


"Don't kick up the dust, you infantry!" jested an hussar whose prancing
horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers.


"I'd like to put you on a two days' march with a knapsack! Your fine
cords would soon get a bit rubbed," said an infantryman, wiping the mud
off his face with his sleeve.
"

"There now, Zikin, they ought to put you on a horse.

At the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of our
Cossack scouts were moving.
 Suddenly on the road at the top of the high
ground, artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen.
 These were the
French.
 A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot.
 All
the officers and men of Denisov's squadron, though they tried to talk of
other things and to look in other directions, thought only of what
was there on the hilltop, and kept constantly looking at the patches
appearing on the skyline, which they knew to be the enemy's troops.
 It was calm, and at
intervals the bugle calls and the shouts of the enemy could be heard
from the hill.
 There was no one now between the squadron and the enemy
except a few scattered skirmishers.
 An empty space of some seven hundred
yards was all that separated them.


"One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividing
the living from the dead lies uncertainty, suffering, and death.
 And
what is there? Who is there?--there beyond that field, that tree, that
roof lit up by the sun? No one knows, but one wants to know.
 But you are
strong, healthy, cheerful, and excited, and are surrounded by other such
excitedly animated and healthy men.
" So thinks, or at any rate feels,
anyone who comes in sight of the enemy, and that feeling gives a
particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything that
takes place at such moments.


On the high ground where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannon rose,
and a ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron.
 The
hussars began carefully aligning their horses.
 Silence fell on the whole
squadron.
 Evidently they were firing at the hussars, but the balls
with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads of the horsemen and fell
somewhere beyond them.
 The hussars did not look round, but at the sound
of each shot, as at the word of command, the whole squadron with its
rows of faces so alike yet so different, holding its breath while the
ball flew past, rose in the stirrups and sank back again.
 The soldiers
without turning their heads glanced at one another, curious to see their
comrades' impression.
 Every face, from Denisov's to that of the bugler,
showed one common expression of conflict, irritation, and excitement,
around chin and mouth.
 Rostov on the left flank, mounted on his Rook--a
handsome horse despite its game leg--had the happy air of a schoolboy
called up before a large audience for an examination in which he feels
sure he will distinguish himself.
 He was glancing at everyone with a
clear, bright expression, as if asking them to notice how calmly he sat
under fire.


"Who's that curtseying there? Cadet Miwonov! That's not wight! Look at
me," cried Denisov who, unable to keep still on one spot, kept turning
his horse in front of the squadron.


The black, hairy, snub-nosed face of Vaska Denisov, and his whole short
sturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers in which
he held the hilt of his naked saber, looked just as it usually did,
especially toward evening when he had emptied his second bottle; he was
only redder than usual.
 The
staff captain on his broad-backed, steady mare came at a walk to meet
him.
 His face with its long mustache was serious as always, only his
eyes were brighter than usual.


"Well, what about it?" said he to Denisov.
"

"The devil only knows what they're about!" muttered Denisov.
 Denisov
galloped up to him.


"Your excellency! Let us attack them! I'll dwive them off.
"

"Attack indeed!" said the colonel in a bored voice, puckering up his
face as if driving off a troublesome fly.
 "And why are you stopping
here? Don't you see the skirmishers are retreating? Lead the squadron
back.
 The second squadron that had been in the front
line followed them across and the last Cossacks quitted the farther side
of the river.
 It seemed to Rostov that Bogdanich was only pretending not to
notice him, and that his whole aim now was to test the cadet's courage,
so he drew himself up and looked around him merrily; then it seemed to
him that Bogdanich rode so near in order to show him his courage.
 Next
he thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a desperate attack
just to punish him--Rostov.
 Then he imagined how, after the attack,
Bogdanich would come up to him as he lay wounded and would magnanimously
extend the hand of reconciliation.


The high-shouldered figure of Zherkov, familiar to the Pavlograds as he
had but recently left their regiment, rode up to the colonel.
 After his
dismissal from headquarters Zherkov had not remained in the regiment,
saying he was not such a fool as to slave at the front when he could
get more rewards by doing nothing on the staff, and had succeeded in
attaching himself as an orderly officer to Prince Bagration.
 He now came
to his former chief with an order from the commander of the rear guard.


"Colonel," he said, addressing Rostov's enemy with an air of gloomy
gravity and glancing round at his comrades, "there is an order to stop
and fire the bridge.


"I don't myself know 'to who,'" replied the cornet in a serious tone,
"but the prince told me to 'go and tell the colonel that the hussars
must return quickly and fire the bridge.


"How's this, Colonel?" he shouted as he approached.


"You spoke to me of inflammable material," said he, "but you said
nothing about firing it.
"

"But, my dear sir," said Nesvitski as he drew up, taking off his cap and
smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand, "wasn't I
telling you to fire the bridge, when inflammable material had been put
in position?"

"I am not your 'dear sir,' Mr.
 Staff Officer, and you did not tell me to
burn the bridge! I know the service, and it is my habit orders strictly
to obey.
 You said the bridge would be burned, but who would it burn, I
could not know by the holy spirit!"

"Ah, that's always the way!" said Nesvitski with a wave of the hand.
 Staff Officer.
" continued the colonel in an
offended tone.


"Colonel," interrupted the officer of the suite, "You must be quick or
the enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot.
"

The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the stout
staff officer, and at Zherkov, and he frowned.


Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were to blame
for everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the second
squadron, that in which Rostov was serving under Denisov, to return to
the bridge.


"There, it's just as I thought," said Rostov to himself.
 "He wishes to
test me!" His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face.
 "Let
him see whether I am a coward!" he thought.


Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression
appeared that they had worn when under fire.
 Then came the word of
command.
 The men
were crossing themselves.
 Rostov no longer looked at the colonel, he
had no time.
 He was afraid of falling behind the hussars, so much afraid
that his heart stood still.
 Denisov rode past him, leaning back and shouting something.
 Rostov
saw nothing but the hussars running all around him, their spurs catching
and their sabers clattering.


"Stretchers!" shouted someone behind him.
 The others outstripped him.


"Oh, every bullet has its billet," answered Vaska Denisov, turning in
his saddle.


"Will they burn the bridge or not? Who'll get there first? Will they get
there and fire the bridge or will the French get within grapeshot range
and wipe them out?" These were the questions each man of the troops
on the high ground above the bridge involuntarily asked himself with a
sinking heart--watching the bridge and the hussars in the bright evening
light and the blue tunics advancing from the other side with their
bayonets and guns.
 The hussars will get it hot!" said Nesvitski; "they are within
grapeshot range now.
"

"He shouldn't have taken so many men," said the officer of the suite.


"True enough," answered Nesvitski; "two smart fellows could have done
the job just as well.
"

"Ah, your excellency," put in Zherkov, his eyes fixed on the hussars,
but still with that naive air that made it impossible to know whether he
was speaking in jest or in earnest.
 Our Bogdanich knows how
things are done.


On the French side, amid the groups with cannon, a cloud of smoke
appeared, then a second and a third almost simultaneously, and at the
moment when the first report was heard a fourth was seen.
 Then two
reports one after another, and a third.
 "Look! A man has fallen! Fallen, fallen!"

"Two, I think.
"

"If I were Tsar I would never go to war," said Nesvitski, turning away.


The French guns were hastily reloaded.
 Smoke appeared again
but at irregular intervals, and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto the
bridge.
 The hussars had succeeded in
setting it on fire and the French batteries were now firing at them, no
longer to hinder them but because the guns were trained and there was
someone to fire at.
 Two were misdirected and the shot went too
high, but the last round fell in the midst of a group of hussars and
knocked three of them over.


Rostov, absorbed by his relations with Bogdanich, had paused on the
bridge not knowing what to do.
 There was no one to hew down (as he
had always imagined battles to himself), nor could he help to fire the
bridge because he had not brought any burning straw with him like the
other soldiers.
 He stood looking about him, when suddenly he heard a
rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt, and the hussar nearest
to him fell against the rails with a groan.
 Rostov ran up to him with
the others.
 Again someone shouted, "Stretchers!" Four men seized the
hussar and began lifting him.


"Oooh! For Christ's sake let me alone!" cried the wounded man, but still
he was lifted and laid on the stretcher.
 How beautiful the sky looked; how blue, how calm, and how deep!
How bright and glorious was the setting sun! With what soft glitter the
waters of the distant Danube shone.
 And fairer still were the faraway
blue mountains beyond the river, the nunnery, the mysterious gorges, and
the pine forests veiled in the mist of their summits.
.
.
 There was peace
and happiness.
.
 "In myself alone and in that sunshine there
is so much happiness; but here.
 There--they are shouting again, and again are
all running back somewhere, and I shall run with them, and it, death, is
here above me and around.
.
"

At that instant the sun began to hide behind the clouds, and other
stretchers came into view before Rostov.


"Well, fwiend? So you've smelt powdah!" shouted Vaska Denisov just above
his ear.


"Yes and no mistake!" cried Denisov.
 "You worked like wegular bwicks and
it's nasty work! An attack's pleasant work! Hacking away at the dogs!
But this sort of thing is the very devil, with them shooting at you like
a target.
 No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the sensation which
the cadet under fire for the first time had experienced.


"And if he asks about the losses?"

"A trifle," said the colonel in his bass voice: "two hussars wounded,
and one knocked out," he added, unable to restrain a happy smile, and
pronouncing the phrase "knocked out" with ringing distinctness.






CHAPTER IX


Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under the command
of Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriendly to it,
losing confidence in its allies, suffering from shortness of supplies,
and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anything that had
been foreseen, the Russian army of thirty-five thousand men commanded
by Kutuzov was hurriedly retreating along the Danube, stopping where
overtaken by the enemy and fighting rearguard actions only as far as
necessary to enable it to retreat without losing its heavy equipment.

There had been actions at Lambach, Amstetten, and Melk; but despite the
courage and endurance--acknowledged even by the enemy--with which the
Russians fought, the only consequence of these actions was a yet more
rapid retreat.
 Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and
had joined Kutuzov at Braunau now separated from the Russian army,
and Kutuzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted forces.
 Instead of an
offensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared in accord with the
modern science of strategics, had been handed to Kutuzov when he was in
Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrath, the sole and almost unattainable
aim remaining for him was to effect a junction with the forces that were
advancing from Russia, without losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm.
 On the
thirtieth he attacked Mortier's division, which was on the left bank,
and broke it up.
 In this action for the first time trophies were taken:
banners, cannon, and two enemy generals.
 Though the troops
were ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third of their number in
killed, wounded, sick, and stragglers; though a number of sick and
wounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danube with a letter
in which Kutuzov entrusted them to the humanity of the enemy; and
though the big hospitals and the houses in Krems converted into military
hospitals could no longer accommodate all the sick and wounded, yet the
stand made at Krems and the victory over Mortier raised the spirits of
the army considerably.
 To be so sent
meant not only a reward but an important step toward promotion.


The night was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snow that
had fallen the previous day--the day of the battle.
 Reviewing his
impressions of the recent battle, picturing pleasantly to himself the
impression his news of a victory would create, or recalling the send-off
given him by the commander in chief and his fellow officers, Prince
Andrew was galloping along in a post chaise enjoying the feelings of a
man who has at length begun to attain a long-desired happiness.
 As soon
as he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with the rattle of the
wheels and the sensation of victory.
 Then he began to imagine that
the Russians were running away and that he himself was killed, but he
quickly roused himself with a feeling of joy, as if learning afresh that
this was not so but that on the contrary the French had run away.
 He
again recalled all the details of the victory and his own calm courage
during the battle, and feeling reassured he dozed off.
.
.

The Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the front
cart, shouting and scolding a soldier with coarse abuse.
 In each of
the long German carts six or more pale, dirty, bandaged men were being
jolted over the stony road.
 Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave the
soldier three gold pieces.


"That's for them all," he said to the officer who came up.


"Get well soon, lads!" he continued, turning to the soldiers.
 "There's
plenty to do still.
.
 Go on!" he shouted to the driver, and they galloped on.


It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the paved
streets of Brunn and found himself surrounded by high buildings, the
lights of shops, houses, and street lamps, fine carriages, and all that
atmosphere of a large and active town which is always so attractive to a
soldier after camp life.
 He again vividly recalled the details of the battle, no longer
dim, but definite and in the concise form in which he imagined himself
stating them to the Emperor Francis.
 He
expected to be at once presented to the Emperor.


"To the right from the corridor, Euer Hochgeboren! There you will find
the adjutant on duty," said the official.
 "He will conduct you to the
Minister of War.
"

The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and went
in to the Minister of War.
 His fertile mind instantly
suggested to him a point of view which gave him a right to despise the
adjutant and the minister.
 "Away from the smell of powder, they
probably think it easy to gain victories!" he thought.
 His eyes narrowed
disdainfully, he entered the room of the Minister of War with peculiarly
deliberate steps.
 This feeling of disdain was heightened when he saw the
minister seated at a large table reading some papers and making pencil
notes on them, and for the first two or three minutes taking no notice
of his arrival.
 He went on reading to the end, without
raising his eyes at the opening of the door and the sound of footsteps.


"Take this and deliver it," said he to his adjutant, handing him the
papers and still taking no notice of the special messenger.
 "But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me," he
thought.
 He had an intellectual and distinctive
head, but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the firm, intelligent
expression on his face changed in a way evidently deliberate and
habitual to him.


"From General Field Marshal Kutuzov?" he asked.
 "I hope it is good news?
There has been an encounter with Mortier? A victory? It was high time!"

He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and began to read it
with a mournful expression.

However, I will let you know.


"Au revoir! Thank you very much.


When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest
and happiness the victory had afforded him had been now left in the
indifferent hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant.
 The
whole tenor of his thoughts instantaneously changed; the battle seemed
the memory of a remote event long past.






CHAPTER X


Prince Andrew stayed at Brunn with Bilibin, a Russian acquaintance of
his in the diplomatic service.


"Ah, my dear prince! I could not have a more welcome visitor," said
Bilibin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew.
 "So you're a messenger of victory, eh? Splendid! And I am sitting
here ill, as you see.
"

After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat's
luxurious study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him.
 Besides it was pleasant,
after his reception by the Austrians, to speak if not in Russian
(for they were speaking French) at least with a Russian who would, he
supposed, share the general Russian antipathy to the Austrians which was
then particularly strong.
 They had known each other previously in Petersburg, but
had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutuzov.

Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gave promise of rising high
in the military profession, so to an even greater extent Bilibin gave
promise of rising in his diplomatic career.
 Both the foreign minister and our ambassador
in Vienna knew him and valued him.
 He was not one of those many
diplomats who are esteemed because they have certain negative qualities,
avoid doing certain things, and speak French.
 He was one of those,
who, liking work, knew how to do it, and despite his indolence would
sometimes spend a whole night at his writing table.


Bilibin liked conversation as he liked work, only when it could be made
elegantly witty.
 In society he always awaited an opportunity to say
something striking and took part in a conversation only when that was
possible.
 These sayings were prepared in the
inner laboratory of his mind in a portable form as if intentionally, so
that insignificant society people might carry them from drawing room to
drawing room.
 And, in fact, Bilibin's witticisms were hawked about
in the Viennese drawing rooms and often had an influence on matters
considered important.


His thin, worn, sallow face was covered with deep wrinkles, which always
looked as clean and well washed as the tips of one's fingers after a
Russian bath.
 The movement of these wrinkles formed the principal play
of expression on his face.
 Now his forehead would pucker into deep folds
and his eyebrows were lifted, then his eyebrows would descend and
deep wrinkles would crease his cheeks.


"Well, now tell me about your exploits," said he.


Bolkonski, very modestly without once mentioning himself, described the
engagement and his reception by the Minister of War.


"They received me and my news as one receives a dog in a game of
skittles," said he in conclusion.


Bilibin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared.


"Cependant, mon cher," he remarked, examining his nails from a distance
and puckering the skin above his left eye, "malgre la haute estime que
je professe pour the Orthodox Russian army, j'avoue que votre victoire
n'est pas des plus victorieuses.
" *


     * "But my dear fellow, with all my respect for the Orthodox
     Russian army, I must say that your victory was not
     particularly victorious.
.
.
 We had expected, as I told you, to get at their rear by seven
in the morning but had not reached it by five in the afternoon.
 "You
ought to have been there at seven in the morning.
"

"Why did you not succeed in impressing on Bonaparte by diplomatic
methods that he had better leave Genoa alone?" retorted Prince Andrew in
the same tone.


"I know," interrupted Bilibin, "you're thinking it's very easy to take
marshals, sitting on a sofa by the fire! That is true, but still why
didn't you capture him? So don't be surprised if not only the Minister
of War but also his Most August Majesty the Emperor and King Francis
is not much delighted by your victory.
.
.
.
"

He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his
forehead.


"It is now my turn to ask you 'why?' mon cher," said Bolkonski.
 Kutuzov alone at last gains a
real victory, destroying the spell of the invincibility of the French,
and the Minister of War does not even care to hear the details.
"

"That's just it, my dear fellow.
 You see it's hurrah for the Tsar, for
Russia, for the Orthodox Greek faith! All that is beautiful, but what
do we, I mean the Austrian court, care for your victories? Bring us nice
news of a victory by the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand (one archduke's as
good as another, as you know) and even if it is only over a fire brigade
of Bonaparte's, that will be another story and we'll fire off some
cannon! But this sort of thing seems done on purpose to vex us.

You abandon Vienna, give up its defense--as much as to say: 'Heaven is
with us, but heaven help you and your capital!' The one general whom we
all loved, Schmidt, you expose to a bullet, and then you congratulate
us on the victory! Admit that more irritating news than yours could not
have been conceived.
 It's as if it had been done on purpose, on purpose.
"

After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, his reception, and
especially after having dined, Bolkonski felt that he could not take in
the full significance of the words he heard.
 You see that your
victory is not a matter for great rejoicing and that you can't be
received as a savior.
"

"Really I don't care about that, I don't care at all," said Prince
Andrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle before Krems
was really of small importance in view of such events as the fall of
Austria's capital.
 "How is it Vienna was taken? What of the bridge and
its celebrated bridgehead and Prince Auersperg? We heard reports that
Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna?" he said.


"Prince Auersperg is on this, on our side of the river, and is defending
us--doing it very badly, I think, but still he is defending us.
 But
Vienna is on the other side.
 Otherwise we should long ago have been in the mountains of
Bohemia, and you and your army would have spent a bad quarter of an hour
between two fires.
"

"But still this does not mean that the campaign is over," said Prince
Andrew.
 It will be as I said at the beginning of the campaign, it won't
be your skirmishing at Durrenstein, or gunpowder at all, that will
decide the matter, but those who devised it," said Bilibin quoting one
of his own mots, releasing the wrinkles on his forehead, and pausing.
 If not
it is merely a question of settling where the preliminaries of the new
Campo Formio are to be drawn up.
 "Buonaparte?" he
repeated, accentuating the u: "I think, however, now that he lays down
laws for Austria at Schonbrunn, il faut lui faire grace de l'u! * I
shall certainly adopt an innovation and call him simply Bonaparte!"


    * "We must let him off the u!"


"But joking apart," said Prince Andrew, "do you really think the
campaign is over?"

"This is what I think.
 Austria has been made a fool of, and she is not
used to it.
 She will retaliate.
 And she has been fooled in the first
place because her provinces have been pillaged--they say the Holy
Russian army loots terribly--her army is destroyed, her capital
taken, and all this for the beaux yeux * of His Sardinian Majesty.
"


    * Fine eyes.
 "That would be too base.
"

"If we live we shall see," replied Bilibin, his face again becoming
smooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end.


When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a
clean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and fragrant pillows, he
felt that the battle of which he had brought tidings was far, far away
from him.


He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, of musketry
and the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears, and now
again drawn out in a thin line the musketeers were descending the hill,
the French were firing, and he felt his heart palpitating as he rode
forward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrily whistling all around,
and he experienced tenfold the joy of living, as he had not done since
childhood.
.
.


"Yes, that all happened!" he said, and, smiling happily to himself like
a child, he fell into a deep, youthful slumber.






CHAPTER XI


Next day he woke late.
 Recalling his recent impressions, the first
thought that came into his mind was that today he had to be presented
to the Emperor Francis; he remembered the Minister of War, the polite
Austrian adjutant, Bilibin, and last night's conversation.
 In the study were four gentlemen
of the diplomatic corps.
 With Prince Hippolyte Kuragin, who was a
secretary to the embassy, Bolkonski was already acquainted.


The gentlemen assembled at Bilibin's were young, wealthy, gay society
men, who here, as in Vienna, formed a special set which Bilibin, their
leader, called les notres.
 These gentlemen received Prince
Andrew as one of themselves, an honor they did not extend to many.



    * Ours.



"But the best of it was," said one, telling of the misfortune of
a fellow diplomat, "that the Chancellor told him flatly that his
appointment to London was a promotion and that he was so to regard it.

Can you fancy the figure he cut?.
.


"You, Bolkonski, don't know," said Bilibin turning to Prince Andrew,
"that all the atrocities of the French army (I nearly said of the
Russian army) are nothing compared to what this man has been doing among
the women!"

"La femme est la compagne de l'homme," * announced Prince Hippolyte, and
began looking through a lorgnette at his elevated legs.



    * "Woman is man's companion.
"


Bilibin and the rest of "ours" burst out laughing in Hippolyte's face,
and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom--he had to admit--he had
almost been jealous on his wife's account, was the butt of this set.
.
 as in its last note.
.
.
 you understand.
.
.
.
.


"Wait, I have not finished.
.
.
" he said to Prince Andrew, seizing him
by the arm, "I believe that intervention will be stronger than
nonintervention.
 And.
.
.
" he paused.
 "Finally one cannot impute the
nonreceipt of our dispatch of November 18.
 That is how it will end.
" And
he released Bolkonski's arm to indicate that he had now quite finished.


"Demosthenes, I know thee by the pebble thou secretest in thy golden
mouth!" said Bilibin, and the mop of hair on his head moved with
satisfaction.


Everybody laughed, and Hippolyte louder than anyone.
 Brunn's attractions must be shown him.
"

"We must let him see Amelie, she's exquisite!" said one of "ours,"
kissing his finger tips.


"In general we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humane
interests," said Bilibin.


"I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality,
gentlemen, it is already time for me to go," replied Prince Andrew
looking at his watch.


"Where to?"

"To the Emperor.
"

"Oh! Oh! Oh! Well, au revoir, Bolkonski! Au revoir, Prince! Come back
early to dinner," cried several voices.
 "We'll take you in hand.
"

"When speaking to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise the way
that provisions are supplied and the routes indicated," said Bilibin,
accompanying him to the hall.


"Well, talk as much as you can, anyway.
 He has a passion for giving
audiences, but he does not like talking himself and can't do it, as you
will see.
"





CHAPTER XII


At the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he had
been told to, and the Emperor Francis merely looked fixedly into his
face and just nodded to him with his long head.
 But after it was
over, the adjutant he had seen the previous day ceremoniously informed
Bolkonski that the Emperor desired to give him an audience.
 The Emperor
Francis received him standing in the middle of the room.
 Before the
conversation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor
seemed confused and blushed as if not knowing what to say.


"Tell me, when did the battle begin?" he asked hurriedly.


Prince Andrew replied.
 The Emperor spoke
as if his sole aim were to put a given number of questions--the answers
to these questions, as was only too evident, did not interest him.


"How many miles?"

"From where to where, Your Majesty?"

"From Durrenstein to Krems.
"

"Three and a half miles, Your Majesty.
"

"The French have abandoned the left bank?"

"According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts during the
night.
"

"Is there sufficient forage in Krems?"

"Forage has not been supplied to the extent.
.
.
 Prince Andrew withdrew and
was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides.
 Everywhere he saw
friendly looks and heard friendly words.
 Yesterday's adjutant reproached
him for not having stayed at the palace, and offered him his own house.

The Minister of War came up and congratulated him on the Maria Theresa
Order of the third grade, which the Emperor was conferring on him.
 Then the Russian ambassador took him by
the shoulder, led him to the window, and began to talk to him.

Bolkonski was invited everywhere, and had to spend the whole morning
calling on the principal Austrian dignitaries.
 Between four and five in
the afternoon, having made all his calls, he was returning to Bilibin's
house thinking out a letter to his father about the battle and his visit
to Brunn.
 At the door he found a vehicle half full of luggage.


Before returning to Bilibin's Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop to
provide himself with some books for the campaign, and had spent some
time in the shop.


"Oh, your excellency!" said Franz, with difficulty rolling the
portmanteau into the vehicle, "we are to move on still farther.


Bilibin came out to meet him.
 His usually calm face showed excitement.


"There now! Confess that this is delightful," said he.
 "This affair of
the Thabor Bridge, at Vienna.
.
.
 I heard nothing there.
.
.
 What is it all about?" inquired Prince Andrew impatiently.


"What's it all about? Why, the French have crossed the bridge that
Auersperg was defending, and the bridge was not blown up: so Murat is
now rushing along the road to Brunn and will be here in a day or two.
"

"What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bridge, if it was mined?"

"That is what I ask you.


"But if the bridge is crossed it means that the army too is lost? It
will be cut off," said he.


"That's just it," answered Bilibin.
 "Listen! The French entered
Vienna as I told you.
 Very well.
 Next day, which was yesterday, those
gentlemen, messieurs les marechaux, * Murat, Lannes, and Belliard,
mount and ride to the bridge.
 (Observe that all three are Gascons.
)
'Gentlemen,' says one of them, 'you know the Thabor Bridge is mined and
doubly mined and that there are menacing fortifications at its head and
an army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered to blow up the bridge
and not let us cross? But it will please our sovereign the Emperor
Napoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go and take it!' 'Yes,
let's!' say the others.
"


    * The marshalls.



"Stop jesting," said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously.
 This news
grieved him and yet he was pleased.
 "Nothing is truer or sadder.
 He lets them enter the tete-de-pont.
.
.
 The sergeant, who was evidently wiser than his general,
goes up to Auersperg and says: 'Prince, you are being deceived, here are
the French!' Murat, seeing that all is lost if the sergeant is allowed
to speak, turns to Auersperg with feigned astonishment (he is a
true Gascon) and says: 'I don't recognize the world-famous Austrian
discipline, if you allow a subordinate to address you like that!' It
was a stroke of genius.
 Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake and
orders the sergeant to be arrested.
 Come, you must own that this affair
of the Thabor Bridge is delightful! It is not exactly stupidity, nor
rascality.
.
.
.
"


     * Bridgehead.


     * (2) That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that
     he ought to be firing at the enemy.



"It may be treachery," said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the gray
overcoats, wounds, the smoke of gunpowder, the sounds of firing, and the
glory that awaited him.


"Not that either.
 "It's not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity: it is just
as at Ulm.
.
.
 it is.
.
.
.
 c'est du Mack.
 Nous sommes mackes (It is.
.
 We are Macked)," he concluded, feeling that he
had produced a good epigram, a fresh one that would be repeated.


"I am going away.
"

"Where to?"

"To the army.
"

And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went to
his room.
 Why are you going?"

And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinkles
vanished from his face.


"Why are you going? I know you think it your duty to gallop back to
the army now that it is in danger.
 Leave it to those who are no longer fit for
anything else.
.
 You have not been ordered to return and have not been
dismissed from here; therefore, you can stay and go with us wherever our
ill luck takes us.
"

"Do stop joking, Bilibin," cried Bolkonski.
"

And Bilibin unwrinkled his temple, feeling that the dilemma was
insoluble.


"I cannot argue about it," replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he thought:
"I am going to save the army.






CHAPTER XIII


That same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War, Bolkonski
set off to rejoin the army, not knowing where he would find it and
fearing to be captured by the French on the way to Krems.


In Brunn everybody attached to the court was packing up, and the heavy
baggage was already being dispatched to Olmutz.
 The road was so obstructed
with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage.


"Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transportee des extremites
de l'univers, nous allons lui faire eprouver le meme sort--(le sort de
l'armee d'Ulm).
" * He remembered these words in Bonaparte's address
to his army at the beginning of the campaign, and they awoke in him
astonishment at the genius of his hero, a feeling of wounded pride,
and a hope of glory.
 "Well, if need be, I shall do it no worse than others.
"


He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments,
carts, guns, artillery, and again baggage wagons and vehicles of all
kinds overtaking one another and blocking the muddy road, three and
sometimes four abreast.

All along the sides of the road fallen horses were to be seen, some
flayed, some not, and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers
sat waiting for something, and again soldiers straggling from their
companies, crowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages, or
returned from them dragging sheep, fowls, hay, and bulging sacks.
 Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mud
pushed the guns and wagons themselves.
 Whips cracked, hoofs slipped,
traces broke, and lungs were strained with shouting.
 The officers
directing the march rode backward and forward between the carts.
 Their
voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their faces
that they despaired of the possibility of checking this disorder.


"Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army," thought Bolkonski, recalling
Bilibin's words.
 A
soldier was driving, and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the
apron under the leather hood of the vehicle.
 An
officer in charge of transport was beating the soldier who was driving
the woman's vehicle for trying to get ahead of others, and the strokes
of his whip fell on the apron of the equipage.
 The woman screamed
piercingly.
.
.
.
.
 They won't let us pass, we are left behind and have lost
our people.
.
 "Turn back with your slut!"

"Mr.
.


"Kindly let this cart pass.


The officer glanced at him, and without replying turned again to the
soldier.
 "I'll teach you to push on!.
.


"And who are you?" cried the officer, turning on him with tipsy rage,
"who are you? Are you in command here? Eh? I am commander here, not
you! Go back or I'll flatten you into a pancake," repeated he.


"That was a nice snub for the little aide-de-camp," came a voice from
behind.


"Kind.
.
ly let--them--pass!"

The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.


"It's all the fault of these fellows on the staff that there's this
disorder," he muttered.
 "Do as you like.


On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,
intending to rest if but for a moment, eat something, and try to sort
out the stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused his mind.
 "This
is a mob of scoundrels and not an army," he was thinking as he went up
to the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him by
name.


He turned round.
 Nesvitski's handsome face looked out of the little
window.
 Nesvitski, moving his moist lips as he chewed something, and
flourishing his arm, called him to enter.


"Bolkonski! Bolkonski!.
.
.
 Don't you hear? Eh? Come quick.
" he shouted.
 They hastily turned round to him asking if he
had any news.


"Here, in that house," answered the adjutant.


"I was going to ask you.
 I know nothing except that it was all I could
do to get here.
"

"And we, my dear boy! It's terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack,
we're getting it still worse," said Nesvitski.
"

"You won't be able to find either your baggage or anything else now,
Prince.
 And God only knows where your man Peter is," said the other
adjutant.


"Where are headquarters?"

"We are to spend the night in Znaim.

"They've made up splendid packs for me--fit to cross the Bohemian
mountains with.
 It's a bad lookout, old fellow! But what's the matter
with you? You must be ill to shiver like that," he added, noticing that
Prince Andrew winced as at an electric shock.


"It's nothing," replied Prince Andrew.


"What is the commander in chief doing here?" he asked.


"I can't make out at all," said Nesvitski.


"Well, all I can make out is that everything is abominable, abominable,
quite abominable!" said Prince Andrew, and he went off to the house
where the commander in chief was.


Passing by Kutuzov's carriage and the exhausted saddle horses of his
suite, with their Cossacks who were talking loudly together, Prince
Andrew entered the passage.
 Kutuzov himself, he was told, was in the
house with Prince Bagration and Weyrother.
 Weyrother was the Austrian
general who had succeeded Schmidt.
 Kozlovski's face
looked worn--he too had evidently not slept all night.
.
.
.
.
 From the
sound of these voices, the inattentive way Kozlovski looked at him, the
disrespectful manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact that the clerk and
Kozlovski were squatting on the floor by a tub so near to the commander
in chief, and from the noisy laughter of the Cossacks holding the
horses near the window, Prince Andrew felt that something important and
disastrous was about to happen.


He turned to Kozlovski with urgent questions.


"Immediately, Prince," said Kozlovski.
"

"What about capitulation?"

"Nothing of the sort.
 Orders are issued for a battle.

Just as he was going to open it the sounds ceased, the door opened,
and Kutuzov with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in the doorway.

Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kutuzov but the expression of the
commander in chief's one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied with
thoughts and anxieties as to be oblivious of his presence.
 He looked
straight at his adjutant's face without recognizing him.


"Ah, from Vienna? Very good.
 Later, later!"

Kutuzov went out into the porch with Bagration.


"Well, good-by, Prince," said he to Bagration.
 With his left
hand he drew Bagration toward him, and with his right, on which he wore
a ring, he made the sign of the cross over him with a gesture evidently
habitual, offering his puffy cheek, but Bagration kissed him on the neck
instead.


"Your excellency, I should like to be of use here.
"

"Get in," said Kutuzov, and noticing that Bolkonski still delayed, he
added: "I need good officers myself, need them myself!"

They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence.


"There is still much, much before us," he said, as if with an old man's
penetration he understood all that was passing in Bolkonski's mind.
 "If
a tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God," he added as
if speaking to himself.


Prince Andrew glanced at Kutuzov's face only a foot distant from him and
involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near his
temple, where an Ismail bullet had pierced his skull, and the empty eye
socket.
 "Yes, he has a right to speak so calmly of those men's death,"
thought Bolkonski.


Kutuzov did not reply.
 He seemed to have forgotten what he had been
saying, and sat plunged in thought.

There was not a trace of agitation on his face.
 With delicate irony he
questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the
Emperor, about the remarks he had heard at court concerning the Krems
affair, and about some ladies they both knew.
 The spy reported that the
French, after crossing the bridge at Vienna, were advancing in immense
force upon Kutuzov's line of communication with the troops that were
arriving from Russia.
 If Kutuzov decided to remain at Krems, Napoleon's
army of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cut him off completely
and surround his exhausted army of forty thousand, and he would find
himself in the position of Mack at Ulm.
 If Kutuzov decided to retreat
along the road from Krems to Olmutz, to unite with the troops arriving
from Russia, he risked being forestalled on that road by the French
who had crossed the Vienna bridge, and encumbered by his baggage and
transport, having to accept battle on the march against an enemy three
times as strong, who would hem him in from two sides.


Kutuzov chose this latter course.


The French, the spy reported, having crossed the Vienna bridge, were
advancing by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixty-six miles off
on the line of Kutuzov's retreat.


The night he received the news, Kutuzov sent Bagration's vanguard, four
thousand strong, to the right across the hills from the Krems-Znaim to
the Vienna-Znaim road.
 Bagration was to make this march without resting,
and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear, and if he succeeded
in forestalling the French he was to delay them as long as possible.
 Kutuzov with his transport had still to march for some days
before he could reach Znaim.
 But a
freak of fate made the impossible possible.
 The success of the trick
that had placed the Vienna bridge in the hands of the French without
a fight led Murat to try to deceive Kutuzov in a similar way.
 Meeting
Bagration's weak detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to be
Kutuzov's whole army.
 To be able to crush it absolutely he awaited the
arrival of the rest of the troops who were on their way from Vienna,
and with this object offered a three days' truce on condition that both
armies should remain in position without moving.
 Count Nostitz, the
Austrian general occupying the advanced posts, believed Murat's emissary
and retired, leaving Bagration's division exposed.
 Another emissary rode
to the Russian line to announce the peace negotiations and to offer the
Russian army the three days' truce.
 Bagration replied that he was not
authorized either to accept or refuse a truce and sent his adjutant to
Kutuzov to report the offer he had received.
 The offer of a truce gave the only, and a quite
unexpected, chance of saving the army.
 Wintzingerode was not merely
to agree to the truce but also to offer terms of capitulation, and
meanwhile Kutuzov sent his adjutants back to hasten to the utmost the
movements of the baggage trains of the entire army along the Krems-Znaim
road.
 Bagration's exhausted and hungry detachment, which alone covered
this movement of the transport and of the whole army, had to remain
stationary in face of an enemy eight times as strong as itself.


Kutuzov's expectations that the proposals of capitulation (which were in
no way binding) might give time for part of the transport to pass, and
also that Murat's mistake would very soon be discovered, proved
correct.
 As soon as Bonaparte (who was at Schonbrunn, sixteen miles from
Hollabrunn) received Murat's dispatch with the proposal of a truce and
a capitulation, he detected a ruse and wrote the following letter to
Murat:


Schonbrunn, 25th Brumaire, 1805,

at eight o'clock in the morning

To PRINCE MURAT,

I cannot find words to express to you my displeasure.
 You command only
my advance guard, and have no right to arrange an armistice without my
order.


If, however, the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention, I will
ratify it; but it is only a trick.
.
.
.


The Russian Emperor's aide-de-camp is an impostor.
.
 The Austrians let
themselves be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna bridge, you are
letting yourself be tricked by an aide-de-camp of the Emperor.


NAPOLEON


Bonaparte's adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing letter to
Murat.






CHAPTER XV


Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who had
persisted in his request to Kutuzov, arrived at Grunth and reported
himself to Bagration.
 Bonaparte's adjutant had not yet reached Murat's
detachment and the battle had not yet begun.
 In Bagration's detachment
no one knew anything of the general position of affairs.
 Bagration,
knowing Bolkonski to be a favorite and trusted adjutant, received him
with distinction and special marks of favor, explaining to him that
there would probably be an engagement that day or the next, and giving
him full liberty to remain with him during the battle or to join the
rearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat, "which is also very
important.
"

"However, there will hardly be an engagement today," said Bagration as
if to reassure Prince Andrew.


"If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a medal
he can get his reward just as well in the rearguard, but if he wishes to
stay with me, let him.
.
 he'll be of use here if he's a brave officer,"
thought Bagration.


On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces who
seemed to be seeking something, and soldiers dragging doors, benches,
and fencing from the village.


"There now, Prince! We can't stop those fellows," said the staff officer
pointing to the soldiers.
 "The officers don't keep them in hand.
 And
there," he pointed to a sutler's tent, "they crowd in and sit.
 This
morning I turned them all out and now look, it's full again.
 I must go
there, Prince, and scare them a bit.


"Why didn't you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you something.
 Several officers, with flushed and
weary faces, were sitting at the table eating and drinking.
 "You know it won't do to leave your posts like this.
 The prince
gave orders that no one should leave his post.


"Well, aren't you ashamed of yourself, Captain Tushin?" he continued.


Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer
Tushin, who silent and smiling, shifting from one stockinged foot to the
other, glanced inquiringly with his large, intelligent, kindly eyes from
Prince Andrew to the staff officer.


"Kindly return to your posts," said the staff officer trying to preserve
his gravity.
 Several battalions of soldiers, in their shirt sleeves despite
the cold wind, swarmed in these earthworks like a host of white ants;
spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrown up from behind the
bank by unseen hands.
"


They rode up the opposite hill.
"

"Thank you very much, I will go on alone," said Prince Andrew, wishing
to rid himself of this staff officer's company, "please don't trouble
yourself further.
"

The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.
 The soldiers in
their greatcoats were ranged in lines, the sergeants major and company
officers were counting the men, poking the last man in each section in
the ribs and telling him to hold his hand up.
 Soldiers scattered over
the whole place were dragging logs and brushwood and were building
shelters with merry chatter and laughter; around the fires sat others,
dressed and undressed, drying their shirts and leg bands or mending
boots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers and porridge cookers.

In one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers were gazing eagerly
at the steaming boiler, waiting till the sample, which a quartermaster
sergeant was carrying in a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a log
before his shelter, had been tasted.
 The
soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces,
emptied them, rolling the vodka in their mouths, and walked away from
the sergeant major with brightened expressions, licking their lips and
wiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats.
 All their faces were
as serene as if all this were happening at home awaiting peaceful
encampment, and not within sight of the enemy before an action in
which at least half of them would be left on the field.
 After passing a
chasseur regiment and in the lines of the Kiev grenadiers--fine fellows
busy with similar peaceful affairs--near the shelter of the regimental
commander, higher than and different from the others, Prince Andrew came
out in front of a platoon of grenadiers before whom lay a naked man.
 Two
soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and
striking him regularly on his bare back.
 The man shrieked unnaturally.

A stout major was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the
screams kept repeating:

"It's a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,
honorable, and brave, but if he robs his fellows there is no honor in
him, he's a scoundrel.
 Go on! Go on!"

So the swishing sound of the strokes, and the desperate but unnatural
screams, continued.


"Go on, go on!" said the major.


Prince Andrew, having reached the front line, rode along it.
 Our front
line and that of the enemy were far apart on the right and left flanks,
but in the center where the men with a flag of truce had passed that
morning, the lines were so near together that the men could see one
another's faces and speak to one another.


Since early morning--despite an injunction not to approach the picket
line--the officers had been unable to keep sight-seers away.
 The
soldiers forming the picket line, like showmen exhibiting a curiosity,
no longer looked at the French but paid attention to the sight-seers and
grew weary waiting to be relieved.
 Prince Andrew halted to have a look
at the French.


"Look! Look there!" one soldier was saying to another, pointing to a
Russian musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officer and
was rapidly and excitedly talking to a French grenadier.
 "Hark to him
jabbering! Fine, isn't it? It's all the Frenchy can do to keep up with
him.
 There now, Sidorov!"

"Wait a bit and listen.
 Dolokhov had
come from the left flank where their regiment was stationed, with his
captain.
 "More, please: more! What's he saying?"

Dolokhov did not answer the captain; he had been drawn into a hot
dispute with the French grenadier.
 They were naturally talking about the
campaign.


"Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured!" said the
French grenadier.


"We'll make you dance as we did under Suvorov.
.
.



    * "On vous fera danser.
 "The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has taught the
others.
.
" began Dolokhov, but the Frenchman interrupted him.
.
!" cried he angrily.


"The devil skin your Emperor.
"

And Dolokhov swore at him in coarse soldier's Russian and shouldering
his musket walked away.


"Let us go, Ivan Lukich," he said to the captain.


"Ho! ho! ho! Ha! ha! ha! ha! Ouh! ouh!" came peals of such healthy and
good-humored laughter from the soldiers that it infected the French
involuntarily, so much so that the only thing left to do seemed to be
to unload the muskets, explode the ammunition, and all return home as
quickly as possible.
 Here he dismounted, and stopped
beside the farthest of the four unlimbered cannon.

Our infantry were stationed there, and at the farthest point the
dragoons.
 The French line was
wider than ours, and it was plain that they could easily outflank us
on both sides.
 Behind our position was a steep and deep dip, making it
difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire.
 He made some notes on two points, intending to mention them to
Bagration.
 His idea was, first, to concentrate all the artillery in the
center, and secondly, to withdraw the cavalry to the other side of the
dip.
 Prince Andrew, being always near the commander in chief, closely
following the mass movements and general orders, and constantly studying
historical accounts of battles, involuntarily pictured to himself the
course of events in the forthcoming action in broad outline.
 In that case
the dragoons could successfully make a flank counterattack.
 If they
attack our center we, having the center battery on this high ground,
shall withdraw the left flank under its cover, and retreat to the dip by
echelons.
" So he reasoned.
.
.
"

"All the same, one is afraid! Oh, you clever people," said a third manly
voice interrupting them both.
 "Of course you artillery men are very
wise, because you can take everything along with you--vodka and snacks.
"

And the owner of the manly voice, evidently an infantry officer,
laughed.


"Why," thought Prince Andrew, "that's the captain who stood up in
the sutler's hut without his boots.


"Some herb vodka? Certainly!" said Tushin.
 "But still, to conceive a
future life.
.
 The ground
seemed to groan at the terrible impact.






CHAPTER XVII


Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery,
looking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball.
 His eyes
ran rapidly over the wide space, but he only saw that the hitherto
motionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was
a battery to their left.
 The smoke above it had not yet dispersed.
 A
small but distinctly visible enemy column was moving down the hill,
probably to strengthen the front line.
 The smoke of the first shot had
not yet dispersed before another puff appeared, followed by a report.

The battle had begun! Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back
to Grunth to find Prince Bagration.
 He heard the cannonade behind him
growing louder and more frequent.


Lemarrois had just arrived at a gallop with Bonaparte's stern letter,
and Murat, humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault, had at once
moved his forces to attack the center and outflank both the Russian
wings, hoping before evening and before the arrival of the Emperor to
crush the contemptible detachment that stood before him.
 "But where and how will my Toulon present itself?"

Passing between the companies that had been eating porridge and drinking
vodka a quarter of an hour before, he saw everywhere the same rapid
movement of soldiers forming ranks and getting their muskets ready,
and on all their faces he recognized the same eagerness that filled his
heart.
 "It has begun! Here it is, dreadful but enjoyable!" was what the
face of each soldier and each officer seemed to say.


Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up, he saw,
in the light of the dull autumn evening, mounted men coming toward him.

The foremost, wearing a Cossack cloak and lambskin cap and riding a
white horse, was Prince Bagration.
 He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew
told him what he had seen.


The feeling, "It has begun! Here it is!" was seen even on Prince
Bagration's hard brown face with its half-closed, dull, sleepy eyes.

Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face
and wished he could tell what, if anything, this man was thinking and
feeling at that moment.
 "Is there anything at all behind that impassive
face?" Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked.
 Prince Bagration bent
his head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrew told him, and
said, "Very good!" in a tone that seemed to imply that everything that
took place and was reported to him was exactly what he had foreseen.

Prince Bagration, uttering his words with an Oriental accent, spoke
particularly slowly, as if to impress the fact that there was no need to
hurry.
 However, he put his horse to a trot in the direction of Tushin's
battery.
 Prince Andrew followed with the suite.
 The accountant, a stout,
full-faced man, looked around him with a naive smile of satisfaction
and presented a strange appearance among the hussars, Cossacks, and
adjutants, in his camlet coat, as he jolted on his horse with a convoy
officer's saddle.
"

"Oh, leave off!" said the accountant with a beaming but rather cunning
smile, as if flattered at being made the subject of Zherkov's joke, and
purposely trying to appear stupider than he really was.


"What's that that has fallen?" asked the accountant with a naive smile.


"A French pancake," answered Zherkov.


"So that's what they hit with?" asked the accountant.
 "How awful!"

He seemed to swell with satisfaction.
 He had hardly finished speaking
when they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling which suddenly
ended with a thud into something soft.
.
.
 Zherkov and the staff officer bent over their saddles and
turned their horses away.
 The accountant stopped, facing the Cossack,
and examined him with attentive curiosity.
 The Cossack was dead, but the
horse still struggled.


Prince Bagration screwed up his eyes, looked round, and, seeing the
cause of the confusion, turned away with indifference, as if to say, "Is
it worth while noticing trifles?" He reined in his horse with the case
of a skillful rider and, slightly bending over, disengaged his saber
which had caught in his cloak.
 Prince Andrew remembered the story of Suvorov
giving his saber to Bagration in Italy, and the recollection was
particularly pleasant at that moment.
 They had reached the battery at
which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield.


"Whose company?" asked Prince Bagration of an artilleryman standing by
the ammunition wagon.


"Captain Tushin's, your excellency!" shouted the red-haired, freckled
gunner in a merry voice, standing to attention.


"Yes, yes," muttered Bagration as if considering something, and he rode
past the limbers to the farthest cannon.
 A huge, broad-shouldered gunner, Number One, holding
a mop, his legs far apart, sprang to the wheel; while Number Two with
a trembling hand placed a charge in the cannon's mouth.
 The short,
round-shouldered Captain Tushin, stumbling over the tail of the gun
carriage, moved forward and, not noticing the general, looked out
shading his eyes with his small hand.


"Lift it two lines more and it will be just right," cried he in a feeble
voice to which he tried to impart a dashing note, ill suited to his weak
figure.
 "Number Two!" he squeaked.
 "Fire, Medvedev!"

Bagration called to him, and Tushin, raising three fingers to his cap
with a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute
but like a priest's benediction, approached the general.
 Though Tushin's
guns had been intended to cannonade the valley, he was firing incendiary
balls at the village of Schon Grabern visible just opposite, in front of
which large masses of French were advancing.


No one had given Tushin orders where and at what to fire, but after
consulting his sergeant major, Zakharchenko, for whom he had great
respect, he had decided that it would be a good thing to set fire to the
village.
 The French had advanced nearest on our right.

To the left the horizon bounded by the adjacent wood.
 Prince Bagration
ordered two battalions from the center to be sent to reinforce the right
flank.
 The officer of the suite ventured to remark to the prince that
if these battalions went away, the guns would remain without support.

Prince Bagration turned to the officer and with his dull eyes looked at
him in silence.
 It seemed to Prince Andrew that the officer's remark was
just and that really no answer could be made to it.
 But at that moment
an adjutant galloped up with a message from the commander of the
regiment in the hollow and news that immense masses of the French were
coming down upon them and that his regiment was in disorder and was
retreating upon the Kiev grenadiers.
 Prince Bagration bowed his head in
sign of assent and approval.
 But this
adjutant returned half an hour later with the news that the commander
of the dragoons had already retreated beyond the dip in the ground, as
a heavy fire had been opened on him and he was losing men uselessly, and
so had hastened to throw some sharpshooters into the wood.


"Very good!" said Bagration.
 About Tushin and the battalion that had been in
support of his battery all was forgotten.
 Prince Andrew noticed, however, that though what
happened was due to chance and was independent of the commander's will,
owing to the tact Bagration showed, his presence was very valuable.

Officers who approached him with disturbed countenances became calm;
soldiers and officers greeted him gaily, grew more cheerful in his
presence, and were evidently anxious to display their courage before
him.






CHAPTER XVIII


Prince Bagration, having reached the highest point of our right flank,
began riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but where
on account of the smoke nothing could be seen.
 The nearer they got to
the hollow the less they could see but the more they felt the nearness
of the actual battlefield.
 They began to meet wounded men.
 One with a
bleeding head and no cap was being dragged along by two soldiers who
supported him under the arms.
 A bullet had evidently hit him in the throat or
mouth.

Crossing a road they descended a steep incline and saw several men
lying on the ground; they also met a crowd of soldiers some of whom were
unwounded.
 The soldiers were ascending the hill breathing heavily, and
despite the general's presence were talking loudly and gesticulating.
 Bagration rode up
to the ranks along which shots crackled now here and now there, drowning
the sound of voices and the shouts of command.
 The whole air reeked with
smoke.
 The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened with it.
 A pleasant humming and whistling of bullets were
often heard.
 "What is this?" thought Prince Andrew approaching the crowd
of soldiers.
 "It can't be an attack, for they are not moving; it can't
be a square--for they are not drawn up for that.
"

The commander of the regiment, a thin, feeble-looking old man with a
pleasant smile--his eyelids drooping more than half over his old eyes,
giving him a mild expression, rode up to Bagration and welcomed him as
a host welcomes an honored guest.
 He reported that his regiment had
been attacked by French cavalry and that, though the attack had been
repulsed, he had lost more than half his men.
 He said the attack
had been repulsed, employing this military term to describe what had
occurred to his regiment, but in reality he did not himself know what
had happened during that half-hour to the troops entrusted to him, and
could not say with certainty whether the attack had been repulsed or his
regiment had been broken up.
 They were still firing, not at the cavalry which
had disappeared, but at French infantry who had come into the hollow and
were firing at our men.
 Turning to his
adjutant he ordered him to bring down the two battalions of the Sixth
Chasseurs whom they had just passed.
 Prince Andrew was struck by
the changed expression on Prince Bagration's face at this moment.
 It
expressed the concentrated and happy resolution you see on the face of
a man who on a hot day takes a final run before plunging into the water.

The dull, sleepy expression was no longer there, nor the affectation
of profound thought.
 The round, steady, hawk's eyes looked before him
eagerly and rather disdainfully, not resting on anything although his
movements were still slow and measured.


The commander of the regiment turned to Prince Bagration, entreating him
to go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were.
 "Please,
your excellency, for God's sake!" he kept saying, glancing for support
at an officer of the suite who turned away from him.
 He spoke in the tone of entreaty and reproach
that a carpenter uses to a gentleman who has picked up an ax: "We are
used to it, but you, sir, will blister your hands.
" He spoke as if those
bullets could not kill him, and his half-closed eyes gave still more
persuasiveness to his words.
 While he was speaking, the curtain of smoke that had
concealed the hollow, driven by a rising wind, began to move from right
to left as if drawn by an invisible hand, and the hill opposite, with
the French moving about on it, opened out before them.
 One could already see the soldiers' shaggy
caps, distinguish the officers from the men, and see the standard
flapping against its staff.


"They march splendidly," remarked someone in Bagration's suite.


The head of the column had already descended into the hollow.
 The clash
would take place on this side of it.
.
.
 Before they had
reached Bagration, the weighty tread of the mass of men marching in step
could be heard.
 On their left flank, nearest to Bagration, marched
a company commander, a fine round-faced man, with a stupid and happy
expression--the same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed.
 At that
moment he was clearly thinking of nothing but how dashing a fellow he
would appear as he passed the commander.
 He carried close
to his leg a narrow unsheathed sword (small, curved, and not like a real
weapon) and looked now at the superior officers and now back at the men
without losing step, his whole powerful body turning flexibly.
 It was as
if all the powers of his soul were concentrated on passing the commander
in the best possible manner, and feeling that he was doing it well he
was happy.
 "Left.
 left.
.
.
.
.
.
 left.
.
 left.
.
" A fat
major skirted a bush, puffing and falling out of step; a soldier who had
fallen behind, his face showing alarm at his defection, ran at a trot,
panting to catch up with his company.
.
 left.
 A morose soldier marching on the left turned his eyes on
Bagration as he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: "We know
that ourselves!" Another, without looking round, as though fearing to
relax, shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on.


The order was given to halt and down knapsacks.

He gave the reins to a Cossack, took off and handed over his felt coat,
stretched his legs, and set his cap straight.
 The head of the French
column, with its officers leading, appeared from below the hill.


"Forward, with God!" said Bagration, in a resolute, sonorous voice,
turning for a moment to the front line, and slightly swinging his arms,
he went forward uneasily over the rough field with the awkward gait of
a cavalryman.


The French were already near.
 Prince Andrew, walking beside Bagration,
could clearly distinguish their bandoliers, red epaulets, and even their
faces.
) Prince Bagration
gave no further orders and silently continued to walk on in front of the
ranks.
 Suddenly one shot after another rang out from the French, smoke
appeared all along their uneven ranks, and musket shots sounded.






CHAPTER XIX


The attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our right
flank.
 In the center Tushin's forgotten battery, which had managed to
set fire to the Schon Grabern village, delayed the French advance.
 The
French were putting out the fire which the wind was spreading, and thus
gave us time to retreat.
 But our left--which consisted
of the Azov and Podolsk infantry and the Pavlograd hussars--was
simultaneously attacked and outflanked by superior French forces under
Lannes and was thrown into confusion.


Zherkov, not removing his hand from his cap, turned his horse about
and galloped off.
 But no sooner had he left Bagration than his courage
failed him.


Having reached the left flank, instead of going to the front where the
firing was, he began to look for the general and his staff where they
could not possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.


The command of the left flank belonged by seniority to the commander of
the regiment Kutuzov had reviewed at Braunau and in which Dolokhov was
serving as a private.
 But the
regiments, both cavalry and infantry, were by no means ready for the
impending action.
 From privates to general they were not expecting a
battle and were engaged in peaceful occupations, the cavalry feeding the
horses and the infantry collecting wood.


"He higher iss dan I in rank," said the German colonel of the hussars,
flushing and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up, "so let him do
what he vill, but I cannot sacrifice my hussars.
.
.
 Bugler, sount ze
retreat!"

But haste was becoming imperative.
 The general in command of
the infantry went toward his horse with jerky steps, and having mounted
drew himself up very straight and tall and rode to the Pavlograd
commander.
 The commanders met with polite bows but with secret
malevolence in their hearts.
 I beg of you, I beg of you," he repeated, "to occupy the
position and prepare for an attack.
"

"I peg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business!" suddenly
replied the irate colonel.
 "If you vere in the cavalry.
.
"

"I am not in the cavalry, Colonel, but I am a Russian general and if you
are not aware of the fact.
.
 I am not considering my own pleasure and
I won't allow it to be said!"

Taking the colonel's outburst as a challenge to his courage, the general
expanded his chest and rode, frowning, beside him to the front line, as
if their differences would be settled there amongst the bullets.
 There was nothing fresh to be seen from the line, for from
where they had been before it had been evident that it was impossible
for cavalry to act among the bushes and broken ground, as well as that
the French were outflanking our left.
 Both passed the examination successfully.
 As there was
nothing to be said, and neither wished to give occasion for it to be
alleged that he had been the first to leave the range of fire, they
would have remained there for a long time testing each other's courage
had it not been that just then they heard the rattle of musketry and a
muffled shout almost behind them in the wood.
 They were cut off from the line of
retreat on the left by the French.
 However inconvenient the position, it
was now necessary to attack in order to cut away through for themselves.


The squadron in which Rostov was serving had scarcely time to mount
before it was halted facing the enemy.
 Again, as at the Enns bridge,
there was nothing between the squadron and the enemy, and again that
terrible dividing line of uncertainty and fear--resembling the line
separating the living from the dead--lay between them.
 All were
conscious of this unseen line, and the question whether they would cross
it or not, and how they would cross it, agitated them all.
 The command to form up rang
out and the sabers whizzed as they were drawn from their scabbards.

Still no one moved.


"Fo'ward, with God, lads!" rang out Denisov's voice.
 "At a twot
fo'ward!"

The horses' croups began to sway in the front line.


Before him, on the right, Rostov saw the front lines of his hussars and
still farther ahead a dark line which he could not see distinctly but
took to be the enemy.
 Shots could be heard, but some way off.


Rostov anticipated his horse's movements and became more and more
elated.
 "Let anyone come my way now,"
thought Rostov driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go at a full
gallop so that he outstripped the others.
 Rostov raised his saber, ready to strike, but at that instant
the trooper Nikitenko, who was galloping ahead, shot away from him, and
Rostov felt as in a dream that he continued to be carried forward
with unnatural speed but yet stayed on the same spot.
 From behind him
Bondarchuk, an hussar he knew, jolted against him and looked angrily at
him.
 Bondarchuk's horse swerved and galloped past.


"How is it I am not moving? I have fallen, I am killed!" Rostov asked
and answered at the same instant.

Instead of the moving horses and hussars' backs, he saw nothing before
him but the motionless earth and the stubble around him.
 There was warm
blood under his arm.
" Rook
tried to rise on his forelegs but fell back, pinning his rider's leg.

Blood was flowing from his head; he struggled but could not rise.
 Rostov
also tried to rise but fell back, his sabretache having become entangled
in the saddle.
 Where our men were, and where the French, he did not
know.
 There was no one near.
 The wrist felt as if it were not his.
 He was being held by the arms and
his horse was being led behind him.


"It must be one of ours, a prisoner.
 Yes.
 Can it be that they will take
me too? Who are these men?" thought Rostov, scarcely believing his eyes.

"Can they be French?" He looked at the approaching Frenchmen, and though
but a moment before he had been galloping to get at them and hack them
to pieces, their proximity now seemed so awful that he could not believe
his eyes.
 "Who are they? Why are they running? Can they be coming at me?
And why? To kill me? Me whom everyone is so fond of?" He remembered
his mother's love for him, and his family's, and his friends', and the
enemy's intention to kill him seemed impossible.
 "But perhaps they may
do it!" For more than ten seconds he stood not moving from the spot or
realizing the situation.
 The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hooked
nose, was already so close that the expression of his face could be
seen.
 And the excited, alien face of that man, his bayonet hanging down,
holding his breath, and running so lightly, frightened Rostov.
 He seized
his pistol and, instead of firing it, flung it at the Frenchman and
ran with all his might toward the bushes.
 One single
sentiment, that of fear for his young and happy life, possessed his
whole being.
 Rapidly leaping the furrows, he fled across the field with
the impetuosity he used to show at catchplay, now and then turning his
good-natured, pale, young face to look back.
 The French had fallen behind, and
just as he looked round the first man changed his run to a walk and,
turning, shouted something loudly to a comrade farther back.
 Rostov
paused.
" But at the same time, his left arm felt as heavy as if
a seventy-pound weight were tied to it.
 The
Frenchman also stopped and took aim.
 One bullet and then another whistled past him.
 He mustered his
last remaining strength, took hold of his left hand with his right, and
reached the bushes.
 Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters.






CHAPTER XX


The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts
of the wood ran out of it, the different companies getting mixed, and
retreated as a disorderly crowd.
 One soldier, in his fear, uttered the
senseless cry, "Cut off!" that is so terrible in battle, and that word
infected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic.


The moment he heard the firing and the cry from behind, the general
realized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment, and the
thought that he, an exemplary officer of many years' service who had
never been to blame, might be held responsible at headquarters for
negligence or inefficiency so staggered him that, forgetting the
recalcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dignity as a general, and above
all quite forgetting the danger and all regard for self-preservation, he
clutched the crupper of his saddle and, spurring his horse, galloped to
the regiment under a hail of bullets which fell around, but fortunately
missed him.
 His one desire was to know what was happening and at any
cost correct, or remedy, the mistake if he had made one, so that he,
an exemplary officer of twenty-two years' service, who had never been
censured, should not be held to blame.
 That moment of moral hesitation which decides
the fate of battles had arrived.
 Would this disorderly crowd of soldiers
attend to the voice of their commander, or would they, disregarding him,
continue their flight? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem
so terrible to the soldiers, despite his furious purple countenance
distorted out of all likeness to his former self, and the flourishing of
his saber, the soldiers all continued to run, talking, firing into the
air, and disobeying orders.
 The moral hesitation which decided the fate
of battles was evidently culminating in a panic.
 It was Timokhin's company,
which alone had maintained its order in the wood and, having lain in
ambush in a ditch, now attacked the French unexpectedly.
 Dolokhov, running beside Timokhin,
killed a Frenchman at close quarters and was the first to seize the
surrendering French officer by his collar.
 Our fugitives returned, the
battalions re-formed, and the French who had nearly cut our left flank
in half were for the moment repulsed.
 Our reserve units were able to
join up, and the fight was at an end.
 The regimental commander and Major
Ekonomov had stopped beside a bridge, letting the retreating companies
pass by them, when a soldier came up and took hold of the commander's
stirrup, almost leaning against him.
 The soldier was pale, his blue eyes looked impudently
into the commander's face, and his lips were smiling.


"Your excellency, here are two trophies," said Dolokhov, pointing to the
French sword and pouch.
 "I have taken an officer prisoner.
 I stopped the
company.
" Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness and spoke in abrupt
sentences.


"A bayonet wound.
 Remember, your excellency!"


Tushin's battery had been forgotten and only at the very end of the
action did Prince Bagration, still hearing the cannonade in the center,
send his orderly staff officer, and later Prince Andrew also, to order
the battery to retire as quickly as possible.
 When the supports attached
to Tushin's battery had been moved away in the middle of the action
by someone's order, the battery had continued firing and was only not
captured by the French because the enemy could not surmise that anyone
could have the effrontery to continue firing from four quite undefended
guns.
 On the contrary, the energetic action of that battery led the
French to suppose that here--in the center--the main Russian forces were
concentrated.
 Twice they had attempted to attack this point, but on each
occasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated guns
on the hillock.


"Look at them scurrying! It's burning! Just see the smoke! Fine! Grand!
Look at the smoke, the smoke!" exclaimed the artillerymen, brightening
up.
 As if urging each other on, the soldiers
cried at each shot: "Fine! That's good! Look at it.
.
.
 The French columns that had
advanced beyond the village went back; but as though in revenge for this
failure, the enemy placed ten guns to the right of the village and began
firing them at Tushin's battery.


In their childlike glee, aroused by the fire and their luck in
successfully cannonading the French, our artillerymen only noticed this
battery when two balls, and then four more, fell among our guns, one
knocking over two horses and another tearing off a munition-wagon
driver's leg.
 The horses were replaced by others from a
reserve gun carriage, the wounded were carried away, and the four guns
were turned against the ten-gun battery.
 Twice they noticed
the French appearing below them, and then they fired grapeshot at them.


Little Tushin, moving feebly and awkwardly, kept telling his orderly to
"refill my pipe for that one!" and then, scattering sparks from it, ran
forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at the French.


"Smack at 'em, lads!" he kept saying, seizing the guns by the wheels and
working the screws himself.


Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant reports which always made him
jump, Tushin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran from gun to gun, now
aiming, now counting the charges, now giving orders about replacing dead
or wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones, and shouting in his feeble
voice, so high pitched and irresolute.
 His face grew more and more
animated.
 Only when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and turn
away from the sight, shouting angrily at the men who, as is always the
case, hesitated about lifting the injured or dead.
 On the contrary, he became more and more elated.
 It
seemed to him that it was a very long time ago, almost a day, since he
had first seen the enemy and fired the first shot, and that the corner
of the field he stood on was well-known and familiar ground.
 The enemy's guns were in his fancy not guns but pipes from
which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker.


"There.
.
.
.
 we'll throw it back.


"Nothing.
.
.
 only a shell.
.
" he answered.


"Come along, our Matvevna!" he said to himself.
 The French swarming round their guns seemed to
him like ants.
 In that world, the handsome drunkard Number One of the
second gun's crew was "uncle"; Tushin looked at him more often than
at anyone else and took delight in his every movement.



    * Daughter of Matthew.


"Now then, Matvevna, dear old lady, don't let me down!" he was saying as
he moved from the gun, when a strange, unfamiliar voice called above his
head: "Captain Tushin! Captain!"

Tushin turned round in dismay.
 He was shouting in a gasping voice:

"Are you mad? You have twice been ordered to retreat, and you.
.
.
"

"Why are they down on me?" thought Tushin, looking in alarm at his
superior.
.
 don't.
.
 "I.
.
.
 A cannon
ball, flying close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his horse.


"Retire! All to retire!" he shouted from a distance.


It was Prince Andrew.
 The first thing he saw on riding up to the space
where Tushin's guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with a
broken leg, that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed horses.

Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring.
 But the mere thought
of being afraid roused him again.
 He decided to have the guns removed from their
positions and withdrawn in his presence.
 Together with Tushin, stepping
across the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French, he attended
to the removal of the guns.


"A staff officer was here a minute ago, but skipped off," said an
artilleryman to Prince Andrew.
 When having limbered up the only two cannon
that remained uninjured out of the four, they began moving down the hill
(one shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind), Prince Andrew rode
up to Tushin.
.
.






CHAPTER XXI


The wind had fallen and black clouds, merging with the powder smoke,
hung low over the field of battle on the horizon.
 As soon as Tushin with his guns,
continually driving round or coming upon wounded men, was out of range
of fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some of the staff,
among them the staff officer and Zherkov, who had been twice sent to
Tushin's battery but had never reached it.
 Though the orders
were to abandon the wounded, many of them dragged themselves after
troops and begged for seats on the gun carriages.
 The jaunty infantry
officer who just before the battle had rushed out of Tushin's wattle
shed was laid, with a bullet in his stomach, on "Matvevna's" carriage.

At the foot of the hill, a pale hussar cadet, supporting one hand with
the other, came up to Tushin and asked for a seat.


"Captain, for God's sake! I've hurt my arm," he said timidly.
.
 For God's sake!"

It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a lift and
been refused.
 He asked in a hesitating, piteous voice.


"Tell them to give me a seat, for God's sake!"

"Give him a seat," said Tushin.
 He died," replied someone.
"

The cadet was Rostov.
 With one hand he supported the other; he was pale
and his jaw trembled, shivering feverishly.
 He was placed on "Matvevna,"
the gun from which they had removed the dead officer.
 The cloak they
spread under him was wet with blood which stained his breeches and arm.
"

"Then what is this blood on the gun carriage?" inquired Tushin.


"It was the officer, your honor, stained it," answered the artilleryman,
wiping away the blood with his coat sleeve, as if apologizing for the
state of his gun.


It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by the
infantry, and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they halted.
 Flashes of shot gleamed in
the darkness.
 They all rushed out of the
village again, but Tushin's guns could not move, and the artillerymen,
Tushin, and the cadet exchanged silent glances as they awaited their
fate.
 The firing died down and soldiers, talking eagerly, streamed out
of a side street.


"You couldn't see a thing.
 And again and again in
the complete darkness Tushin's guns moved forward, surrounded by the
humming infantry as by a frame.


In the darkness, it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river was flowing
always in one direction, humming with whispers and talk and the sound of
hoofs and wheels.
 Amid the general rumble, the groans and voices of the
wounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darkness
of the night.
 The gloom that enveloped the army was filled with their
groans, which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the night.

After a while the moving mass became agitated, someone rode past on a
white horse followed by his suite, and said something in passing: "What
did he say? Where to, now? Halt, is it? Did he thank us?" came eager
questions from all sides.
 The whole moving mass began pressing closer
together and a report spread that they were ordered to halt: evidently
those in front had halted.


Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible.
 Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him, but he kept awake by
an excruciating pain in his arm, for which he could find no satisfactory
position.

Tushin's large, kind, intelligent eyes were fixed with sympathy and
commiseration on Rostov, who saw that Tushin with his whole heart wished
to help him but could not.


From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry, who
were walking, driving past, and settling down all around.

Rostov looked at and listened listlessly to what passed before and
around him.
 "I've lost my company,
your honor.
.
.
 such bad luck!"

With the soldier, an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came up to
the bonfire, and addressing Tushin asked him to have the guns moved a
trifle to let a wagon go past.
.
.
 Then a cheerful soldier ran
up, begging a little fire for the infantry.


"A nice little hot torch for the infantry! Good luck to you, fellow
countrymen.
 Thanks for the fire--we'll return it with interest," said
he, carrying away into the darkness a glowing stick.
 One of them stumbled.


"Who the devil has put the logs on the road?" snarled he.


"Shut up!"

And they disappeared into the darkness with their load.
"

"Your honor, you're wanted by the general.
 He is in the hut here," said
a gunner, coming up to Tushin.
"

Tushin rose and, buttoning his greatcoat and pulling it straight, walked
away from the fire.


Not far from the artillery campfire, in a hut that had been prepared
for him, Prince Bagration sat at dinner, talking with some commanding
officers who had gathered at his quarters.
 The little old man with
the half-closed eyes was there greedily gnawing a mutton bone, and the
general who had served blamelessly for twenty-two years, flushed by a
glass of vodka and the dinner; and the staff officer with the signet
ring, and Zherkov, uneasily glancing at them all, and Prince Andrew,
pale, with compressed lips and feverishly glittering eyes.


In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the French, and
the accountant with the naive face was feeling its texture, shaking his
head in perplexity--perhaps because the banner really interested him,
perhaps because it was hard for him, hungry as he was, to look on at
a dinner where there was no place for him.
 In the next hut there was a
French colonel who had been taken prisoner by our dragoons.
 Our officers
were flocking in to look at him.
 The general whose regiment had been inspected at Braunau was
informing the prince that as soon as the action began he had withdrawn
from the wood, mustered the men who were woodcutting, and, allowing the
French to pass him, had made a bayonet charge with two battalions and
had broken up the French troops.
"

The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not managed
to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened.
 Perhaps
it might really have been so? Could one possibly make out amid all that
confusion what did or did not happen?

"By the way, your excellency, I should inform you," he
continued--remembering Dolokhov's conversation with Kutuzov and his last
interview with the gentleman-ranker--"that Private Dolokhov, who was
reduced to the ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my presence and
particularly distinguished himself.
 He had not seen the hussars all that
day, but had heard about them from an infantry officer.
 "They broke up
two squares, your excellency.
"

Several of those present smiled at Zherkov's words, expecting one of his
usual jokes, but noticing that what he was saying redounded to the glory
of our arms and of the day's work, they assumed a serious expression,
though many of them knew that what he was saying was a lie devoid of any
foundation.
 Prince Bagration turned to the old colonel:

"Gentlemen, I thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically: infantry,
cavalry, and artillery.
 How was it that two guns were abandoned in
the center?" he inquired, searching with his eyes for someone.


"One was damaged," answered the staff officer, "and the other I can't
understand.
.
 It is true that it was hot there," he added, modestly.


"Oh, but you were there?" said Prince Bagration, addressing Prince
Andrew.


"Of course, we only just missed one another," said the staff officer,
with a smile to Bolkonski.


All were silent.
 Tushin appeared at the threshold and made his way
timidly from behind the backs of the generals.
 As he stepped past the
generals in the crowded hut, feeling embarrassed as he always was by the
sight of his superiors, he did not notice the staff of the banner and
stumbled over it.


"How was it a gun was abandoned?" asked Bagration, frowning, not so much
at the captain as at those who were laughing, among whom Zherkov laughed
loudest.


Only now, when he was confronted by the stern authorities, did his guilt
and the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive present
themselves to Tushin in all their horror.
 The officers' laughter
confused him still more.
.
.
.
 He was afraid of getting some other officer into
trouble, and silently fixed his eyes on Bagration as a schoolboy who has
blundered looks at an examiner.


The silence lasted some time.
 Prince Bagration, apparently not wishing
to be severe, found nothing to say; the others did not venture to
intervene.
 Prince Andrew looked at Tushin from under his brows and his
fingers twitched nervously.


"Your excellency!" Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt
voice, "you were pleased to send me to Captain Tushin's battery.
 I went
there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out, two guns
smashed, and no supports at all.


"And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion," he
continued, "we owe today's success chiefly to the action of that battery
and the heroic endurance of Captain Tushin and his company," and without
awaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.
 Prince Andrew went out
with him.


Prince Andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away.
 He felt
sad and depressed.



"Who are they? Why are they here? What do they want? And when will all
this end?" thought Rostov, looking at the changing shadows before
him.
 The pain in his arm became more and more intense.
 Irresistible
drowsiness overpowered him, red rings danced before his eyes, and the
impression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged
with the physical pain.
 To
rid himself of them he closed his eyes.


For a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable things
appeared to him in a dream: his mother and her large white hand, Sonya's
thin little shoulders, Natasha's eyes and laughter, Denisov with his
voice and mustache, and Telyanin and all that affair with Telyanin and
Bogdanich.
 That affair was the same thing as this soldier with the harsh
voice, and it was that affair and this soldier that were so agonizingly,
incessantly pulling and pressing his arm and always dragging it in one
direction.
 He tried to get away from them, but they would not for an
instant let his shoulder move a hair's breadth.
 Tushin had not returned, the doctor had not
come.
 He was alone now, except for a soldier who was sitting naked at
the other side of the fire, warming his thin yellow body.


"Nobody wants me!" thought Rostov.
 "There is no one to help me or pity
me.
" He sighed and,
doing so, groaned involuntarily.


"Eh, is anything hurting you?" asked the soldier, shaking his shirt out
over the fire, and not waiting for an answer he gave a grunt and added:
"What a lot of men have been crippled today--frightful!"

Rostov did not listen to the soldier.
 He looked at the snowflakes
fluttering above the fire and remembered a Russian winter at his warm,
bright home, his fluffy fur coat, his quickly gliding sleigh, his
healthy body, and all the affection and care of his family.
 "And why did
I come here?" he wondered.


Next day the French army did not renew their attack, and the remnant of
Bagration's detachment was reunited to Kutuzov's army.






BOOK THREE: 1805





CHAPTER I


Prince Vasili was not a man who deliberately thought out his plans.
 Of these plans he had not merely one
or two in his head but dozens, some only beginning to form themselves,
some approaching achievement, and some in course of disintegration.
 He
did not, for instance, say to himself: "This man now has influence, I
must gain his confidence and friendship and through him obtain a special
grant.
" Nor did he say to himself: "Pierre is a rich man, I must entice
him to marry my daughter and lend me the forty thousand rubles I need.


He had Pierre at hand in Moscow and procured for him an appointment as
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, which at that time conferred the status of
Councilor of State, and insisted on the young man accompanying him to
Petersburg and staying at his house.
 Something always drew him toward
those richer and more powerful than himself and he had rare skill in
seizing the most opportune moment for making use of people.


Pierre, on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezukhov and a rich man, felt
himself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so beset and
preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself.
 These different
people--businessmen, relations, and acquaintances alike--were all
disposed to treat the young heir in the most friendly and flattering
manner: they were all evidently firmly convinced of Pierre's noble
qualities.
 He was always hearing such words as: "With your remarkable
kindness," or, "With your excellent heart," "You are yourself so
honorable Count," or, "Were he as clever as you," and so on, till
he began sincerely to believe in his own exceptional kindness and
extraordinary intelligence, the more so as in the depth of his heart it
had always seemed to him that he really was very kind and intelligent.

Even people who had formerly been spiteful toward him and evidently
unfriendly now became gentle and affectionate.
 The angry eldest
princess, with the long waist and hair plastered down like a doll's,
had come into Pierre's room after the funeral.
 She could not refrain from weeping at these
words.


"Do this for my sake, mon cher; after all, she had to put up with a
great deal from the deceased," said Prince Vasili to him, handing him a
deed to sign for the princess' benefit.


Prince Vasili had come to the conclusion that it was necessary to throw
this bone--a bill for thirty thousand rubles--to the poor princess that
it might not occur to her to speak of his share in the affair of the
inlaid portfolio.
 Pierre signed the deed and after that the princess
grew still kinder.
 The younger sisters also became affectionate to him,
especially the youngest, the pretty one with the mole, who often made
him feel confused by her smiles and her own confusion when meeting him.
 Besides, he had
no time to ask himself whether these people were sincere or not.
 He
was always busy and always felt in a state of mild and cheerful
intoxication.
 He felt as though he were the center of some important and
general movement; that something was constantly expected of him, that if
he did not do it he would grieve and disappoint many people, but if he
did this and that, all would be well; and he did what was demanded of
him, but still that happy result always remained in the future.


More than anyone else, Prince Vasili took possession of Pierre's affairs
and of Pierre himself in those early days.
 He had the air of a
man oppressed by business, weary and suffering, who yet would not, for
pity's sake, leave this helpless youth who, after all, was the son of
his old friend and the possessor of such enormous wealth, to the caprice
of fate and the designs of rogues.
 During the few days he spent in
Moscow after the death of Count Bezukhov, he would call Pierre, or go to
him himself, and tell him what ought to be done in a tone of weariness
and assurance, as if he were adding every time: "You know I am
overwhelmed with business and it is purely out of charity that I trouble
myself about you, and you also know quite well that what I propose is
the only thing possible.
 All our important business here is now
settled, and I ought to have been off long ago.
 Here is something I have
received from the chancellor.
"

Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these words
were pronounced, Pierre, who had so long been considering his career,
wished to make some suggestion.
 But Prince Vasili interrupted him in the
special deep cooing tone, precluding the possibility of interrupting
his speech, which he used in extreme cases when special persuasion was
needed.


"Mais, mon cher, I did this for my own sake, to satisfy my conscience,
and there is nothing to thank me for.
 No one has ever complained yet of
being too much loved; and besides, you are free, you could throw it
up tomorrow.
" Prince Vasili sighed.
 "Yes, yes, my boy.
 Ah! I was nearly forgetting," he added.
 We'll go into the accounts later.
"

By "what was due from the Ryazan estate" Prince Vasili meant several
thousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre's peasants, which the
prince had retained for himself.
 His whole time was
taken up with dinners and balls and was spent chiefly at Prince Vasili's
house in the company of the stout princess, his wife, and his beautiful
daughter Helene.


Like the others, Anna Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the change of
attitude toward him that had taken place in society.


Formerly in Anna Pavlovna's presence, Pierre had always felt that what
he was saying was out of place, tactless and unsuitable, that remarks
which seemed to him clever while they formed in his mind became foolish
as soon as he uttered them, while on the contrary Hippolyte's stupidest
remarks came out clever and apt.
 Now everything Pierre said was
charmant.
 Even if Anna Pavlovna did not say so, he could see that she
wished to and only refrained out of regard for his modesty.
"

When he read that sentence, Pierre felt for the first time that some
link which other people recognized had grown up between himself and
Helene, and that thought both alarmed him, as if some obligation were
being imposed on him which he could not fulfill, and pleased him as an
entertaining supposition.
 Anna Pavlovna received Pierre with
a shade of melancholy, evidently relating to the young man's recent loss
by the death of Count Bezukhov (everyone constantly considered it a
duty to assure Pierre that he was greatly afflicted by the death of the
father he had hardly known), and her melancholy was just like the august
melancholy she showed at the mention of her most august Majesty the
Empress Marya Fedorovna.
 Anna Pavlovna
arranged the different groups in her drawing room with her habitual
skill.

Pierre wished to join the former, but Anna Pavlovna--who was in the
excited condition of a commander on a battlefield to whom thousands
of new and brilliant ideas occur which there is hardly time to put in
action--seeing Pierre, touched his sleeve with her finger, saying:

"Wait a bit, I have something in view for you this evening.
) "My dear Helene, be charitable to
my poor aunt who adores you.

And that it will not be too dull, here is the dear count who will not
refuse to accompany you.


"Isn't she exquisite?" she said to Pierre, pointing to the stately
beauty as she glided away.
 "And how she carries herself! For so young a
girl, such tact, such masterly perfection of manner! It comes from her
heart.
 Happy the man who wins her! With her the least worldly of men
would occupy a most brilliant position in society.


Pierre, in reply, sincerely agreed with her as to Helene's perfection of
manner.
 If he ever thought of Helene, it was just of her beauty and her
remarkable skill in appearing silently dignified in society.


The old aunt received the two young people in her corner, but seemed
desirous of hiding her adoration for Helene and inclined rather to show
her fear of Anna Pavlovna.
 The aunt
coughed, swallowed, and said in French that she was very pleased to see
Helene, then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcome and
the same look.
 In the middle of a dull and halting conversation, Helene
turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she gave to
everyone.
 Pierre was so used to that smile, and it had so little meaning
for him, that he paid no attention to it.
 The aunt was just speaking of
a collection of snuffboxes that had belonged to Pierre's father, Count
Bezukhov, and showed them her own box.


He half rose, meaning to go round, but the aunt handed him the snuffbox,
passing it across Helene's back.
 She was, as always at evening parties,
wearing a dress such as was then fashionable, cut very low at front and
back.
 Her bust, which had always seemed like marble to Pierre, was
so close to him that his shortsighted eyes could not but perceive the
living charm of her neck and shoulders, so near to his lips that he need
only have bent his head a little to have touched them.
 He was conscious
of the warmth of her body, the scent of perfume, and the creaking of her
corset as she moved.
 He did not see her marble beauty forming a complete
whole with her dress, but all the charm of her body only covered by her
garments.
 And having once seen this he could not help being aware of it,
just as we cannot renew an illusion we have once seen through.


"So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am?" Helene seemed to
say.
 How and when this would be he did not know, he did not
even know if it would be a good thing (he even felt, he knew not why,
that it would be a bad thing), but he knew it would happen.


Pierre dropped his eyes, lifted them again, and wished once more to see
her as a distant beauty far removed from him, as he had seen her every
day until then, but he could no longer do it.
 She was terribly close to him.

She already had power over him, and between them there was no longer any
barrier except the barrier of his own will.


"Well, I will leave you in your little corner," came Anna Pavlovna's
voice, "I see you are all right there.
"

And Pierre, anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anything
reprehensible, looked round with a blush.
 It seemed to him that everyone
knew what had happened to him as he knew it himself.


A little later when he went up to the large circle, Anna Pavlovna said
to him: "I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house?"

This was true.


"That's a good thing, but don't move from Prince Vasili's.
 It is good to
have a friend like the prince," she said, smiling at Prince Vasili.
 "I
know something about that.
 Don't I? And you are still so young.
"

She paused, as women always do, expecting something after they have
mentioned their age.
 "If you marry it will be a different thing," she
continued, uniting them both in one glance.
 But she was just as terribly close to him.


When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinking of what
had happened.
 He had merely understood that
the woman he had known as a child, of whom when her beauty was
mentioned he had said absent-mindedly: "Yes, she's good looking," he had
understood that this woman might belong to him.
 I have myself said she is stupid," he thought.
 "There
is something nasty, something wrong, in the feeling she excites in me.
.
.
.
.
.
" he reflected, but while he was thinking this (the reflection
was still incomplete), he caught himself smiling and was conscious
that another line of thought had sprung up, and while thinking of her
worthlessness he was also dreaming of how she would be his wife, how she
would love him become quite different, and how all he had thought and
heard of her might be false.
 "But no! Why did this thought never occur to me before?" and
again he told himself that it was impossible, that there would be
something unnatural, and as it seemed to him dishonorable, in this
marriage.
 He recalled her former words and looks and the words and looks
of those who had seen them together.
 But at the very time he was
expressing this conviction to himself, in another part of his mind her
image rose in all its womanly beauty.
 He had arranged this for himself so as to
visit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatole
where his regiment was stationed, and take him to visit Prince Nicholas
Bolkonski in order to arrange a match for him with the daughter of that
rich old man.
 But before leaving home and undertaking these new affairs,
Prince Vasili had to settle matters with Pierre, who, it is true, had
latterly spent whole days at home, that is, in Prince Vasili's house
where he was staying, and had been absurd, excited, and foolish in
Helene's presence (as a lover should be), but had not yet proposed to
her.


"This is all very fine, but things must be settled," said Prince Vasili
to himself, with a sorrowful sigh, one morning, feeling that Pierre
who was under such obligations to him ("But never mind that") was not
behaving very well in this matter.
.
.
 well, God be
with him," thought he, relishing his own goodness of heart, "but it must
be brought to a head.
 The day after tomorrow will be Lelya's name day.
 He might perhaps have been able
to free himself but that Prince Vasili (who had rarely before given
receptions) now hardly let a day go by without having an evening party
at which Pierre had to be present unless he wished to spoil the general
pleasure and disappoint everyone's expectation.
 And though Prince Vasili, when he stayed in (as
he said) for Pierre's sake, hardly exchanged a couple of words with him,
Pierre felt unable to disappoint him.
 Every day he said to himself one
and the same thing: "It is time I understood her and made up my mind
what she really is.


She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant for him
alone, in which there was something more significant than in the general
smile that usually brightened her face.
 Pierre knew that everyone was
waiting for him to say a word and cross a certain line, and he knew that
sooner or later he would step across it, but an incomprehensible terror
seized him at the thought of that dreadful step.
 A thousand times during
that month and a half while he felt himself drawn nearer and nearer to
that dreadful abyss, Pierre said to himself: "What am I doing? I need
resolution.
 Can it be that I have none?"

He wished to take a decision, but felt with dismay that in this matter
he lacked that strength of will which he had known in himself and really
possessed.
 Pierre was one of those who are only strong when they feel
themselves quite innocent, and since that day when he was overpowered by
a feeling of desire while stooping over the snuffbox at Anna Pavlovna's,
an unacknowledged sense of the guilt of that desire paralyzed his will.


On Helene's name day, a small party of just their own people--as his
wife said--met for supper at Prince Vasili's.

To each of them he made some careless and agreeable remark except to
Pierre and Helene, whose presence he seemed not to notice.
 The wax candles burned brightly, the silver and crystal
gleamed, so did the ladies' toilets and the gold and silver of the
men's epaulets; servants in scarlet liveries moved round the table, the
clatter of plates, knives, and glasses mingled with the animated hum of
several conversations.
 At one end of the table, the old chamberlain was
heard assuring an old baroness that he loved her passionately, at which
she laughed; at the other could be heard the story of the misfortunes of
some Mary Viktorovna or other.


"Well, and so he never got farther than: 'Sergey Kuzmich'?" asked one of
the ladies.
.
 From all sides.
 From all sides.
.
 Sergey
Kuzmich.
.
.
 And again his handkerchief, and again: 'Sergey
Kuzmich, From all sides,'.
 and tears, till at last somebody else was
asked to read it.
"

"Kuzmich.
.
.
.


"Don't be unkind," cried Anna Pavlovna from her end of the table holding
up a threatening finger.
.
.
 At the head of the table, where the
honored guests sat, everyone seemed to be in high spirits and under the
influence of a variety of exciting sensations.
 it's
getting on, it will all be settled today.
" Anna Pavlovna threatened
him on behalf of "our dear Vyazmitinov," and in her eyes, which, for an
instant, glanced at Pierre, Prince Vasili read a congratulation on his
future son-in-law and on his daughter's happiness.
 The old princess
sighed sadly as she offered some wine to the old lady next to her and
glanced angrily at her daughter, and her sigh seemed to say: "Yes,
there's nothing left for you and me but to sip sweet wine, my dear,
now that the time has come for these young ones to be thus boldly,
provocatively happy.
" "And what nonsense all this is that I am saying!"
thought a diplomatist, glancing at the happy faces of the lovers.
 And this human feeling
dominated everything else and soared above all their affected chatter.

Jests fell flat, news was not interesting, and the animation was
evidently forced.


Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and this both pleased and
embarrassed him.
 He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation.
 Only now and
then detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot
unexpectedly through his mind.


"So it is all finished!" he thought.
 "And how has it all happened? How
quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself alone,
but because of everyone, it must inevitably come about.
 They are all
expecting it, they are so sure that it will happen that I cannot, I
cannot, disappoint them.
 But how will it be? I do not know, but it will
certainly happen!" thought Pierre, glancing at those dazzling shoulders
close to his eyes.
 He felt it
awkward to attract everyone's attention and to be considered a lucky man
and, with his plain face, to be looked on as a sort of Paris possessed
of a Helen.
 "But no doubt it always is and must be so!" he consoled
himself.
 Then there was
nothing.
 How did it begin,
when did it all come about?" And here he was sitting by her side as her
betrothed, seeing, hearing, feeling her nearness, her breathing, her
movements, her beauty.
 But Pierre was so absorbed that he did not understand what was
said.


"I am asking you when you last heard from Bolkonski," repeated Prince
Vasili a third time.
 "How absent-minded you are, my dear fellow.

"What of it? It's the truth!" and he himself smiled his gentle childlike
smile, and Helene smiled too.


"How can one talk or think of such trifles?" thought Pierre.


"Yes, from Olmutz," he answered, with a sigh.


After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into the
drawing room.
 The diplomatist preserved a mournful
silence as he left the drawing room.
 The old general
grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was.
"

"I think I may congratulate you," whispered Anna Pavlovna to the old
princess, kissing her soundly.
 "If I hadn't this headache I'd have
stayed longer.
"

The old princess did not reply, she was tormented by jealousy of her
daughter's happiness.

He had often before, during the last six weeks, remained alone with her,
but had never spoken to her of love.
 Now he felt that it was inevitable,
but he could not make up his mind to take the final step.
 He felt
ashamed; he felt that he was occupying someone else's place here beside
Helene.
 "This happiness is not for you," some inner voice whispered to
him.
 "This happiness is for those who have not in them what there is in
you.
"

But, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whether she was
satisfied with the party.
 She replied in her usual simple manner that
this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had.


Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left.
 They were sitting in
the large drawing room.
 Pierre rose and said it was getting late.
 Prince Vasili gave
him a look of stern inquiry, as though what Pierre had just said was
so strange that one could not take it in.
 But then the expression of
severity changed, and he drew Pierre's hand downwards, made him sit
down, and smiled affectionately.


"Well, Lelya?" he asked, turning instantly to his daughter and
addressing her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural to
parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which Prince
Vasili had only acquired by imitating other parents.


And he again turned to Pierre.


"Sergey Kuzmich--From all sides-" he said, unbuttoning the top button of
his waistcoat.
 He suddenly muttered something and
went away.
 It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was disconcerted.

The sight of the discomposure of that old man of the world touched
Pierre: he looked at Helene and she too seemed disconcerted, and her
look seemed to say: "Well, it is your own fault.
"

"The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!" thought Pierre, and he
again began speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergey Kuzmich,
asking what the point of the story was as he had not heard it properly.

Helene answered with a smile that she too had missed it.


"Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear.
.
.
 He closed his eyes and seemed to be
dozing.
 His head sank forward and then he roused himself.
"

The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified and
indifferent air, and glanced into the little drawing room.
 Pierre and
Helene still sat talking just as before.


"Still the same," she said to her husband.
 Shaking
himself, he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute steps went
past the ladies into the little drawing room.
 His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierre
rose in alarm on seeing it.


"Thank God!" said Prince Vasili.
.
.
 Lelya.
.
) "I loved your
father.
 and she will make you a good wife.
.
 God bless you!.
.
.
 Tears actually moistened his cheeks.


"Princess, come here!" he shouted.


The old princess came in and also wept.
 The elderly lady was using
her handkerchief too.
 It is good because it's
definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt.


"Helene!" he said aloud and paused.
 He looked at her face.
 She
drew nearer to him.
.
 those.
" she said, pointing to his spectacles.


Pierre took them off, and his eyes, besides the strange look eyes have
from which spectacles have just been removed, had also a frightened and
inquiring look.
 He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it, but
with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she intercepted his
lips and met them with her own.
 Her face struck Pierre, by its altered,
unpleasantly excited expression.



    * "I love you.
"


Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezukhov's large,
newly furnished Petersburg house, the happy possessor, as people said,
of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.






CHAPTER III


Old Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasili in
November, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him a
visit.
 "My son Anatole is
accompanying me on his way to the army, so I hope you will allow him
personally to express the deep respect that, emulating his father, he
feels for you.
"

"It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out, suitors are
coming to us of their own accord," incautiously remarked the little
princess on hearing the news.


Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.


Old Bolkonski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasili's
character, but more so recently, since in the new reigns of Paul and
Alexander Prince Vasili had risen to high position and honors.


"Do you hear how he's walking?" said Tikhon, drawing the architect's
attention to the sound of the prince's footsteps.
.
.
.
"

However, at nine o'clock the prince, in his velvet coat with a sable
collar and cap, went out for his usual walk.
 The prince went
through the conservatories, the serfs' quarters, and the outbuildings,
frowning and silent.


"Can a sleigh pass?" he asked his overseer, a venerable man, resembling
his master in manners and looks, who was accompanying him back to the
house.


"The snow is deep.
 I am having the avenue swept, your honor.
"

The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch.
 "I heard,
your honor, that a minister is coming to visit your honor.


"What? A minister? What minister? Who gave orders?" he said in his
shrill, harsh voice.
 "The road is not swept for the princess my
daughter, but for a minister! For me, there are no ministers!"

"Your honor, I thought.
.
"

"You thought!" shouted the prince, his words coming more and more
rapidly and indistinctly.
.
.
 Rascals! Blackguards!.
.
.
 I'll
teach you to think!" and lifting his stick he swung it and would have
hit Alpatych, the overseer, had not the latter instinctively avoided the
blow.
 "Thought.
.
.
.


But although Alpatych, frightened at his own temerity in avoiding the
stroke, came up to the prince, bowing his bald head resignedly before
him, or perhaps for that very reason, the prince, though he continued to
shout: "Blackguards!.
.
.


Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew
that the prince was in a bad humor, stood awaiting him; Mademoiselle
Bourienne with a radiant face that said: "I know nothing, I am the same
as usual," and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with downcast eyes.
 She thought:
"If I seem not to notice he will think that I do not sympathize with
him; if I seem sad and out of spirits myself, he will say (as he has
done before) that I'm in the dumps.
.
 or dummy!" he muttered.


"And the other one is not here.
 They've been telling tales," he
thought--referring to the little princess who was not in the dining
room.


"Where is the princess?" he asked.
 "Hiding?"

"She is not very well," answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with a bright
smile, "so she won't come down.
"

"Hm! Hm!" muttered the prince, sitting down.
 Tikhon caught it and handed it to a footman.
 The little
princess was not unwell, but had such an overpowering fear of the prince
that, hearing he was in a bad humor, she had decided not to appear.
"

In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear, and
with a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did not
realize because the fear was so much the stronger feeling.
 The prince
reciprocated this antipathy, but it was overpowered by his contempt
for her.


"So we are to have visitors, mon prince?" remarked Mademoiselle
Bourienne, unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers.
 I got him his appointment in the
service," said the prince disdainfully.
 Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know.
 I don't
want him.
) "Are you unwell today?
Eh? Afraid of the 'minister' as that idiot Alpatych called him this
morning?"

"No, mon pere.
"

Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice
of a subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about the
conservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, and
after the soup the prince became more genial.
 She grew
pale on seeing her father-in-law.


She was much altered.
 She was now plain rather than pretty.


"Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the prince's
question as to how she felt.
"

"Well, all right, all right.
.
 It was only my
stupidity.


Prince Vasili arrived that evening.


Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.


Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a
table on a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedly fixed his
large and handsome eyes.
 He regarded his whole life as a continual round
of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him.

And he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly
heiress in the same way.
 All this might, he thought, turn out very well
and amusingly.
 "And why not marry her if she really has so much money?
That never does any harm," thought Anatole.


He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which had
become habitual to him and, his handsome head held high, entered his
father's room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him.
"

"If he starts a row I'll go away," said Prince Anatole.
"

In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants' rooms that
the minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both had
been minutely described.
 "How shall I enter
the drawing room? Even if I like him I can't now be myself with him.
"
The mere thought of her father's look filled her with terror.
 The little
princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received from Masha,
the lady's maid, the necessary report of how handsome the minister's son
was, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with what difficulty
the father had dragged his legs upstairs while the son had followed him
like an eagle, three steps at a time.
 Having received this information,
the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne, whose chattering voices
had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess Mary's room.


"You know they've come, Marie?" said the little princess, waddling in,
and sinking heavily into an armchair.
 Her hair was carefully done and her
face was animated, which, however, did not conceal its sunken and faded
outlines.
 Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society, it was still
more noticeable how much plainer she had become.


"What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?" she began.
 Princess Mary's self-esteem was wounded by the fact that
the arrival of a suitor agitated her, and still more so by both her
companions' not having the least conception that it could be otherwise.
 She flushed, her beautiful eyes
grew dim, red blotches came on her face, and it took on the unattractive
martyrlike expression it so often wore, as she submitted herself to
Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise.
 Both these women quite sincerely tried
to make her look pretty.
 She was so plain that neither of them could
think of her as a rival, so they began dressing her with perfect
sincerity, and with the naive and firm conviction women have that dress
can make a face pretty.


"No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," said Lise, looking
sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance.
 "You have a maroon
dress, have it fetched.
 Really! You know the fate of your whole life may
be at stake.
 But this one is too light, it's not becoming!"

It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary
that was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little
princess felt this; they still thought that if a blue ribbon were placed
in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arranged lower on
the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well.
 They forgot that
the frightened face and the figure could not be altered, and that
however they might change the setting and adornment of that face, it
would still remain piteous and plain.
 After two or three changes to
which Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hair had been arranged
on the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled her
looks) and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf, the
little princess walked twice round her, now adjusting a fold of the
dress with her little hand, now arranging the scarf and looking at her
with her head bent first on one side and then on the other.
 "No, Mary,
really this dress does not suit you.
 I prefer you in your little gray
everyday dress.
 Katie," she said to the
maid, "bring the princess her gray dress, and you'll see, Mademoiselle
Bourienne, how I shall arrange it," she added, smiling with a foretaste
of artistic pleasure.


But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remained
sitting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in the
mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to burst
into sobs.


"Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one more
little effort.


The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, who was
laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping of
birds.
 They looked at the beautiful, large, thoughtful
eyes full of tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly and imploringly at
them, and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist.
 Not
in the least! Please change it.
"

"Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to me,"
answered a voice struggling with tears.


Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves
that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse than usual,
but it was too late.
 She was looking at them with an expression they
both knew, an expression thoughtful and sad.
 This expression in Princess
Mary did not frighten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but they
knew that when it appeared on her face, she became mute and was not to
be shaken in her determination.


Princess Mary was left alone.
 She did not comply with Lise's request,
she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in her
glass.
 Letting her arms fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes and
pondered.
 A husband, a man, a strong dominant and strangely attractive
being rose in her imagination, and carried her into a totally different
happy world of his own.
 "But no, it is impossible, I am too ugly," she thought.


"Please come to tea.


She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking, and
before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her
eyes fixed on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by a
lamp, she stood before it with folded hands for a few moments.
 A painful
doubt filled her soul.
 The more she tried to hide this feeling from
others and even from herself, the stronger it grew.
 "O God," she said,
"how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil? How am I
to renounce forever these vile fancies, so as peacefully to fulfill
Thy will?" And scarcely had she put that question than God gave her the
answer in her own heart.
" With this consoling thought (but yet with a hope for the
fulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing) Princess Mary sighed,
and having crossed herself went down, thinking neither of her gown and
coiffure nor of how she would go in nor of what she would say.
 What
could all that matter in comparison with the will of God, without Whose
care not a hair of man's head can fall?





CHAPTER IV


When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were already
in the drawing room, talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle
Bourienne.
 When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her heels,
the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess,
indicating her to the gentlemen, said: "Voila Marie!" Princess Mary saw
them all and saw them in detail.
 She saw Prince Vasili's face, serious
for an instant at the sight of her, but immediately smiling again, and
the little princess curiously noting the impression "Marie" produced on
the visitors.
 And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne, with her ribbon and
pretty face, and her unusually animated look which was fixed on him,
but him she could not see, she only saw something large, brilliant,
and handsome moving toward her as she entered the room.
 Prince Vasili
approached first, and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her
hand and answered his question by saying that, on the contrary, she
remembered him quite well.
 Then Anatole came up to her.
 She still could
not see him.
 She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly, and she
touched with her lips a white forehead, over which was beautiful
light-brown hair smelling of pomade.
 Anatole stood with his right thumb under a button
of his uniform, his chest expanded and his back drawn in, slightly
swinging one foot, and, with his head a little bent, looked with beaming
face at the princess without speaking and evidently not thinking about
her at all.
 Anatole was not quick-witted, nor ready or eloquent in
conversation, but he had the faculty, so invaluable in society, of
composure and imperturbable self-possession.
 If a man lacking in
self-confidence remains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a
consciousness of the impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find
something to say, the effect is bad.
 "If anyone finds this
silence inconvenient, let him talk, but I don't want to," he seemed to
say.
" Perhaps he did not really think this
when he met women--even probably he did not, for in general he thought
very little--but his looks and manner gave that impression.
 The conversation was
general and animated, thanks to Princess Lise's voice and little downy
lip that lifted over her white teeth.


"Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to
ourselves, dear prince," said the little princess (of course, in French)
to Prince Vasili.



"Ah, but you won't talk politics to me like Annette!"

"And our little tea table?"

"Oh, yes!"

"Why is it you were never at Annette's?" the little princess asked
Anatole.


When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the
opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.


She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole
had left Paris and how he had liked that city.
" *


    * The little one is charming.



The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning and considering
what he was to do.
 The coming of these visitors annoyed him.
 The question was whether he could ever
bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband.
 Life without
Princess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to
him.
 "And why should she marry?" he thought.

There's Lise, married to Andrew--a better husband one would think could
hardly be found nowadays--but is she contented with her lot? And who
would marry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! They'll take her for her
connections and wealth.
 Are there no women living unmarried, and even
the happier for it?" So thought Prince Bolkonski while dressing, and
yet the question he was always putting off demanded an immediate
answer.
 Prince Vasili had brought his son with the evident intention of
proposing, and today or tomorrow he would probably ask for an answer.

His birth and position in society were not bad.

And that is what we shall see.
"

"That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!" he added aloud.


He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing rapidly
round the company.
 "Got herself up like a fool!"
he thought, looking irritably at her.


"Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see you!"

"Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vasili in his usual rapid,
self-confident, familiar tone.
"

Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole.


"Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!" he said.
 "Well, come and kiss
me," and he offered his cheek.


Anatole kissed the old man, and looked at him with curiosity and perfect
composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had
told him to expect.


Prince Bolkonski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa
and, drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasili, pointed to it and began
questioning him about political affairs and news.
 Then rising, he suddenly went up to his
daughter.


"Is it for visitors you've got yourself up like that, eh?" said he.
"

"It was my fault, mon pere," interceded the little princess, with a
blush.


"You must do as you please," said Prince Bolkonski, bowing to his
daughter-in-law, "but she need not make a fool of herself, she's plain
enough as it is.
"

And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his daughter, who was
reduced to tears.
"

"Now the fun begins," thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile beside
the old prince.
 Now tell me,
my dear boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?" asked the old man,
scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.


"Ah! That's a good thing.
 Such a fine fellow must serve.
 Well, are
you off to the front?"

"No, Prince, our regiment has gone to the front, but I am attached.
 Suddenly
Prince Bolkonski frowned.


Anatole returned smiling to the ladies.


"And so you've had him educated abroad, Prince Vasili, haven't you?"
said the old prince to Prince Vasili.


"I have done my best for him, and I can assure you the education there
is much better than ours.
"

"Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed.


"Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can't part from her?"
said the old prince angrily.
 "What an idea! I'm ready for it tomorrow!
Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better.
 You know
my principles--everything aboveboard? I will ask her tomorrow in your
presence; if she is willing, then he can stay on.
" The old prince snorted.


"I will tell you frankly," said Prince Vasili in the tone of a crafty
man convinced of the futility of being cunning with so keen-sighted
companion.
 Anatole is no
genius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad; an excellent son or
kinsman.
"

"All right, all right, we'll see!"

As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length of time
without male society, on Anatole's appearance all the three women of
Prince Bolkonski's household felt that their life had not been real
till then.
 Their powers of reasoning, feeling, and observing immediately
increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed in
darkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brightness, full of significance.
 The
handsome open face of the man who might perhaps be her husband absorbed
all her attention.
 She drove them away and
tried to conceal them.


"But am I not too cold with him?" thought the princess.
 "Poor girl, she's devilish ugly!" thought Anatole.


Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole's
arrival, thought in another way.
 Of course, she, a handsome young woman
without any definite position, without relations or even a country, did
not intend to devote her life to serving Prince Bolkonski, to reading
aloud to him and being friends with Princess Mary.
 Mademoiselle Bourienne knew
a story, heard from her aunt but finished in her own way, which she
liked to repeat to herself.
 It was the story of a girl who had been
seduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mere) appeared, and
reproached her for yielding to a man without being married.
 Mademoiselle
Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this
story to him, her seducer.
 He would carry her away and then sa pauvre mere would appear
and he would marry her.
 It was not calculation that guided her (she did not even for a
moment consider what she should do), but all this had long been familiar
to her, and now that Anatole had appeared it just grouped itself around
him and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible.


Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man
tired of being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by the
spectacle of his power over these three women.
 Besides that, he was
beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne
that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great
suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions.
 Anatole, laughing and in high spirits,
came and leaned on his elbows, facing her and beside Mademoiselle
Bourienne.
 Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.
 But Anatole's
expression, though his eyes were fixed on her, referred not to her but
to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne's little foot, which he was
then touching with his own under the clavichord.
 "How happy I am now, and how
happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband? Can it
be possible?" she thought, not daring to look at his face, but still
feeling his eyes gazing at her.


In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatole
kissed Princess Mary's hand.
 Turning from Princess Mary he went up and kissed
Mademoiselle Bourienne's hand.
 (This was not etiquette, but then he did
everything so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle Bourienne
flushed, and gave the princess a frightened look.
 Anatole went up to kiss the little princess' hand.
 Not till then!" she said.






CHAPTER V


They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he
got into bed, all kept awake a long time that night.
 She feared to look round, it seemed
to her that someone was there standing behind the screen in the dark
corner.
 And this someone was he--the devil--and he was also this man
with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.


Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for a long
time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at someone, now
working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mere
rebuking her for her fall.


The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made.

She could not lie either on her face or on her side.


"I told you it was all lumps and holes!" the little princess repeated.


The old prince did not sleep either.
 The old prince felt as though he
had been insulted through his daughter.
 The insult was the more pointed
because it concerned not himself but another, his daughter, whom he
loved more than himself.
 He kept telling himself that he would consider
the whole matter and decide what was right and how he should act, but
instead of that he only excited himself more and more.
 Fr.
.
 fr.
.
.
 No, she has no pride.
.
.
.
.
"

The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making a
mistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Princess Mary's self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not to
be parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this
thought, he called Tikhon and began to undress.


"What devil brought them here?" thought he, while Tikhon was putting the
nightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest.
 They came to disturb my life--and there is not much of it
left.
"

"Devil take 'em!" he muttered, while his head was still covered by the
shirt.


Tikhon knew his master's habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and
therefore met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitive expression of
the face that emerged from the shirt.


"Gone to bed?" asked the prince.


"They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency.
"

"No good.
.
 no good.
 When Princess Mary
went to her father's room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne and
Anatole met in the conservatory.


Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation.

She read this in Tikhon's face and in that of Prince Vasili's valet, who
made her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carrying hot water.


The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of
his daughter that morning.
 Princess Mary well knew this painstaking
expression of her father's.
 His face wore that expression when his
dry hands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum in
arithmetic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her,
repeating in a low voice the same words several times over.


He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.


"I have had a proposition made me concerning you," he said with an
unnatural smile.

Last night a proposition was made me on your account and, as you know my
principles, I refer it to you.
"

"How am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, growing pale
and then blushing.


"How understand me!" cried her father angrily.
 "Prince Vasili finds you
to his taste as a daughter-in-law and makes a proposal to you on his
pupil's behalf.
.
.
 And I ask you!"

"I do not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess.


"I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question.
 I'm not going to get
married.
 She lowered her eyes so as not to see the gaze
under which she felt that she could not think, but would only be able to
submit from habit, and she said: "I wish only to do your will, but if
I had to express my own desire.
.
.
" She had no time to finish.
 She'll be the wife, while
you.
.
.
 He saw the effect these words had produced on his
daughter.
 "Remember this,
Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to
choose.
 Only remember that your life's happiness
depends on your decision.
 Never mind me!"

"But I do not know, Father!"

"There's no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marry you or
anybody; but you are free to choose.
.
.
.
 Well, pray if you like, but you had better think
it over.
 Go! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!" he still shouted when the
princess, as if lost in a fog, had already staggered out of the study.


Her fate was decided and happily decided.
 It was untrue to be sure, but
still it was terrible, and she could not help thinking of it.


"Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed to say.
 Princess
Mary looked at them in silence.
 At last
Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away.
 When Tikhon came to her
Princess Mary was sitting on the sofa in her room, holding the weeping
Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair.
 The
princess' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance were
looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne's
pretty face.


"Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "and I will try to
do all I can for your happiness.
 You who are so pure can never understand being so
carried away by passion.
 Oh, only my poor mother.
.
.
"

"I quite understand," answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile.
 "Calm
yourself, my dear.
 I will go to my father," she said, and went out.


Prince Vasili, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox in
his hand, was sitting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face,
as if stirred to his heart's core and himself regretting and laughing
at his own sensibility, when Princess Mary entered.


"Ah, my dear, my dear!" he began, rising and taking her by both hands.
 Decide, my
dear, good, gentle Marie, whom I have always loved as a daughter!"

He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.
.
 fr.
.
.
" snorted Prince Bolkonski.
 "Yes, or no?"

"My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my life
from yours.


Prince Vasili rose.
.
.
 The future is so
long.
 I thank you for
the honor, but I shall never be your son's wife.
"

"Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have seen
you.
 Very glad! Go back to your rooms, Princess.
 Go!" said the old
prince.


"My vocation is a different one," thought Princess Mary.
 I
will do all I can to arrange the match between them.
 If he is not rich I
will give her the means; I will ask my father and Andrew.
 She is so unfortunate, a stranger, alone,
helpless! And, oh God, how passionately she must love him if she could
so far forget herself! Perhaps I might have done the same!.
.
" thought
Princess Mary.






CHAPTER VI


It was long since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas.
 On receiving it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and
haste, trying to escape notice, closed the door, and began to read the
letter.


"My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, prepared to
sympathize in any way.


"Nikolenka.
.
.
 a letter.
.
 wa.
.
.
.
.
 s.
.
.
.
.
 my darling boy.
.

the countess.
.
.
.
.
 How tell the
little countess!"

Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief wiped
the tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having dried her
own eyes she comforted the count, and decided that at dinner and till
teatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, with God's help,
would inform her.


At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the war news and
about Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had been received from
him, though she knew that already, and remarked that they might very
likely be getting a letter from him that day.
 Each time that these hints
began to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at the
count and at Anna Mikhaylovna, the latter very adroitly turned the
conversation to insignificant matters.
 After dinner, she rushed
head long after Anna Mikhaylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself on
her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room.
"

"No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won't give up--I know you know
something.
"

Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head.


"You are a little slyboots," she said.


"A letter from Nikolenka! I'm sure of it!" exclaimed Natasha, reading
confirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna's face.
"

Anna Mikhaylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter,
on condition that she should tell no one.


"Nikolenka.
.
 wounded.
.
 a letter," she announced in gleeful triumph.


"Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turning white.


Natasha, seeing the impression the news of her brother's wound produced
on Sonya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news.


She rushed to Sonya, hugged her, and began to cry.


"A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he
wrote himself," said she through her tears.
"

Natasha smiled through her tears.


"No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now an officer.
"

"Thank God!" said Sonya, crossing herself.
 "But perhaps she deceived
you.
 Let us go to Mamma.
"

Petya paced the room in silence for a time.


Sonya smiled.
 "I remember
Nikolenka too, I remember him well," she said.
 "But I don't remember
Boris.
 I don't remember him a bit.
"

"What! You don't remember Boris?" asked Sonya in surprise.


"It's not that I don't remember--I know what he is like, but not as I
remember Nikolenka.
 Him--I just shut my eyes and remember, but Boris.
.
) "No! there's nothing at all.
"

"Oh, Natasha!" said Sonya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at her
friend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant to
say and as if she were saying it to someone else, with whom joking was
out of the question, "I am in love with your brother once for all and,
whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love him as
long as I live.
"

Natasha looked at Sonya with wondering and inquisitive eyes, and said
nothing.
 But Natasha had not yet felt anything
like it.


"Shall you write to him?" she asked.
 Now that he was already an
officer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of herself
and, as it might seem, of the obligations to her he had taken on
himself?

"I don't know.
 I think if he writes, I will write too," she said,
blushing.


"And you won't feel ashamed to write to him?"

Sonya smiled.


"No.
 I'm not going to.
"

"Why should you be ashamed?"

"Well, I don't know.
 It's awkward and would make me ashamed.


"Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old Petya, with
the air of an old brigadier.

On retiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on a
miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears
kept coming into her eyes.


"Don't come in," she said to the old count who was following her.
" And she went in, closing the door behind her.


At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then Anna
Mikhaylovna's voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, then silence,
then both voices together with glad intonations, and then footsteps.

Anna Mikhaylovna opened the door.
 Her face wore the proud expression of
a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits the
public to appreciate his skill.


"It is done!" she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the
countess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and
in the other the letter, and pressing them alternately to her lips.


When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his
bald head, over which she again looked at the letter and the portrait,
and in order to press them again to her lips, she slightly pushed away
the bald head.
 Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petya now entered the room,
and the reading of the letter began.
 After a brief description of
the campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his
promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father's and mother's hands
asking for their blessing, and that he kissed Vera, Natasha, and Petya.
" When she heard this Sonya
blushed so that tears came into her eyes and, unable to bear the looks
turned upon her, ran away into the dancing hall, whirled round it at
full speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed and
smiling, plumped down on the floor.
 The countess was crying.


"Why are you crying, Mamma?" asked Vera.
"

This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natasha looked
at her reproachfully.
 The tutors came, and the nurses, and
Dmitri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter
each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh
proofs of Nikolenka's virtues.

The universal experience of ages, showing that children do grow
imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for the
countess.
 Her son's growth toward manhood, at each of its stages,
had seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the
millions of human beings who grew up in the same way.


"What a style! How charmingly he describes!" said she, reading the
descriptive part of the letter.
.
.
.
 Not a word! About some Denisov or other, though he himself,
I dare say, is braver than any of them.
 I always said when he was only so
high--I always said.
.
"

For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of
letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out,
while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the
count, money and all things necessary for the uniform and equipment
of the newly commissioned officer were collected.
 Anna Mikhaylovna,
practical woman that she was, had even managed by favor with army
authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herself
and her son.
 She had opportunities of sending her letters to the Grand
Duke Constantine Pavlovich, who commanded the Guards.
 The Rostovs
supposed that The Russian Guards, Abroad, was quite a definite address,
and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guards
there was no reason why it should not reach the Pavlograd regiment,
which was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhood.
 The letters were
from the old count, the countess, Petya, Vera, Natasha, and Sonya, and
finally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various other
things the old count sent to his son.






CHAPTER VII


On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in camp before
Olmutz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors--the
Russian and the Austrian.


That day Nicholas Rostov received a letter from Boris, telling him that
the Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from Olmutz
and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for him.
 The Pavlograds held feast after feast, celebrating
awards they had received for the campaign, and made expeditions to
Olmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian, who had recently
opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses.
 Rostov, who had
just celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought Denisov's horse,
Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and the sutlers.
 On
receiving Boris' letter he rode with a fellow officer to Olmutz, dined
there, drank a bottle of wine, and then set off alone to the Guards'
camp to find his old playmate.
 He had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated with a soldier's
cross, equally shabby cadet's riding breeches lined with worn leather,
and an officer's saber with a sword knot.
 As he
rode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Boris and all his
comrades of the Guards by his appearance--that of a fighting hussar who
had been under fire.
 They had come by easy stages, their
knapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrian authorities had provided
excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place.
 The regiments
had entered and left the town with their bands playing, and by the Grand
Duke's orders the men had marched all the way in step (a practice on
which the Guards prided themselves), the officers on foot and at their
proper posts.
 Boris had been quartered, and had marched all the way,
with Berg who was already in command of a company.
 Berg, who had
obtained his captaincy during the campaign, had gained the confidence of
his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money
matters very satisfactorily.
 Boris, during the campaign, had made the
acquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by
a letter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had become
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski, through whom he hoped to obtain
a post on the commander in chief's staff.
 Boris, in the accurate way
characteristic of him, was building a little pyramid of chessmen with
his delicate white fingers while awaiting Berg's move, and watched his
opponent's face, evidently thinking about the game as he always thought
only of whatever he was engaged on.


"We'll try to," replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing his
hand.


At that moment the door opened.


"Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov.


"Dear me, how you have changed!"

Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doing so did not omit to steady and
replace some chessmen that were falling.
 He was about to embrace his
friend, but Nicholas avoided him.
 With that peculiar feeling of youth,
that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a manner
different from that of its elders which is often insincere, Nicholas
wished to do something special on meeting his friend.
 He wanted to pinch
him, push him, do anything but kiss him--a thing everybody did.


They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the age when young
men take their first steps on life's road, each saw immense changes in
the other, quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken
those first steps.
 Both had changed greatly since they last met and both
were in a hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them.


"Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you'd been to a fete,
not like us sinners of the line," cried Rostov, with martial swagger
and with baritone notes in his voice, new to Boris, pointing to his own
mud-bespattered breeches.
 The German landlady, hearing Rostov's loud
voice, popped her head in at the door.
 "I did not
expect you today," he added.
 "I only sent you the note yesterday by
Bolkonski--an adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a friend of mine.
 I did not
think he would get it to you so quickly.
.
.
 George
fastened to the cording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm,
glanced at Berg with a smile.


"As you see," he said.


"Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile.
"

And the two friends told each other of their doings, the one of his
hussar revels and life in the fighting line, the other of the pleasures
and advantages of service under members of the Imperial family.


"Oh, you Guards!" said Rostov.
"

Boris made a grimace.


"If you really want it," said he.


He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sent
for wine.
.
 to the devil!" he exclaimed, and
immediately seizing him by the shoulder and looking amiably into his
face, evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his words, he added,
"Don't be hurt, my dear fellow; you know I speak from my heart as to an
old acquaintance.
"

"Oh, don't mention it, Count! I quite understand," said Berg, getting up
and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice.


"Go across to our hosts: they invited you," added Boris.


"Why?"

"Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given them such
a fright! Oh, what a pig I am!" he repeated, flushing suddenly.
 "Well,
have you sent Gabriel for some wine? All right let's have some!"

In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendation
to Bagration which the old countess at Anna Mikhaylovna's advice had
obtained through an acquaintance and sent to her son, asking him to take
it to its destination and make use of it.


"What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rostov, throwing the letter under
the table.


"Why have you thrown that away?" asked Boris.
.
 "This letter would be of great use to you.
"

"Why not?" inquired Boris.


"And you're still the same diplomatist! But that's not the point.
.

Come, how are you?" asked Rostov.


"Well, as you see.
 So far everything's all right, but I confess I should
much like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front.
"

"Why?"

"Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try to
make as successful a career of it as possible.
"

"Oh, that's it!" said Rostov, evidently thinking of something else.


He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend's eyes, evidently
trying in vain to find the answer to some question.
.
.
 and how do you get on with that German?" asked
Rostov, with a contemptuous smile.


"He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow," answered Boris.
 Berg returned,
and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three officers
became animated.
 The Guardsmen told Rostov of their march and how they
had been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad.
 They spoke of the
sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told stories
of his kindness and irascibility.
 Berg, as usual, kept silent when the
subject did not relate to himself, but in connection with the stories
of the Grand Duke's quick temper he related with gusto how in Galicia he
had managed to deal with the Grand Duke when the latter made a tour of
the regiments and was annoyed at the irregularity of a movement.
 With a
pleasant smile Berg related how the Grand Duke had ridden up to him in
a violent passion, shouting: "Arnauts!" ("Arnauts" was the Tsarevich's
favorite expression when he was in a rage) and called for the company
commander.


"Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew
I was right.
 Without boasting, you know, I may say that I know the Army
Orders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I do the Lord's
Prayer.
 'Albanians!' and 'devils!' and 'To
Siberia!'" said Berg with a sagacious smile.
 "I knew I was in the right
so I kept silent; was not that best, Count?.
 Still I remained silent.
 That's what
keeping one's head means.


"Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling.
 This pleased Rostov and he began talking about it, and
as he went on became more and more animated.
 He told them of his Schon
Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle generally
do describe it, that is, as they would like it to have been, as they
have heard it described by others, and as sounds well, but not at all as
it really was.
 If he had told the truth to his
hearers--who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had
formed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hear
just such a story--they would either not have believed him or, still
worse, would have thought that Rostov was himself to blame since what
generally happens to the narrators of cavalry attacks had not happened
to him.
 He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot and
that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as
he could from a Frenchman into the wood.
 And so he
told them all that.
 Prince Andrew, who liked
to help young men, was flattered by being asked for his assistance and
being well disposed toward Boris, who had managed to please him the day
before, he wished to do what the young man wanted.
 When he came in and saw an hussar of the line recounting
his military exploits (Prince Andrew could not endure that sort of man),
he gave Boris a pleasant smile, frowned as with half-closed eyes he
looked at Rostov, bowed slightly and wearily, and sat down languidly
on the sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad company.

Rostov flushed up on noticing this, but he did not care, this was a mere
stranger.
 Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that he too seemed ashamed
of the hussar of the line.


In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of
the contempt with which Rostov, from his fighting army point of view,
regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer
was evidently one, Rostov felt confused, blushed, and became silent.


"We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidently reluctant to
say more in the presence of a stranger.
 To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could
give no opinion on such an important government order, and Berg laughed
gaily.
 "Come to me
after the review and we will do what is possible.
"

And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostov,
whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now changing to
anger he did not condescend to notice, and said: "I think you were
talking of the Schon Grabern affair? Were you there?"

"I was there," said Rostov angrily, as if intending to insult the
aide-de-camp.


Bolkonski noticed the hussar's state of mind, and it amused him.
 With a
slightly contemptuous smile, he said: "Yes, there are many stories now
told about that affair!"

"Yes, stories!" repeated Rostov loudly, looking with eyes suddenly grown
furious, now at Boris, now at Bolkonski.


"I am not talking about you," he said, "I don't know you and, frankly, I
don't want to.
 I am speaking of the staff in general.
"

"And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of quiet
authority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with you that
it would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficient self-respect,
but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen.
 In a day or two
we shall all have to take part in a greater and more serious duel, and
besides, Drubetskoy, who says he is an old friend of yours, is not at
all to blame that my face has the misfortune to displease you.
 However,"
he added rising, "you know my name and where to find me, but don't
forget that I do not regard either myself or you as having been at all
insulted, and as a man older than you, my advice is to let the matter
drop.
 Well then, on Friday after the review I shall expect you,
Drubetskoy.


Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostov think of what he ought to
have said.
 And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it.
 He
ordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Boris, rode
home.
 Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge that affected
adjutant, or really let the matter drop, was the question that worried
him all the way.
 He thought angrily of the pleasure he would have at
seeing the fright of that small and frail but proud man when covered by
his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of all the men he knew
there was none he would so much like to have for a friend as that very
adjutant whom he so hated.






CHAPTER VIII


The day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a review was held of the
Austrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia
and those who had been campaigning under Kutuzov.
 The two Emperors, the
Russian with his heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with the Archduke,
inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men.
 Now thousands of feet and bayonets
moved and halted at the officers' command, turned with banners flying,
formed up at intervals, and wheeled round other similar masses of
infantry in different uniforms; now was heard the rhythmic beat of
hoofs and the jingling of showy cavalry in blue, red, and green braided
uniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan,
or gray horses; then again, spreading out with the brazen clatter of the
polished shining cannon that quivered on the gun carriages and with
the smell of linstocks, came the artillery which crawled between the
infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position.


From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten
o'clock all had been brought into due order.
 The whole army was extended in three lines: the cavalry
in front, behind it the artillery, and behind that again the infantry.
 The
three parts of that army were sharply distinguished: Kutuzov's fighting
army (with the Pavlograds on the right flank of the front); those
recently arrived from Russia, both Guards and regiments of the line;
and the Austrian troops.
 But they all stood in the same lines, under one
command, and in a like order.


Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: "They're coming! They're
coming!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final preparation
swept over all the troops.
 And at that moment, though the day was still, a light gust
of wind blowing over the army slightly stirred the streamers on the
lances and the unfolded standards fluttered against their staffs.
 It
looked as if by that slight motion the army itself was expressing its
joy at the approach of the Emperors.


In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard.
 This
was the Emperors' suites.
 The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the
trumpets of the first cavalry regiment played the general march.
 It
seemed as though not the trumpeters were playing, but as if the army
itself, rejoicing at the Emperors' approach, had naturally burst into
music.
 Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor
Alexander was clearly heard.
 He gave the words of greeting, and the
first regiment roared "Hurrah!" so deafeningly, continuously, and
joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and the
immensity of the power they constituted.


He felt that at a single word from that man all this vast mass (and he
himself an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire and water,
commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he could
not but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminence of that word.


"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one regiment after
another greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march, and then
"Hurrah!".
.


Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and immobility
seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive,
its thunder joining the roar of the whole line along which he had
already passed.
 Upon them the undivided, tensely passionate attention of that
whole mass of men was concentrated.


The handsome young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Horse
Guards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with his
pleasant face and resonant though not loud voice, attracted everyone's
attention.


Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen sight had
recognized the Tsar and watched his approach.
 When he was within twenty
paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of his
handsome, happy young face, he experienced a feeling tenderness and
ecstasy such as he had never before known.


Stopping in front of the Pavlograds, the Tsar said something in French
to the Austrian Emperor and smiled.


Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still
stronger flow of love for his sovereign.


"Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?" thought
Rostov.
 "I should die of happiness!"

The Tsar addressed the officers also: "I thank you all, gentlemen, I
thank you with my whole heart.
" To Rostov every word sounded like a
voice from heaven.
 How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!

"You have earned the St.
 George's standards and will be worthy of them.


The Tsar said something more which Rostov did not hear, and the
soldiers, straining their lungs, shouted "Hurrah!"

Rostov too, bending over his saddle, shouted "Hurrah!" with all his
might, feeling that he would like to injure himself by that shout, if
only to express his rapture fully.


The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if undecided.


"How can the Emperor be undecided?" thought Rostov, but then even this
indecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting, like everything else
the Tsar did.


That hesitation lasted only an instant.
 The Tsar's foot, in the narrow
pointed boot then fashionable, touched the groin of the bobtailed bay
mare he rode, his hand in a white glove gathered up the reins, and he
moved off accompanied by an irregularly swaying sea of aides-de-camp.


Among the gentlemen of the suite, Rostov noticed Bolkonski, sitting
his horse indolently and carelessly.
 Rostov recalled their quarrel of
yesterday and the question presented itself whether he ought or ought
not to challenge Bolkonski.
 "Of course not!" he now thought.
"

When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troops began
a ceremonial march past him, and Rostov on Bedouin, recently purchased
from Denisov, rode past too, at the rear of his squadron--that is, alone
and in full view of the Emperor.
 Bending his foaming muzzle to his chest, his
tail extended, Bedouin, as if also conscious of the Emperor's eye
upon him, passed splendidly, lifting his feet with a high and graceful
action, as if flying through the air without touching the ground.


Rostov himself, his legs well back and his stomach drawn in and feeling
himself one with his horse, rode past the Emperor with a frowning but
blissful face "like a vewy devil," as Denisov expressed it.


"Fine fellows, the Pavlograds!" remarked the Emperor.


"My God, how happy I should be if he ordered me to leap into the fire
this instant!" thought Rostov.
 "It is all
very well for Rostov, whose father sends him ten thousand rubles at a
time, to talk about not wishing to cringe to anybody and not be anyone's
lackey, but I who have nothing but my brains have to make a career
and must not miss opportunities, but must avail myself of them!" he
reflected.


He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmutz that day, but the appearance of
the town where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps were stationed
and the two Emperors were living with their suites, households, and
courts only strengthened his desire to belong to that higher world.


He knew no one, and despite his smart Guardsman's uniform, all these
exalted personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriages
with their plumes, ribbons, and medals, both courtiers and military
men, seemed so immeasurably above him, an insignificant officer of the
Guards, that they not only did not wish to, but simply could not, be
aware of his existence.
 At the quarters of the commander in chief,
Kutuzov, where he inquired for Bolkonski, all the adjutants and even the
orderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that a great
many officers like him were always coming there and that everybody was
heartily sick of them.
 In spite of this, or rather because of it, next
day, November 15, after dinner he again went to Olmutz and, entering the
house occupied by Kutuzov, asked for Bolkonski.
 Prince Andrew was in and
Boris was shown into a large hall probably formerly used for dancing,
but in which five beds now stood, and furniture of various kinds: a
table, chairs, and a clavichord.
 None of these
gentlemen changed his position on seeing Boris.
 The one who was writing
and whom Boris addressed turned round crossly and told him Bolkonski
was on duty and that he should go through the door on the left into the
reception room if he wished to see him.


At that moment Boris clearly realized what he had before surmised, that
in the army, besides the subordination and discipline prescribed in the
military code, which he and the others knew in the regiment, there was
another, more important, subordination, which made this tight-laced,
purple-faced general wait respectfully while Captain Prince Andrew, for
his own pleasure, chose to chat with Lieutenant Drubetskoy.
 More than
ever was Boris resolved to serve in future not according to the written
code, but under this unwritten law.
 He felt now that merely by having
been recommended to Prince Andrew he had already risen above the general
who at the front had the power to annihilate him, a lieutenant of the
Guards.
 Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand.

When Germans start being accurate, there's no end to it!"

Boris smiled, as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding to
as something generally known.
 But it was the first time he had heard
Weyrother's name, or even the term "dispositions.
"

"Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I have been
thinking about you.
"

"Yes, I was thinking"--for some reason Boris could not help
blushing--"of asking the commander in chief.
 I only wanted to ask because I fear the Guards
won't be in action," he added as if in apology.


"All right, all right.

"Only let me report this gentleman's business, and I shall be at your
disposal.

"It's no use your going to the commander in chief.
 He would say a lot of
pleasant things, ask you to dinner" ("That would not be bad as regards
the unwritten code," thought Boris), "but nothing more would come of it.
"

Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide a young
man and help him to worldly success.


That same day a council of war had been held in which all the members of
the Hofkriegsrath and both Emperors took part.
 At that council, contrary
to the views of the old generals Kutuzov and Prince Schwartzenberg, it
had been decided to advance immediately and give battle to Bonaparte.

The council of war was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied by Boris
arrived at the palace to find Dolgorukov.
 The voices of those who counseled delay and advised
waiting for something else before advancing had been so completely
silenced and their arguments confuted by such conclusive evidence of the
advantages of attacking that what had been discussed at the council--the
coming battle and the victory that would certainly result from it--no
longer seemed to be in the future but in the past.
 All the advantages
were on our side.
 The strategic position where
the operations would take place was familiar in all its details to
the Austrian General Weyrother: a lucky accident had ordained that the
Austrian army should maneuver the previous year on the very fields where
the French had now to be fought; the adjacent locality was known and
shown in every detail on the maps, and Bonaparte, evidently weakened,
was undertaking nothing.


Dolgorukov, one of the warmest advocates of an attack, had just returned
from the council, tired and exhausted but eager and proud of the victory
that had been gained.
 Prince Andrew introduced his protege, but Prince
Dolgorukov politely and firmly pressing his hand said nothing to Boris
and, evidently unable to suppress the thoughts which were uppermost in
his mind at that moment, addressed Prince Andrew in French.


"Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have gained! God grant that
the one that will result from it will be as victorious! However, dear
fellow," he said abruptly and eagerly, "I must confess to having been
unjust to the Austrians and especially to Weyrother.
 What exactitude,
what minuteness, what knowledge of the locality, what foresight for
every eventuality, every possibility even to the smallest detail! No, my
dear fellow, no conditions better than our present ones could have been
devised.
 This combination of Austrian precision with Russian valor--what
more could be wished for?"

"So the attack is definitely resolved on?" asked Bolkonski.


"And do you know, my dear fellow, it seems to me that Bonaparte has
decidedly lost bearings, you know that a letter was received from him
today for the Emperor.
" Dolgorukov smiled significantly.


"Is that so? And what did he say?" inquired Bolkonski.
.
'"

"But between not recognizing him as Emperor and calling him General
Bonaparte, there is a difference," remarked Bolkonski.
'"

Dolgorukov laughed merrily.


"Only that?" said Bolkonski.

He is a wise and clever fellow.
.
 "Good, wasn't it?"

"Yes, but he will dislike it extremely," said Bolkonski.

You know the story of the handkerchief? It is delightful!"

And the talkative Dolgorukov, turning now to Boris, now to Prince
Andrew, told how Bonaparte wishing to test Markov, our ambassador,
purposely dropped a handkerchief in front of him and stood looking at
Markov, probably expecting Markov to pick it up for him, and how Markov
immediately dropped his own beside it and picked it up without touching
Bonaparte's.


"Delightful!" said Bolkonski.
 "But I have come to you, Prince, as a
petitioner on behalf of this young man.
 You see.
.
.


"Oh, what a nuisance," said Dolgorukov, getting up hurriedly and
pressing the hands of Prince Andrew and Boris.
 "You know I should be
very glad to do all in my power both for you and for this dear young
man.
" Again he pressed the hand of the latter with an expression of
good-natured, sincere, and animated levity.
.
 They followed Prince Dolgorukov out
into the corridor and met--coming out of the door of the Emperor's room
by which Dolgorukov had entered--a short man in civilian clothes with a
clever face and sharply projecting jaw which, without spoiling his face,
gave him a peculiar vivacity and shiftiness of expression.
 This short
man nodded to Dolgorukov as to an intimate friend and stared at Prince
Andrew with cool intensity, walking straight toward him and evidently
expecting him to bow or to step out of his way.


"He is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant of men--the
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Prince Adam Czartoryski.
.
.
.






CHAPTER X


At dawn on the sixteenth of November, Denisov's squadron, in which
Nicholas Rostov served and which was in Prince Bagration's detachment,
moved from the place where it had spent the night, advancing into action
as arranged, and after going behind other columns for about two thirds
of a mile was stopped on the highroad.

At nine in the morning, he heard firing in front and shouts of hurrah,
and saw wounded being brought back (there were not many of them), and
at last he saw how a whole detachment of French cavalry was brought in,
convoyed by a sotnya of Cossacks.
 The men and officers
returning spoke of a brilliant victory, of the occupation of the town of
Wischau and the capture of a whole French squadron.
 The day was bright
and sunny after a sharp night frost, and the cheerful glitter of that
autumn day was in keeping with the news of victory which was conveyed,
not only by the tales of those who had taken part in it, but also by
the joyful expression on the faces of soldiers, officers, generals, and
adjutants, as they passed Rostov going or coming.
 And Nicholas, who had
vainly suffered all the dread that precedes a battle and had spent that
happy day in inactivity, was all the more depressed.


"Come here, Wostov.
 Let's dwink to dwown our gwief!" shouted Denisov,
who had settled down by the roadside with a flask and some food.


The officers gathered round Denisov's canteen, eating and talking.


"There! They are bringing another!" cried one of the officers,
indicating a captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot by
two Cossacks.


One of them was leading by the bridle a fine large French horse he had
taken from the prisoner.


"Sell us that horse!" Denisov called out to the Cossacks.
 He was breathless with agitation, his face was red, and when
he heard some French spoken he at once began speaking to the officers,
addressing first one, then another.
 He said he would not have been
taken, it was not his fault but the corporal's who had sent him to seize
some horsecloths, though he had told him the Russians were there.
 And at
every word he added: "But don't hurt my little horse!" and stroked the
animal.
 It was plain that he did not quite grasp where he was.
 Now
he excused himself for having been taken prisoner and now, imagining
himself before his own officers, insisted on his soldierly discipline
and zeal in the service.


The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold pieces, and Rostov, being the
richest of the officers now that he had received his money, bought it.


"But don't hurt my little horse!" said the Alsatian good-naturedly to
Rostov when the animal was handed over to the hussar.


"Alley! Alley!" said the Cossack, touching the prisoner's arm to make
him go on.


"The Emperor! The Emperor!" was suddenly heard among the hussars.
 Not daring to look round and without looking round, he
was ecstatically conscious of his approach.
 He felt it not only from the
sound of the hoofs of the approaching cavalcade, but because as he drew
near everything grew brighter, more joyful, more significant, and more
festive around him.
 Nearer and nearer to Rostov came that sun shedding
beams of mild and majestic light around, and already he felt himself
enveloped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm, and
majestic voice that was yet so simple! And as if in accord with
Rostov's feeling, there was a deathly stillness amid which was heard the
Emperor's voice.


"The Pavlograd hussars?" he inquired.
 Alexander's face was
even more beautiful than it had been three days before at the review.
 Casually, while surveying the squadron, the
Emperor's eyes met Rostov's and rested on them for not more than two
seconds.
 Whether or no the Emperor understood what was going on in
Rostov's soul (it seemed to Rostov that he understood everything), at
any rate his light-blue eyes gazed for about two seconds into Rostov's
face.
 A gentle, mild light poured from them.
 Then all at once he
raised his eyebrows, abruptly touched his horse with his left foot, and
galloped on.


This battle, which consisted in the capture of a French squadron, was
represented as a brilliant victory over the French, and so the
Emperor and the whole army, especially while the smoke hung over
the battlefield, believed that the French had been defeated and were
retreating against their will.
 The
wounded soldier was so dirty, coarse, and revolting that his proximity
to the Emperor shocked Rostov.
 The soldier groaned.


"Gently, gently! Can't you do it more gently?" said the Emperor
apparently suffering more than the dying soldier, and he rode away.


Rostov saw tears filling the Emperor's eyes and heard him, as he was
riding away, say to Czartoryski: "What a terrible thing war is: what a
terrible thing! Quelle terrible chose que la guerre!"

The troops of the vanguard were stationed before Wischau, within sight
of the enemy's lines, which all day long had yielded ground to us at
the least firing.

The campfires crackled and the soldiers' songs resounded even more
merrily than on the previous night.
 "Not 'our Sovereign, the
Emperor,' as they say at official dinners," said he, "but the health of
our Sovereign, that good, enchanting, and great man! Let us drink to his
health and to the certain defeat of the French!"

"If we fought before," he said, "not letting the French pass, as at
Schon Grabern, what shall we not do now when he is at the front? We will
all die for him gladly! Is it not so, gentlemen? Perhaps I am not saying
it right, I have drunk a good deal--but that is how I feel, and so do
you too! To the health of Alexander the First! Hurrah!"

"Hurrah!" rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers.


And the old cavalry captain, Kirsten, shouted enthusiastically and no
less sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rostov.


"As there's no one to fall in love with on campaign, he's fallen in love
with the Tsar," he said.


"Denisov, don't make fun of it!" cried Rostov.
.
.
 At headquarters and among the troops
near by the news spread that the Emperor was unwell.
 He ate nothing and
had slept badly that night, those around him reported.
 The cause of this
indisposition was the strong impression made on his sensitive mind by
the sight of the killed and wounded.
 The
Emperor had only just fallen asleep and so Savary had to wait.


It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander
a meeting with Napoleon.
 To the joy and pride of the whole army, a
personal interview was refused, and instead of the Sovereign, Prince
Dolgorukov, the victor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to negotiate
with Napoleon if, contrary to expectations, these negotiations were
actuated by a real desire for peace.


Toward evening Dolgorukov came back, went straight to the Tsar, and
remained alone with him for a long time.


On the eighteenth and nineteenth of November, the army advanced two
days' march and the enemy's outposts after a brief interchange of shots
retreated.
 In the highest army circles from midday on the nineteenth, a
great, excitedly bustling activity began which lasted till the morning
of the twentieth, when the memorable battle of Austerlitz was fought.


Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity--the eager talk, running
to and fro, and dispatching of adjutants--was confined to the Emperor's
headquarters.
 But on the afternoon of that day, this activity reached
Kutuzov's headquarters and the staffs of the commanders of columns.


The concentrated activity which had begun at the Emperor's headquarters
in the morning and had started the whole movement that followed was like
the first movement of the main wheel of a large tower clock.
 One wheel
slowly moved, another was set in motion, and a third, and wheels began
to revolve faster and faster, levers and cogwheels to work, chimes to
play, figures to pop out, and the hands to advance with regular motion
as a result of all that activity.


Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion of innumerable
wheels and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movement of the
hands which show the time, so the result of all the complicated human
activities of 160,000 Russians and French--all their passions, desires,
remorse, humiliations, sufferings, outbursts of pride, fear, and
enthusiasm--was only the loss of the battle of Austerlitz, the so-called
battle of the three Emperors--that is to say, a slow movement of the
hand on the dial of human history.


Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on the
commander in chief.


Bolkonski took the opportunity to go in to get some details of the
coming action from Dolgorukov.
 He felt that Kutuzov was upset and
dissatisfied about something and that at headquarters they were
dissatisfied with him, and also that at the Emperor's headquarters
everyone adopted toward him the tone of men who know something others do
not know: he therefore wished to speak to Dolgorukov.


"Well, how d'you do, my dear fellow?" said Dolgorukov, who was sitting
at tea with Bilibin.
 "The fete is for tomorrow.
"

"But they heard him at the council of war and will hear him when he
talks sense, but to temporize and wait for something now when Bonaparte
fears nothing so much as a general battle is impossible.
"

"Yes, you have seen him?" said Prince Andrew.
 "Well, what is Bonaparte
like? How did he impress you?"

"Yes, I saw him, and am convinced that he fears nothing so much as a
general engagement," repeated Dolgorukov, evidently prizing this general
conclusion which he had arrived at from his interview with Napoleon.

"If he weren't afraid of a battle why did he ask for that interview? Why
negotiate, and above all why retreat, when to retreat is so contrary
to his method of conducting war? Believe me, he is afraid, afraid of a
general battle.
 His hour has come! Mark my words!"

"But tell me, what is he like, eh?" said Prince Andrew again.


"He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call him
'Your Majesty,' but who, to his chagrin, got no title from me! That's
the sort of man he is, and nothing more," replied Dolgorukov, looking
round at Bilibin with a smile.
 Believe me in war the
energy of young men often shows the way better than all the experience
of old Cunctators.
"

"But in what position are we going to attack him? I have been at the
outposts today and it is impossible to say where his chief forces are
situated," said Prince Andrew.


He wished to explain to Dolgorukov a plan of attack he had himself
formed.


"Oh, that is all the same," Dolgorukov said quickly, and getting up he
spread a map on the table.
 "All eventualities have been foreseen.
.


Prince Andrew began to reply and to state his own plan, which might have
been as good as Weyrother's, but for the disadvantage that Weyrother's
had already been approved.


"I will do so," said Prince Andrew, moving away from the map.


"Whatever are you bothering about, gentlemen?" said Bilibin, who, till
then, had listened with an amused smile to their conversation and now
was evidently ready with a joke.
 "Whether tomorrow brings victory or
defeat, the glory of our Russian arms is secure.
 Except your Kutuzov,
there is not a single Russian in command of a column! The commanders
are: Herr General Wimpfen, le Comte de Langeron, le Prince de
Lichtenstein, le Prince, de Hohenlohe, and finally Prishprish, and so on
like all those Polish names.
 "It is not true; there are now
two Russians, Miloradovich, and Dokhturov, and there would be a third,
Count Arakcheev, if his nerves were not too weak.
"

"However, I think General Kutuzov has come out," said Prince Andrew.
 "I
wish you good luck and success, gentlemen!" he added and went out after
shaking hands with Dolgorukov and Bilibin.


On the way home, Prince Andrew could not refrain from asking Kutuzov,
who was sitting silently beside him, what he thought of tomorrow's
battle.
.
 All the
commanders of columns were summoned to the commander in chief's and with
the exception of Prince Bagration, who declined to come, were all there
at the appointed time.
 Weyrother evidently felt himself to be
at the head of a movement that had already become unrestrainable.
 He was
like a horse running downhill harnessed to a heavy cart.
 Weyrother had been twice that evening to the enemy's picket line to
reconnoiter personally, and twice to the Emperors, Russian and Austrian,
to report and explain, and to his headquarters where he had dictated
the dispositions in German, and now, much exhausted, he arrived at
Kutuzov's.
 He was bespattered with mud and had a pitiful,
weary, and distracted air, though at the same time he was haughty and
self-confident.


Kutuzov was occupying a nobleman's castle of modest dimensions near
Ostralitz.
 In the large drawing room which had become the commander in
chief's office were gathered Kutuzov himself, Weyrother, and the members
of the council of war.
 They were drinking tea, and only awaited Prince
Bagration to begin the council.
 At last Bagration's orderly came with
the news that the prince could not attend.
 Prince Andrew came in
to inform the commander in chief of this and, availing himself of
permission previously given him by Kutuzov to be present at the council,
he remained in the room.


Kutuzov, with his uniform unbuttoned so that his fat neck bulged over
his collar as if escaping, was sitting almost asleep in a low chair,
with his podgy old hands resting symmetrically on its arms.
 At the sound
of Weyrother's voice, he opened his one eye with an effort.


"Yes, yes, if you please! It is already late," said he, and nodding his
head he let it droop and again closed his eye.


If at first the members of the council thought that Kutuzov was
pretending to sleep, the sounds his nose emitted during the reading that
followed proved that the commander in chief at that moment was absorbed
by a far more serious matter than a desire to show his contempt for
the dispositions or anything else--he was engaged in satisfying the
irresistible human need for sleep.
"

The dispositions were very complicated and difficult.
 They began as
follows:

"As the enemy's left wing rests on wooded hills and his right extends
along Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz behind the ponds that are there, while we,
on the other hand, with our left wing by far outflank his right, it is
advantageous to attack the enemy's latter wing especially if we occupy
the villages of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, whereby we can both fall on
his flank and pursue him over the plain between Schlappanitz and the
Thuerassa forest, avoiding the defiles of Schlappanitz and Bellowitz
which cover the enemy's front.
 The second column marches.
.
.
.
" and so on, read Weyrother.


The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions.
 Exactly opposite Weyrother,
with his glistening wide-open eyes fixed upon him and his mustache
twisted upwards, sat the ruddy Miloradovich in a military pose, his
elbows turned outwards, his hands on his knees, and his shoulders
raised.
 Then Miloradovich looked round significantly at the other
generals.
 Next
to Weyrother sat Count Langeron who, with a subtle smile that never left
his typically southern French face during the whole time of the reading,
gazed at his delicate fingers which rapidly twirled by its corners
a gold snuffbox on which was a portrait.


"A geography lesson!" he muttered as if to himself, but loud enough to
be heard.
 He
asked Weyrother several times to repeat words he had not clearly heard
and the difficult names of villages.


When the reading which lasted more than an hour was over, Langeron again
brought his snuffbox to rest and, without looking at Weyrother or at
anyone in particular, began to say how difficult it was to carry out
such a plan in which the enemy's position was assumed to be known,
whereas it was perhaps not known, since the enemy was in movement.

Langeron's objections were valid but it was obvious that their chief
aim was to show General Weyrother--who had read his dispositions with as
much self-confidence as if he were addressing school children--that he
had to do, not with fools, but with men who could teach him something in
military matters.


When the monotonous sound of Weyrother's voice ceased, Kutuzov opened
his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the mill wheel
is interrupted.
 He listened to what Langeron said, as if remarking, "So
you are still at that silly business!" quickly closed his eye again, and
let his head sink still lower.


Langeron, trying as virulently as possible to sting Weyrother's vanity
as author of the military plan, argued that Bonaparte might easily
attack instead of being attacked, and so render the whole of this
plan perfectly worthless.


"If he could attack us, he would have done so today," said he.


"In that case he is inviting his doom by awaiting our attack," said
Langeron, with a subtly ironical smile, again glancing round for support
to Miloradovich who was near him.
"

Weyrother again gave that smile which seemed to say that to him it was
strange and ridiculous to meet objections from Russian generals and to
have to prove to them what he had not merely convinced himself of, but
had also convinced the sovereign Emperors of.
.
" began Prince Andrew, who had for long been waiting an
opportunity to express his doubts.


Kutuzov here woke up, coughed heavily, and looked round at the generals.


"Gentlemen, the dispositions for tomorrow--or rather for today, for it
is past midnight--cannot now be altered," said he.
.
.
" he paused, "than to have a good sleep.
"

He moved as if to rise.
 Prince Andrew went out.



The council of war, at which Prince Andrew had not been able to
express his opinion as he had hoped to, left on him a vague and uneasy
impression.
 Whether Dolgorukov and Weyrother, or Kutuzov, Langeron, and
the others who did not approve of the plan of attack, were right--he did
not know.


The night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamed
mysteriously.
 "Yes, tomorrow, tomorrow!" he thought.
 "Tomorrow
everything may be over for me! All these memories will be no more, none
of them will have any meaning for me.
" And his fancy pictured the battle, its loss, the concentration
of fighting at one point, and the hesitation of all the commanders.
 And
then that happy moment, that Toulon for which he had so long waited,
presents itself to him at last.
 He firmly and clearly expresses his
opinion to Kutuzov, to Weyrother, and to the Emperors.
 All are struck by
the justness of his views, but no one undertakes to carry them out, so
he takes a regiment, a division-stipulates that no one is to interfere
with his arrangements--leads his division to the decisive point, and
gains the victory alone.
 The dispositions for the next battle are
planned by him alone.
 Nominally he is only an adjutant on Kutuzov's
staff, but he does everything alone.
 The next battle is won by him
alone.
.
 "Well and then?" asked
the other voice.
 "If before that you are not ten times wounded, killed,
or betrayed, well.
.
.
.
.
 Yes, for that alone! I shall never
tell anyone, but, oh God! what am I to do if I love nothing but fame
and men's esteem? Death, wounds, the loss of family--I fear nothing.
 And
precious and dear as many persons are to me--father, sister, wife--those
dearest to me--yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I would give them
all at once for a moment of glory, of triumph over men, of love from men
I don't know and never shall know, for the love of these men here," he
thought, as he listened to voices in Kutuzov's courtyard.


"Oh, go to the devil!" called out a voice, drowned by the laughter of
the orderlies and servants.


"All the same, I love and value nothing but triumph over them all, I
value this mystic power and glory that is floating here above me in this
mist!"





CHAPTER XIII


That same night, Rostov was with a platoon on skirmishing duty in front
of Bagration's detachment.
 His hussars were placed along the line
in couples and he himself rode along the line trying to master the
sleepiness that kept coming over him.
 An enormous space, with our army's
campfires dimly glowing in the fog, could be seen behind him; in front
of him was misty darkness.
 Rostov could see nothing, peer as he would
into that foggy distance: now something gleamed gray, now there was
something black, now little lights seemed to glimmer where the enemy
ought to be, now he fancied it was only something in his own eyes.

His eyes kept closing, and in his fancy appeared--now the Emperor, now
Denisov, and now Moscow memories--and he again hurriedly opened his eyes
and saw close before him the head and ears of the horse he was riding,
and sometimes, when he came within six paces of them, the black figures
of hussars, but in the distance was still the same misty darkness.
.
 It might easily happen," thought Rostov, "that the Emperor will
meet me and give me an order as he would to any other officer; he'll
say: 'Go and find out what's there.
' There are many stories of his
getting to know an officer in just such a chance way and attaching him
to himself! What if he gave me a place near him? Oh, how I would guard
him, how I would tell him the truth, how I would unmask his deceivers!"
And in order to realize vividly his love devotion to the sovereign,
Rostov pictured to himself an enemy or a deceitful German, whom he would
not only kill with pleasure but whom he would slap in the face before
the Emperor.
 Suddenly a distant shout aroused him.
 He started and opened
his eyes.
 pass and
watchword--shaft, Olmutz.
 What a nuisance that our squadron will be in
reserve tomorrow," he thought.
 "I'll ask leave to go to the front, this
may be my only chance of seeing the Emperor.
 It won't be long now before
I am off duty.
 I'll take another turn and when I get back I'll go to the
general and ask him.
" He readjusted himself in the saddle and touched up
his horse to ride once more round his hussars.
 It seemed to him that it
was getting lighter.
 To the left he saw a sloping descent lit up, and
facing it a black knoll that seemed as steep as a wall.
.
 that spot.
.
.
 a spot--une tache," he thought.
 "There
now.
 it's not a tache.
.
.
.
 sister, black eyes.
.
.
.
.

tasha.
.
.
 (Won't she be surprised when I tell her how I've seen the
Emperor?) Natasha.
.
.
 take my sabretache.
.
.
"--"Keep to the right, your
honor, there are bushes here," came the voice of an hussar, past whom
Rostov was riding in the act of falling asleep.
 Rostov lifted his
head that had sunk almost to his horse's mane and pulled up beside
the hussar.
 "But what was I thinking? I mustn't forget.
.
.
 sabretache.
.
.
 saber them.
.
.
 Whom? The hussars.
.
.
 Ah, the
hussars with mustaches.
 Along the Tverskaya Street rode the hussar with
mustaches.
.
 I thought about him too, just opposite Guryev's house.

Old Guryev.
.
.
 Oh, but Denisov's a fine fellow.
 But that's all nonsense.

The chief thing is that the Emperor is here.
 How he looked at me and
wished to say something, but dared not.
 Yes, Na-tasha, sabretache, oh, yes, yes! That's
right!" And his head once more sank to his horse's neck.
 "What? What? What?.
.
.
.
" said Rostov, waking up.
 Over there, where the shouting came
from, a fire flared up and went out again, then another, and all along
the French line on the hill fires flared up and the shouting grew louder
and louder.
 Rostov could hear the sound of French words but could not
distinguish them.
 The din of many voices was too great; all he could
hear was: "ahahah!" and "rrrr!"

"What's that? What do you make of it?" said Rostov to the hussar beside
him.
 "It's dark.
.

Steady!" he cried to his fidgeting horse.


Rostov's horse was also getting restive: it pawed the frozen ground,
pricking its ears at the noise and looking at the lights.
 The gay triumphant shouting of the enemy army had a
stimulating effect on him.
 "Vive l'Empereur! L'Empereur!" he now heard
distinctly.


"They can't be far off, probably just beyond the stream," he said to the
hussar beside him.


The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily.
 The sound
of horse's hoofs approaching at a trot along the line of hussars was
heard, and out of the foggy darkness the figure of a sergeant of hussars
suddenly appeared, looming huge as an elephant.


"Your honor, the generals!" said the sergeant, riding up to Rostov.

One was on a white horse.
 Prince Bagration and Prince Dolgorukov with
their adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon of the lights
and shouts in the enemy's camp.


"Believe me," said Prince Dolgorukov, addressing Bagration, "it is
nothing but a trick! He has retreated and ordered the rearguard to
kindle fires and make a noise to deceive us.
 "I saw them this evening on that knoll; if
they had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too.
.
.
 Officer!"
said Bagration to Rostov, "are the enemy's skirmishers still there?"

"They were there this evening, but now I don't know, your excellency.

Shall I go with some of my hussars to see?" replied Rostov.


Bagration stopped and, before replying, tried to see Rostov's face in
the mist.


"Well, go and see," he said, after a pause.
"

Rostov spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fedchenko and two other
hussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the direction
from which the shouting came.
 He felt both frightened and pleased to be
riding alone with three hussars into that mysterious and dangerous misty
distance where no one had been before him.

Having descended the hill at a trot, he no longer saw either our own or
the enemy's fires, but heard the shouting of the French more loudly and
distinctly.
 To keep to the road which
gleamed white in the mist would have been safer because it would be
easier to see people coming along it.
 "Follow me!" said he, crossed the
road, and began riding up the hill at a gallop toward the point where
the French pickets had been standing that evening.


"Your honor, there he is!" cried one of the hussars behind him.

Rostov turned his horse and galloped back.
 Rostov reined in his horse, whose spirits had risen,
like his own, at the firing, and went back at a footpace.
 "Well, some
more! Some more!" a merry voice was saying in his soul.
 But no more
shots came.


Only when approaching Bagration did Rostov let his horse gallop again,
and with his hand at the salute rode up to the general.


Dolgorukov was still insisting that the French had retreated and had
only lit fires to deceive us.


"What does that prove?" he was saying as Rostov rode up.
"

"It's plain that they have not all gone yet, Prince," said Bagration.

"Wait till tomorrow morning, we'll find out everything tomorrow.
"

"The picket is still on the hill, your excellency, just where it was
in the evening," reported Rostov, stooping forward with his hand at the
salute and unable to repress the smile of delight induced by his ride
and especially by the sound of the bullets.
 "Thank you, officer.
"

"Your excellency," said Rostov, "may I ask a favor?"

"What is it?"

"Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve.
"

"Oh, very well, you may stay in attendance on me.
"

"Count Ilya Rostov's son?" asked Dolgorukov.


But Rostov did not reply.


"Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?"

"I will give the order.
 The soldiers, on seeing him,
lit wisps of straw and ran after him, shouting, "Vive l'Empereur!"
Napoleon's proclamation was as follows:


Soldiers! The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge the
Austrian army of Ulm.
 The position we
occupy is a strong one, and while they are marching to go round me on
the right they will expose a flank to me.
 Soldiers! I will myself direct
your battalions.
 The troops of the
center, the reserves, and Bagration's right flank had not yet moved, but
on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, which
were to be the first to descend the heights to attack the French right
flank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains according to plan, were
already up and astir.
 As soon as an Austrian officer showed himself near a
commanding officer's quarters, the regiment began to move: the soldiers
ran from the fires, thrust their pipes into their boots, their bags
into the carts, got their muskets ready, and formed rank.
 The officers
buttoned up their coats, buckled on their swords and pouches, and moved
along the ranks shouting.
 The adjutants and battalion
and regimental commanders mounted, crossed themselves, gave final
instructions, orders, and commissions to the baggage men who remained
behind, and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet resounded.


A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment as
much as a sailor is by his ship.
 The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in which
his ship is sailing, but on the day of battle--heaven knows how and
whence--a stern note of which all are conscious sounds in the moral
atmosphere of an army, announcing the approach of something decisive
and solemn, and awakening in the men an unusual curiosity.
 Bushes looked like gigantic trees and level
ground like cliffs and slopes.
 Anywhere, on any side, one might
encounter an enemy invisible ten paces off.
 But the columns advanced
for a long time, always in the same fog, descending and ascending hills,
avoiding gardens and enclosures, going over new and unknown ground, and
nowhere encountering the enemy.
 Every soldier felt glad to know that
to the unknown place where he was going, many more of our men were going
too.


"There now, the Kurskies have also gone past," was being said in the
ranks.


"It's wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered, lads! Last
night I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them.


"Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? Or have we already come up
against the French?"

"No, one can't hear them.
 They'd be firing if we had.
"

"They were in a hurry enough to start us, and now here we stand in
the middle of a field without rhyme or reason.
"

"I say, shall we soon be clear? They say the cavalry are blocking the
way," said an officer.


"Ah, those damned Germans! They don't know their own country!" said
another.
"

"Then why are you here? You should have gone on long ago, now you won't
get there till evening.
"

"What stupid orders! They don't themselves know what they are doing!"
said the officer and rode off.


"Tafa-lafa! But what he's jabbering no one can make out," said a
soldier, mimicking the general who had ridden away.
 "I'd shoot them, the
scoundrels!"

"We were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven't got
halfway.


And the feeling of energy with which the troops had started began to
turn into vexation and anger at the stupid arrangements and at the
Germans.


At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian guide and a
Russian general.
 The troops meanwhile stood growing listless and dispirited.
 In front in the fog a shot was heard and then another, at
first irregularly at varying intervals--trata.
.
.


Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, and having
stumbled on him in the fog, hearing no encouraging word from their
commanders, and with a consciousness of being too late spreading through
the ranks, and above all being unable to see anything in front or around
them in the thick fog, the Russians exchanged shots with the enemy
lazily and advanced and again halted, receiving no timely orders from
the officers or adjutants who wandered about in the fog in those unknown
surroundings unable to find their own regiments.
 In this way the action
began for the first, second, and third columns, which had gone down
into the valley.
 The fourth column, with which Kutuzov was, stood on the
Pratzen Heights.


Below, where the fight was beginning, there was still thick fog; on the
higher ground it was clearing, but nothing could be seen of what was
going on in front.
 The whole French army,
and even Napoleon himself with his staff, were not on the far side of
the streams and hollows of Sokolnitz and Schlappanitz beyond which we
intended to take up our position and begin the action, but were on this
side, so close to our own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye could
distinguish a mounted man from one on foot.
 He gazed silently at the hills
which seemed to rise out of the sea of mist and on which the Russian
troops were moving in the distance, and he listened to the sounds of
firing in the valley.
 Not a single muscle of his face--which in those
days was still thin--moved.
 From information he had received the evening before, from the
sound of wheels and footsteps heard by the outposts during the night,
by the disorderly movement of the Russian columns, and from all
indications, he saw clearly that the allies believed him to be far away
in front of them, and that the columns moving near Pratzen constituted
the center of the Russian army, and that that center was already
sufficiently weakened to be successfully attacked.


Today was a great day for him--the anniversary of his coronation.
 Before
dawn he had slept for a few hours, and refreshed, vigorous, and in good
spirits, he mounted his horse and rode out into the field in that happy
mood in which everything seems possible and everything succeeds.
 He sat
motionless, looking at the heights visible above the mist, and his cold
face wore that special look of confident, self-complacent happiness that
one sees on the face of a boy happily in love.
 He looked now at the
Pratzen Heights, now at the sun floating up out of the mist.


When the sun had entirely emerged from the fog, and fields and mist were
aglow with dazzling light--as if he had only awaited this to begin the
action--he drew the glove from his shapely white hand, made a sign
with it to the marshals, and ordered the action to begin.






CHAPTER XV


At eight o'clock Kutuzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourth
column, Miloradovich's, the one that was to take the place of
Przebyszewski's and Langeron's columns which had already gone down into
the valley.
 He greeted the men of the foremost regiment and gave them
the order to march, thereby indicating that he intended to lead that
column himself.
 When he had reached the village of Pratzen he halted.

Prince Andrew was behind, among the immense number forming the commander
in chief's suite.
 He was in a state of suppressed excitement and
irritation, though controlledly calm as a man is at the approach of a
long-awaited moment.
 How it would come about he did not
know, but he felt sure it would do so.
 The locality and the position of
our troops were known to him as far as they could be known to anyone
in our army.
 His own strategic plan, which obviously could not now be
carried out, was forgotten.
 It was there Prince Andrew thought the fight would
concentrate.
"

He could not look calmly at the standards of the passing battalions.
 Nothing was visible in the valley to the left into which
our troops had descended and from whence came the sounds of firing.

Above the heights was the dark clear sky, and to the right the vast orb
of the sun.
 In front, far off on the farther shore of that sea of mist,
some wooded hills were discernible, and it was there the enemy probably
was, for something could be descried.
 On the right the Guards were
entering the misty region with a sound of hoofs and wheels and now and
then a gleam of bayonets; to the left beyond the village similar masses
of cavalry came up and disappeared in the sea of mist.
 That morning Kutuzov seemed
worn and irritable.
 The infantry passing before him came to a halt
without any command being given, apparently obstructed by something in
front.


"Do order them to form into battalion columns and go round the village!"
he said angrily to a general who had ridden up.
 "Don't you understand,
your excellency, my dear sir, that you must not defile through narrow
village streets when we are marching against the enemy?"

"I intended to re-form them beyond the village, your excellency,"
answered the general.


Kutuzov laughed bitterly.
 According to the
dispositions.
.
 "Who told you that?.

Kindly do as you are ordered.
"

An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes in his hat
galloped up to Kutuzov and asked in the Emperor's name had the fourth
column advanced into action.


"Go, my dear fellow, and see whether the third division has passed the
village.
"

Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him.


"And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted," he added.
 "What are
they doing? What are they doing?" he murmured to himself, still not
replying to the Austrian.


Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance, he stopped
the third division and convinced himself that there really were no
sharpshooters in front of our columns.
 The colonel at the head of the
regiment was much surprised at the commander in chief's order to throw
out skirmishers.
 He had felt perfectly sure that there were other troops
in front of him and that the enemy must be at least six miles away.

There was really nothing to be seen in front except a barren descent
hidden by dense mist.
 Having given orders in the commander in chief's
name to rectify this omission, Prince Andrew galloped back.
 The
troops were no longer moving, but stood with the butts of their muskets
on the ground.


"All right, all right!" he said to Prince Andrew, and turned to a
general who, watch in hand, was saying it was time they started as all
the left-flank columns had already descended.


"Plenty of time, your excellency," muttered Kutuzov in the midst of a
yawn.
 "Plenty of time," he repeated.


Just then at a distance behind Kutuzov was heard the sound of regiments
saluting, and this sound rapidly came nearer along the whole extended
line of the advancing Russian columns.
 Evidently the person they were
greeting was riding quickly.
 When the soldiers of the regiment in front
of which Kutuzov was standing began to shout, he rode a little to one
side and looked round with a frown.
 Along the road from Pratzen galloped
what looked like a squadron of horsemen in various uniforms.
 One in a black uniform with
white plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed chestnut horse, the other who
was in a white uniform rode a black one.
 Kutuzov, affecting the manners of an old
soldier at the front, gave the command "Attention!" and rode up to the
Emperors with a salute.
 His whole appearance and manner were suddenly
transformed.
 He put on the air of a subordinate who obeys without
reasoning.
 With an affectation of respect which evidently struck
Alexander unpleasantly, he rode up and saluted.


This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy face
of the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and vanished.

After his illness he looked rather thinner that day than on the field of
Olmutz where Bolkonski had seen him for the first time abroad, but there
was still the same bewitching combination of majesty and mildness in his
fine gray eyes, and on his delicate lips the same capacity for varying
expression and the same prevalent appearance of goodhearted innocent
youth.
 He was slightly flushed after galloping two
miles, and reining in his horse he sighed restfully and looked round
at the faces of his suite, young and animated as his own.
 He beckoned to one of his white adjutants and asked
some question--"Most likely he is asking at what o'clock they started,"
thought Prince Andrew, watching his old acquaintance with a smile
he could not repress as he recalled his reception at Brunn.
 In the
Emperors' suite were the picked young orderly officers of the Guard and
line regiments, Russian and Austrian.


As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fields enters
a stuffy room, so a whiff of youthfulness, energy, and confidence of
success reached Kutuzov's cheerless staff with the galloping advent of
all these brilliant young men.


"Why aren't you beginning, Michael Ilarionovich?" said the Emperor
Alexander hurriedly to Kutuzov, glancing courteously at the same time at
the Emperor Francis.


"I am waiting, Your Majesty," answered Kutuzov, bending forward
respectfully.


The Emperor, frowning slightly, bent his ear forward as if he had not
quite heard.


"Waiting, Your Majesty," repeated Kutuzov.
 (Prince Andrew noted that
Kutuzov's upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the word "waiting.
")
"Not all the columns have formed up yet, Your Majesty.


In the Emperor's suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressed
dissatisfaction and reproach.
 "Old though he may be, he should not, he
certainly should not, speak like that," their glances seemed to say.
 The silence lasted for about a
minute.


"However, if you command it, Your Majesty," said Kutuzov, lifting his
head and again assuming his former tone of a dull, unreasoning, but
submissive general.


He touched his horse and having called Miloradovich, the commander of
the column, gave him the order to advance.


As this Apsheron battalion marched by, the red-faced Miloradovich,
without his greatcoat, with his Orders on his breast and an enormous
tuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one side with its corners front
and back, galloped strenuously forward, and with a dashing salute reined
in his horse before the Emperor.


"God be with you, general!" said the Emperor.


"Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilite, sire,"
* he answered gaily, raising nevertheless ironic smiles among the
gentlemen of the Tsar's suite by his poor French.



     * "Indeed, Sire, we shall do everything it is possible to
     do, Sire.
"


Miloradovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a little
behind the Emperor.
 The Apsheron men, excited by the Tsar's presence,
passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold, brisk
pace.


"Lads!" shouted Miloradovich in a loud, self-confident, and cheery
voice, obviously so elated by the sound of firing, by the prospect
of battle, and by the sight of the gallant Apsherons, his comrades in
Suvorov's time, now passing so gallantly before the Emperors, that
he forgot the sovereigns' presence.
 "Lads, it's not the first village
you've had to take," cried he.


"Glad to do our best!" shouted the soldiers.


The Emperor's horse started at the sudden cry.
 This horse that had
carried the sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the
field of Austerlitz, enduring the heedless blows of his left foot and
pricking its ears at the sound of shots just as it had done on the
Empress' Field, not understanding the significance of the firing, nor
of the nearness of the Emperor Francis' black cob, nor of all that was
being said, thought, and felt that day by its rider.


The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a
remark to him, pointing to the gallant Apsherons.






CHAPTER XVI


Kutuzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind the
carabineers.


When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column he
stopped at a solitary, deserted house that had probably once been an
inn, where two roads parted.
 Both of them led downhill and troops were
marching along both.


The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly visible
about a mile and a half off on the opposite heights.
 Down below, on
the left, the firing became more distinct.
 Kutuzov had stopped and was
speaking to an Austrian general.
 Prince Andrew, who was a little behind
looking at them, turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass.


"Look, look!" said this adjutant, looking not at the troops in the
distance, but down the hill before him.
 "It's the French!"

The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass, trying
to snatch it from one another.
 The expression on all their faces
suddenly changed to one of horror.
.
 No!.
.
 Yes, see it is!.
.
 for certain.
.
.


With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right, not more
than five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standing, a dense French
column coming up to meet the Apsherons.


"Here it is! The decisive moment has arrived.
 My turn has come," thought
Prince Andrew, and striking his horse he rode up to Kutuzov.
 But at that
very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round, firing was heard quite
close at hand, and a voice of naive terror barely two steps from Prince
Andrew shouted, "Brothers! All's lost!" And at this as if at a command,
everyone began to run.


Confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to where five
minutes before the troops had passed the Emperors.
 Not only would it
have been difficult to stop that crowd, it was even impossible not to
be carried back with it oneself.
 Bolkonski only tried not to lose touch
with it, and looked around bewildered and unable to grasp what was
happening in front of him.
 Kutuzov remained in the same place
and without answering drew out a handkerchief.
 Blood was flowing from
his cheek.
 Prince Andrew forced his way to him.


"The wound is not here, it is there!" said Kutuzov, pressing the
handkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing soldiers.

"Stop them!" he shouted, and at the same moment, probably realizing that
it was impossible to stop them, spurred his horse and rode to the right.
 One was shouting, "Get on! Why
are you hindering us?" Another in the same place turned round and fired
in the air; a third was striking the horse Kutuzov himself rode.
 Having forced his way out of the crowd of
fugitives, Prince Andrew, trying to keep near Kutuzov, saw on the slope
of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that was still firing and
Frenchmen running toward it.
 Higher up stood some Russian infantry,
neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward with the
fleeing crowd.
 Of Kutuzov's suite only four remained.
 They were all
pale and exchanged looks in silence.


"Stop those wretches!" gasped Kutuzov to the regimental commander,
pointing to the flying soldiers; but at that instant, as if to punish
him for those words, bullets flew hissing across the regiment and across
Kutuzov's suite like a flock of little birds.


The French had attacked the battery and, seeing Kutuzov, were firing
at him.
 After this volley the regimental commander clutched at his leg;
several soldiers fell, and a second lieutenant who was holding the
flag let it fall from his hands.
 It swayed and fell, but caught on the
muskets of the nearest soldiers.
 The soldiers started firing without
orders.
.
.
.

"Bolkonski!" he whispered, his voice trembling from a consciousness
of the feebleness of age, "Bolkonski!" he whispered, pointing to the
disordered battalion and at the enemy, "what's that?"

But before he had finished speaking, Prince Andrew, feeling tears of
shame and anger choking him, had already leapt from his horse and run to
the standard.


"Forward, lads!" he shouted in a voice piercing as a child's.
 Several
soldiers fell.


And really he only ran a few steps alone.
 A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flag
that was swaying from its weight in Prince Andrew's hands, but he
was immediately killed.
 Prince Andrew again seized the standard and,
dragging it by the staff, ran on with the battalion.
 He heard the whistle of bullets above him unceasingly and
to right and left of him soldiers continually groaned and dropped.
 He could distinctly see the
distraught yet angry expression on the faces of these two men, who
evidently did not realize what they were doing.


"What are they about?" thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them.
 "Why
doesn't the red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed? Why doesn't the
Frenchman stab him? He will not get away before the Frenchman remembers
his bayonet and stabs him.
.
.
 It
seemed to him as though one of the soldiers near him hit him on the head
with the full swing of a bludgeon.


"What's this? Am I falling? My legs are giving way," thought he, and
fell on his back.
 He opened his eyes, hoping to see how the struggle of
the Frenchmen with the gunners ended, whether the red-haired gunner had
been killed or not and whether the cannon had been captured or saved.

But he saw nothing.
 Above him there was now nothing but the sky--the
lofty sky, not clear yet still immeasurably lofty, with gray clouds
gliding slowly across it.
 "How quiet, peaceful, and solemn; not at all
as I ran," thought Prince Andrew--"not as we ran, shouting and fighting,
not at all as the gunner and the Frenchman with frightened and angry
faces struggled for the mop: how differently do those clouds glide
across that lofty infinite sky! How was it I did not see that lofty sky
before? And how happy I am to have found it at last! Yes! All is vanity,
all falsehood, except that infinite sky.
 There is nothing, nothing, but
that.

Thank God!.
.
.
 Not wishing to agree to Dolgorukov's demand to
commence the action, and wishing to avert responsibility from himself,
Prince Bagration proposed to Dolgorukov to send to inquire of the
commander in chief.
 He sent him.


"You can give the message to His Majesty," said Dolgorukov, hurriedly
interrupting Bagration.


All his wishes were being fulfilled that morning: there was to be a
general engagement in which he was taking part, more than that, he was
orderly to the bravest general, and still more, he was going with a
message to Kutuzov, perhaps even to the sovereign himself.
 On receiving the order he gave his horse the rein and
galloped along the line.


He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase one another
down the hillsides, and clouds of cannon smoke rolling, spreading,
and mingling with one another.
 He could also, by the gleam of bayonets
visible through the smoke, make out moving masses of infantry and narrow
lines of artillery with green caissons.


Rostov stopped his horse for a moment on a hillock to see what was going
on, but strain his attention as he would he could not understand or make
out anything of what was happening: there in the smoke men of some sort
were moving about, in front and behind moved lines of troops; but why,
whither, and who they were, it was impossible to make out.


"How it will be there I don't know, but all will be well!" thought
Rostov.


After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part of the
line (the Guards) was already in action.


"So much the better! I shall see it close," he thought.


He was riding almost along the front line.
 They were our Uhlans who with disordered
ranks were returning from the attack.


"That is no business of mine," he thought.
 He had not ridden many
hundred yards after that before he saw to his left, across the whole
width of the field, an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white
uniforms, mounted on black horses, trotting straight toward him and
across his path.
 Rostov put his horse to full gallop to get out of the
way of these men, and he would have got clear had they continued at the
same speed, but they kept increasing their pace, so that some of the
horses were already galloping.
 Rostov heard the thud of their hoofs and
the jingle of their weapons and saw their horses, their figures, and
even their faces, more and more distinctly.
 They were our Horse Guards,
advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming to meet them.

Rostov could already see their faces and heard the command: "Charge!"
shouted by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred to full speed.

Rostov, fearing to be crushed or swept into the attack on the French,
galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go, but still was
not in time to avoid them.


The last of the Horse Guards, a huge pockmarked fellow, frowned angrily
on seeing Rostov before him, with whom he would inevitably collide.

This Guardsman would certainly have bowled Rostov and his Bedouin over
(Rostov felt himself quite tiny and weak compared to these gigantic men
and horses) had it not occurred to Rostov to flourish his whip before
the eyes of the Guardsman's horse.
 Hardly had the Horse Guards
passed Rostov before he heard them shout, "Hurrah!" and looking back saw
that their foremost ranks were mixed up with some foreign cavalry
with red epaulets, probably French.


At that moment, as the Horse Guards, having passed him, disappeared in
the smoke, Rostov hesitated whether to gallop after them or to go where
he was sent.
 This was the brilliant charge of the Horse Guards that
amazed the French themselves.


When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them and
around them cannon balls were flying, of which he was aware not so
much because he heard their sound as because he saw uneasiness on
the soldiers' faces and unnatural warlike solemnity on those of the
officers.


Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards he heard a
voice calling him by name.


Rostov stopped.


"Have you?" he said.
 "Well, how did it go?"

"We drove them back!" said Boris with animation, growing talkative.
 "Can
you imagine it?" and he began describing how the Guards, having taken
up their position and seeing troops before them, thought they were
Austrians, and all at once discovered from the cannon balls discharged
by those troops that they were themselves in the front line and had
unexpectedly to go into action.


"Where are you off to?" asked Boris.


"With a message to His Majesty.
"

"There he is!" said Boris, thinking Rostov had said "His Highness,"
and pointing to the Grand Duke who with his high shoulders and frowning
brows stood a hundred paces away from them in his helmet and Horse
Guards' jacket, shouting something to a pale, white uniformed Austrian
officer.


"But that's the Grand Duke, and I want the commander in chief or the
Emperor," said Rostov, and was about to spur his horse.
 "Count! I am wounded in my right hand" (and he showed his
bleeding hand with a handkerchief tied round it) "and I remained at the
front.
 I held my sword in my left hand, Count.
 All our family--the von
Bergs--have been knights!"

He said something more, but Rostov did not wait to hear it and rode
away.


Having passed the Guards and traversed an empty space, Rostov, to avoid
again getting in front of the first line as he had done when the Horse
Guards charged, followed the line of reserves, going far round the place
where the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard.
 Suddenly he
heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind our troops,
where he could never have expected the enemy to be.


"What can it be?" he thought.
 "But be that what it may,"
he reflected, "there is no riding round it now.
"

The foreboding of evil that had suddenly come over Rostov was more and
more confirmed the farther he rode into the region behind the village of
Pratzen, which was full of troops of all kinds.


"What does it mean? What is it? Whom are they firing at? Who is firing?"
Rostov kept asking as he came up to Russian and Austrian soldiers
running in confused crowds across his path.


"Kill the Germans!" shouted one.


"May the devil take them--the traitors!"

"Zum Henker diese Russen!" * muttered a German.



    * "Hang these Russians!"


Several wounded men passed along the road, and words of abuse, screams,
and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then the firing died down.

Rostov learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had been firing
at one another.
 "And here, where at any
moment the Emperor may see them.
.
.
 He
urged on his already weary horse to get quickly past these crowds, but
the farther he went the more disorganized they were.


"Where is the Emperor? Where is Kutuzov?" Rostov kept asking everyone he
could stop, but got no answer from anyone.


At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer.
 The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in a
carriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road and
that he was dangerously wounded.


"It can't be!" said Rostov.
 "It must have been someone else.
.
.
 There he sat in the
carriage as pale as anything.
 How they made the four black horses fly!
Gracious me, they did rattle past! It's time I knew the Imperial horses
and Ilya Ivanych.
 I don't think Ilya drives anyone except the Tsar!"

Rostov let go of the horse and was about to ride on, when a wounded
officer passing by addressed him:

"Who is it you want?" he asked.
"

"Not killed--wounded!" another officer corrected him.
 Go that way, to that village, all the commanders are
there," said the officer, pointing to the village of Hosjeradek, and he
walked on.


Rostov rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was now
going.
 What need to hurry? What was he now to say
to the Tsar or to Kutuzov, even if they were alive and unwounded?

"Take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!" a
soldier shouted to him.
 "They'd kill you there!"

"Oh, what are you talking about?" said another.
 "Where is he to go? That
way is nearer.
"

Rostov considered, and then went in the direction where they said he
would be killed.
 The French had not yet
occupied that region, and the Russians--the uninjured and slightly
wounded--had left it long ago.
 All about the field, like heaps of manure
on well-kept plowland, lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded to each
couple of acres.
 The wounded crept together in twos and threes and one
could hear their distressing screams and groans, sometimes feigned--or
so it seemed to Rostov.


The French, who had ceased firing at this field strewn with dead and
wounded where there was no one left to fire at, on seeing an adjutant
riding over it trained a gun on him and fired several shots.
 Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle
was lost.
 Some said the report that the Emperor was wounded was
correct, others that it was not, and explained the false rumor that had
spread by the fact that the Emperor's carriage had really galloped from
the field of battle with the pale and terrified Ober-Hofmarschal Count
Tolstoy, who had ridden out to the battlefield with others in the
Emperor's suite.
 One officer told Rostov that he had seen someone from
headquarters behind the village to the left, and thither Rostov rode,
not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience.
 One with a white plume in his hat seemed familiar to
Rostov; the other on a beautiful chestnut horse (which Rostov fancied he
had seen before) rode up to the ditch, struck his horse with his spurs,
and giving it the rein leaped lightly over.
 Turning the horse sharply,
he again jumped the ditch, and deferentially addressed the horseman with
the white plumes, evidently suggesting that he should do the same.
 The
rider, whose figure seemed familiar to Rostov and involuntarily riveted
his attention, made a gesture of refusal with his head and hand and
by that gesture Rostov instantly recognized his lamented and adored
monarch.


"But it can't be he, alone in the midst of this empty field!" thought
Rostov.
 At that moment Alexander turned his head and Rostov saw the
beloved features that were so deeply engraved on his memory.
 The Emperor
was pale, his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow, but the charm, the
mildness of his features, was all the greater.
 He knew that he might and even ought to
go straight to him and give the message Dolgorukov had ordered him to
deliver.


But as a youth in love trembles, is unnerved, and dares not utter the
thoughts he has dreamed of for nights, but looks around for help or a
chance of delay and flight when the longed-for moment comes and he is
alone with her, so Rostov, now that he had attained what he had longed
for more than anything else in the world, did not know how to approach
the Emperor, and a thousand reasons occurred to him why it would be
inconvenient, unseemly, and impossible to do so.


"What! It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage of his
being alone and despondent! A strange face may seem unpleasant or
painful to him at this moment of sorrow; besides, what can I say to him
now, when my heart fails me and my mouth feels dry at the mere sight of
him?" Not one of the innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor that
he had composed in his imagination could he now recall.


"Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the right
flank now that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost?
No, certainly I must not approach him, I must not intrude on his
reflections.
 Better die a thousand times than risk receiving an unkind
look or bad opinion from him," Rostov decided; and sorrowfully and with
a heart full despair he rode away, continually looking back at the Tsar,
who still remained in the same attitude of indecision.


While Rostov was thus arguing with himself and riding sadly away,
Captain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot, and seeing the
Emperor at once rode up to him, offered his services, and assisted him
to cross the ditch on foot.

Rostov from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke
long and warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor, evidently weeping,
covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll's hand.


"And I might have been in his place!" thought Rostov, and hardly
restraining his tears of pity for the Emperor, he rode on in utter
despair, not knowing where to or why he was now riding.


His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness was
the cause of his grief.


He might.
.
 It
was a unique chance to show his devotion to the Emperor and he had not
made use of it.
.
 "What have I done?" thought he.
 And he turned round
and galloped back to the place where he had seen the Emperor, but there
was no one beyond the ditch now.
 Only some carts and carriages were
passing by.
 From one of the drivers he learned that Kutuzov's staff were
not far off, in the village the vehicles were going to.
 Rostov
followed them.
 Then came a cart, and behind that walked an old,
bandy-legged domestic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin coat.


"What?" answered the old man absent-mindedly.


"Go, Tit! Thresh a bit!"

"Oh, you fool!" said the old man, spitting angrily.
 Some time passed in
silence, and then the same joke was repeated.
 More
than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French.


The remains of Langeron's and Dokhturov's mingled forces were crowding
around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of Augesd.


After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade
(delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from numerous
batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights, directed at our
retreating forces.


In the rearguard, Dokhturov and others rallying some battalions kept up
a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops.
 It
was growing dusk.
 On the narrow Augesd Dam where for so many years the
old miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap peacefully
angling, while his grandson, with shirt sleeves rolled up, handled the
floundering silvery fish in the watering can, on that dam over which for
so many years Moravians in shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully
driven their two-horse carts loaded with wheat and had returned dusty
with flour whitening their carts--on that narrow dam amid the wagons and
the cannon, under the horses' hoofs and between the wagon wheels, men
disfigured by fear of death now crowded together, crushing one another,
dying, stepping over the dying and killing one another, only to move on
a few steps and be killed themselves in the same way.


Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around, or
a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng, killing some and
splashing with blood those near them.
 A cannon ball killed someone
behind them, another fell in front and splashed Dolokhov with blood.


"Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved, remain here another
two minutes and it is certain death," thought each one.


Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the edge of
the dam, throwing two soldiers off their feet, and ran onto the slippery
ice that covered the millpool.
 "It bears!.
.
.
"

The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked, and it was plain that it
would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very soon even
under his weight alone.
 The general on horseback at the
entrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to address
Dolokhov.


"Get onto the ice, over the ice! Go on! Turn! Don't you hear? Go on!"
innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck the
general, the men themselves not knowing what, or why, they were
shouting.


One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto the
ice.
 Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen pond.
 He tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist.

The nearest soldiers shrank back, the gun driver stopped his horse, but
from behind still came the shouts: "Onto the ice, why do you stop? Go
on! Go on!" And cries of horror were heard in the crowd.
 The soldiers
near the gun waved their arms and beat the horses to make them turn and
move on.
 The horses moved off the bank.


Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flop onto the
ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that covered
the dam, the pond, and the bank.






CHAPTER XIX


On the Pratzen Heights, where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his
hand, lay Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleeding profusely and unconsciously
uttering a gentle, piteous, and childlike moan.


Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still.
 Suddenly he again felt that he was
alive and suffering from a burning, lacerating pain in his head.


"Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but saw
today?" was his first thought.
 "And I did not know this suffering
either," he thought.
 "Yes, I did not know anything, anything at all till
now.
 But where am I?"

He listened and heard the sound of approaching horses, and voices
speaking French.
 Above him again was the same lofty
sky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher, and
between them gleamed blue infinity.
 He did not turn his head and did not
see those who, judging by the sound of hoofs and voices, had ridden up
and stopped near him.


It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp.


"Fine men!" remarked Napoleon, looking at a dead Russian grenadier,
who, with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape, lay on his
stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide.
 (The flag had already
been taken by the French as a trophy.
)

"That's a fine death!" said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkonski.


Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was
Napoleon who said it.
 He heard the speaker addressed as Sire.
 But he
heard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly.
 Not only
did they not interest him, but he took no notice of them and at once
forgot them.
 He knew it
was Napoleon--his hero--but at that moment Napoleon seemed to him such a
small, insignificant creature compared with what was passing now between
himself and that lofty infinite sky with the clouds flying over it.
 At
that moment it meant nothing to him who might be standing over him, or
what was said of him; he was only glad that people were standing near
him and only wished that they would help him and bring him back to
life, which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned to
understand it so differently.
 He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak, sickly groan
which aroused his own pity.
 "Lift this young man up and carry him
to the dressing station.
"

Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat in
hand, rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory.


Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness from the
terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher, the jolting while
being moved, and the probing of his wound at the dressing station.

During this transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to look
about him and even speak.
"

"There are so many prisoners today, nearly the whole Russian army, that
he is probably tired of them," said another officer.
 Beside him stood a lad of nineteen, also a wounded officer of
the Horse Guards.


"You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander's regiment of Horse
Guards?" asked Napoleon.


"Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably," said Napoleon.


"The praise of a great commander is a soldier's highest reward," said
Repnin.


"I bestow it with pleasure," said Napoleon.


After looking at him Napoleon smiled.


"He's very young to come to meddle with us.
"

"Youth is no hindrance to courage," muttered Sukhtelen in a failing
voice.


"A splendid reply!" said Napoleon.
 "How do you feel, mon brave?"

Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a few
words to the soldiers who were carrying him, now with his eyes fixed
straight on Napoleon, he was silent.
.
.
 So insignificant at that moment
seemed to him all the interests that engrossed Napoleon, so mean did his
hero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victory appear,
compared to the lofty, equitable, and kindly sky which he had seen and
understood, that he could not answer him.


Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with the
stern and solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood,
suffering, and the nearness of death aroused in him.


The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said to one of
the officers as he went: "Have these gentlemen attended to and taken
to my bivouac; let my doctor, Larrey, examine their wounds.


"It would be good," thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the icon his
sister had hung round his neck with such emotion and reverence, "it
would be good if everything were as clear and simple as it seems to
Mary.
 How good it would be to know where to seek for help in this life,
and what to expect after it beyond the grave! How happy and calm I
should be if I could now say: 'Lord, have mercy on me!'.
.
"

The stretchers moved on.


The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presented
itself to him.
 He was already enjoying that happiness when that
little Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look of
shortsighted delight at the misery of others, and doubts and torments
had followed, and only the heavens promised peace.
 Toward morning
all these dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness of
unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon's doctor,
Larrey, was much more likely to end in death than in convalescence.


"He is a nervous, bilious subject," said Larrey, "and will not recover.
"

And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was left to the care of
the inhabitants of the district.
 Denisov
was going home to Voronezh and Rostov persuaded him to travel with him
as far as Moscow and to stay with him there.
 Meeting a comrade at the
last post station but one before Moscow, Denisov had drunk three bottles
of wine with him and, despite the jolting ruts across the snow-covered
road, did not once wake up on the way to Moscow, but lay at the bottom
of the sleigh beside Rostov, who grew more and more impatient the nearer
they got to Moscow.


Denisov gave no answer.


"There's the corner at the crossroads, where the cabman, Zakhar, has his
stand, and there's Zakhar himself and still the same horse! And here's
the little shop where we used to buy gingerbread! Can't you hurry up?
Now then!"

"Which house is it?" asked the driver.
 "Of course, it's our house! Denisov, Denisov! We're
almost there!"

Denisov raised his head, coughed, and made no answer.


"Dmitri," said Rostov to his valet on the box, "those lights are in our
house, aren't they?"

"Yes, sir, and there's a light in your father's study.
"

"Then they've not gone to bed yet? What do you think? Mind now,
don't forget to put out my new coat," added Rostov, fingering his new
mustache.
 "Do wake up,
Vaska!" he went on, turning to Denisov, whose head was again nodding.

"Come, get on! You shall have three rubles for vodka--get on!" Rostov
shouted, when the sleigh was only three houses from his door.
 At last the sleigh bore to the
right, drew up at an entrance, and Rostov saw overhead the old familiar
cornice with a bit of plaster broken off, the porch, and the post by the
side of the pavement.
 He sprang out before the sleigh stopped, and ran
into the hall.
 The house stood cold and silent, as if quite regardless
of who had come to it.
 The well-known old door handle,
which always angered the countess when it was not properly cleaned,
turned as loosely as ever.
 A solitary tallow candle burned in the
anteroom.
 Prokofy, the footman, who was so
strong that he could lift the back of the carriage from behind, sat
plaiting slippers out of cloth selvedges.


"Gracious heavens! The young count!" he cried, recognizing his
young master.


"All well?" asked Rostov, drawing away his arm.


"Yes, God be thanked! Yes! They've just finished supper.
 Let me have a
look at you, your excellency.
"

"Is everything quite all right?"

"The Lord be thanked, yes!"

Rostov, who had completely forgotten Denisov, not wishing anyone to
forestall him, threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through the
large dark ballroom.
 All was the same: there were the same old card
tables and the same chandelier with a cover over it; but someone had
already seen the young master, and, before he had reached the drawing
room, something flew out from a side door like a tornado and began
hugging and kissing him.
 Another and yet another creature of the same
kind sprang from a second door and a third; more hugging, more kissing,
more outcries, and tears of joy.


"And I did not know.
.
.
"

"Here he is.
.
.
 Kolya, * dear fellow.
.
.
 How he has changed!.
.

Where are the candles?.
.
"


    * Nicholas.



"And me, kiss me!"

"Dearest.
.
 and me!"

Sonya, Natasha, Petya, Anna Mikhaylovna, Vera, and the old count were
all hugging him, and the serfs, men and maids, flocked into the room,
exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing.


Petya, clinging to his legs, kept shouting, "And me too!"

Natasha, after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his face
with kisses, holding him tight by the skirt of his coat, sprang away and
pranced up and down in one place like a goat and shrieked piercingly.


All around were loving eyes glistening with tears of joy, and all around
were lips seeking a kiss.


Sonya too, all rosy red, clung to his arm and, radiant with bliss,
looked eagerly toward his eyes, waiting for the look for which she
longed.
 She gazed at him, not taking
her eyes off him, and smiling and holding her breath.
 He gave her a
grateful look, but was still expectant and looking for someone.
 The old
countess had not yet come.
 But now steps were heard at the door, steps
so rapid that they could hardly be his mother's.


Yet it was she, dressed in a new gown which he did not know, made since
he had left.
 When they
met, she fell on his breast, sobbing.
 She could not lift her face, but
only pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar's jacket.
 Denisov,
who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone, stood there and wiped
his eyes at the sight.


"Vasili Denisov, your son's friend," he said, introducing himself to the
count, who was looking inquiringly at him.
 "Nicholas wrote us.
.


"Darling Denisov!" screamed Natasha, beside herself with rapture,
springing to him, putting her arms round him, and kissing him.
 This
escapade made everybody feel confused.
 Denisov blushed too, but smiled
and, taking Natasha's hand, kissed it.
 His brother and sisters struggled for the places nearest
to him and disputed with one another who should bring him his tea,
handkerchief, and pipe.


Rostov was very happy in the love they showed him; but the first
moment of meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seemed
insufficient, and he kept expecting something more, more and yet more.


Next morning, after the fatigues of their journey, the travelers slept
till ten o'clock.


In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers,
satchels, sabretaches, open portmanteaus, and dirty boots.
 There was a masculine odor and a smell of tobacco.


"Hallo, Gwiska--my pipe!" came Vasili Denisov's husky voice.
 A rustle of
starched petticoats and the whispering and laughter of girls' voices
came from the adjoining room.
 The door was opened a crack and there was
a glimpse of something blue, of ribbons, black hair, and merry faces.

It was Natasha, Sonya, and Petya, who had come to see whether they were
getting up.


"Nicholas! Get up!" Natasha's voice was again heard at the door.


The girls sprang aside.
 Denisov hid his hairy legs under the blanket,
looking with a scared face at his comrade for help.
 The door, having let
Petya in, closed again.
 A sound of laughter came from behind it.
 "Or is it yours?" he said, addressing
the black-mustached Denisov with servile deference.


Rostov hurriedly put something on his feet, drew on his dressing gown,
and went out.
 They hardly gave one
another time to ask questions and give replies concerning a thousand
little matters which could not interest anyone but themselves.


"Oh, how nice, how splendid!" she said to everything.


Rostov felt that, under the influence of the warm rays of love, that
childlike smile which had not once appeared on his face since he left
home now for the first time after eighteen months again brightened his
soul and his face.
" She touched his mustache.


"No, call her you, please! I'll tell you all about it some other time.

No, I'll tell you now.


"I burned this to prove my love for her.
 I just heated a ruler in the
fire and pressed it there!"

Sitting on the sofa with the little cushions on its arms, in what used
to be his old schoolroom, and looking into Natasha's wildly bright eyes,
Rostov re-entered that world of home and childhood which had no meaning
for anyone else, but gave him some of the best joys of his life; and the
burning of an arm with a ruler as a proof of love did not seem to him
senseless, he understood and was not surprised at it.


"Well, and is that all?" he asked.
 She, if she loves anyone, does it
for life, but I don't understand that, I forget quickly.
"

"Well, what then?"

"Well, she loves me and you like that.


"Why, you remember before you went away?.
.
 Well, she says you are to
forget all that.
.
.
 She says: 'I shall love him always, but let him be
free.
' Isn't that lovely and noble! Yes, very noble? Isn't it?" asked
Natasha, so seriously and excitedly that it was evident that what she
was now saying she had talked of before, with tears.


"I never go back on my word," he said.
 "Besides, Sonya is so charming
that only a fool would renounce such happiness.
"

"No, no!" cried Natasha, "she and I have already talked it over.
 We knew
you'd say so.
 It makes it as if you were marrying her because you
must, and that wouldn't do at all.
"

Rostov saw that it had been well considered by them.
 Sonya had already
struck him by her beauty on the preceding day.
 She was a charming girl
of sixteen, evidently passionately in love with him (he did not doubt
that for an instant).
 Why should he not love her now, and even marry
her, Rostov thought, but just now there were so many other pleasures
and interests before him! "Yes, they have taken a wise decision," he
thought, "I must remain free.

Oh, how glad I am to have you!"

"Well, and are you still true to Boris?" he continued.
 "I don't think about him
or anyone else, and I don't want anything of the kind.
"

"Dear me! Then what are you up to now?"

"Now?" repeated Natasha, and a happy smile lit up her face.


"See, I'm standing! See!" she said, but could not maintain herself on
her toes any longer.
"

Rostov laughed so loud and merrily that Denisov, in his bedroom, felt
envious and Natasha could not help joining in.


"No, but don't you think it's nice?" she kept repeating.


"Nice! And so you no longer wish to marry Boris?"

Natasha flared up.
 And I'll tell him so
when I see him!"

"Dear me!" said Rostov.


"Yes, indeed!"

"Oh, well then, good-by: go and dress.
 Is he very terrible, Denisov?"

"Why terrible?" asked Nicholas.
 "No, Vaska is a splendid fellow.
"

"Well then, be quick.
 We'll all have breakfast together.
"

And Natasha rose and went out of the room on tiptoe, like a ballet
dancer, but smiling as only happy girls of fifteen can smile.
 When
Rostov met Sonya in the drawing room, he reddened.
 The evening before, in the first happy moment of
meeting, they had kissed each other, but today they felt it could not
be done; he felt that everybody, including his mother and sisters, was
looking inquiringly at him and watching to see how he would behave with
her.

But their eyes met and said thou, and exchanged tender kisses.
 His looks
thanked her for offering him his freedom and told her that one way or
another he would never cease to love her, for that would be impossible.


"How strange it is," said Vera, selecting a moment when all were silent,
"that Sonya and Nicholas now say you to one another and meet like
strangers.
"

Vera's remark was correct, as her remarks always were, but, like most of
her observations, it made everyone feel uncomfortable, not only Sonya,
Nicholas, and Natasha, but even the old countess, who--dreading
this love affair which might hinder Nicholas from making a brilliant
match--blushed like a girl.
 After a short period of adapting himself
to the old conditions of life, Nicholas found it very pleasant to be
at home again.
 He felt that he had grown up and matured very much.
 His
despair at failing in a Scripture examination, his borrowing money from
Gavril to pay a sleigh driver, his kissing Sonya on the sly--he now
recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind.

Now he was a lieutenant of hussars, in a jacket laced with silver, and
wearing the Cross of St.
 George, awarded to soldiers for bravery in
action, and in the company of well-known, elderly, and respected racing
men was training a trotter of his own for a race.
 He led the mazurka at
the Arkharovs' ball, talked about the war with Field Marshal Kamenski,
visited the English Club, and was on intimate terms with a colonel of
forty to whom Denisov had introduced him.
"

During Rostov's short stay in Moscow, before rejoining the army, he did
not draw closer to Sonya, but rather drifted away from her.
 She was very
pretty and sweet, and evidently deeply in love with him, but he was at
the period of youth when there seems so much to do that there is no time
for that sort of thing and a young man fears to bind himself and prizes
his freedom which he needs for so many other things.
 When he thought of
Sonya, during this stay in Moscow, he said to himself, "Ah, there will
be, and there are, many more such girls somewhere whom I do not yet
know.
 There will be time enough to think about love when I want to, but
now I have no time.
" Besides, it seemed to him that the society of women
was rather derogatory to his manhood.
 The races, the
English Club, sprees with Denisov, and visits to a certain house--that
was another matter and quite the thing for a dashing young hussar!

At the beginning of March, old Count Ilya Rostov was very busy arranging
a dinner in honor of Prince Bagration at the English Club.
 The count had been a member and on the committee of
the Club from the day it was founded.


The count considered.
 Ah, dear me! I was
forgetting.
 We must have another entree.
 Ah, goodness gracious!" he
clutched at his head.
 "Who is going to get me the flowers? Dmitri! Eh,
Dmitri! Gallop off to our Moscow estate," he said to the factotum who
appeared at his call.
 "Hurry off and tell Maksim, the gardener, to set
the serfs to work.
 Say that everything out of the hothouses must be
brought here well wrapped up in felt.
"

Having given several more orders, he was about to go to his "little
countess" to have a rest, but remembering something else of importance,
he returned again, called back the cook and the club steward, and again
began giving orders.
 A light footstep and the clinking of spurs were
heard at the door, and the young count, handsome, rosy, with a dark
little mustache, evidently rested and made sleeker by his easy life in
Moscow, entered the room.
 "Now, if you would only help
a bit! I must have singers too.
"

"Really, Papa, I believe Prince Bagration worried himself less before
the battle of Schon Grabern than you do now," said his son with a smile.


The old count pretended to be angry.


"Yes, you talk, but try it yourself!"

And the count turned to the cook, who, with a shrewd and respectful
expression, looked observantly and sympathetically at the father and
son.


"What have the young people come to nowadays, eh, Feoktist?" said he.

"Laughing at us old fellows!"

"That's so, your excellency, all they have to do is to eat a good
dinner, but providing it and serving it all up, that's not their
business!"

"That's it, that's it!" exclaimed the count, and gaily seizing his son
by both hands, he cried, "Now I've got you, so take the sleigh and pair
at once, and go to Bezukhov's, and tell him 'Count Ilya has sent you
to ask for strawberries and fresh pineapples.
' We can't get them from
anyone else.
"

"And am I to bring the gypsy girls along with him?" asked Nicholas,
laughing.
.
 Though she came upon the count in his
dressing gown every day, he invariably became confused and begged her to
excuse his costume.


"No matter at all, my dear count," she said, meekly closing her eyes.

"But I'll go to Bezukhov's myself.
 Pierre has arrived, and now we shall
get anything we want from his hothouses.
 I have to see him in any case.
 Thank God, Boris is now on the
staff.
"

The count was delighted at Anna Mikhaylovna's taking upon herself one of
his commissions and ordered the small closed carriage for her.
 Is his wife with him?"
he asked.


Anna Mikhaylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadness was depicted
on her face.


"Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate," she said.


Anna Mikhaylovna sighed deeply.


"Dolokhov, Mary Ivanovna's son," she said in a mysterious whisper, "has
compromised her completely, they say.
"

Next day, the third of March, soon after one o'clock, two hundred and
fifty members of the English Club and fifty guests were awaiting the
guest of honor and hero of the Austrian campaign, Prince Bagration, to
dinner.


On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz, Moscow had
been bewildered.
 In the English Club, where all who were distinguished, important,
and well informed foregathered when the news began to arrive in
December, nothing was said about the war and the last battle, as
though all were in a conspiracy of silence.
 The men who set the tone in
conversation--Count Rostopchin, Prince Yuri Dolgorukov, Valuev, Count
Markov, and Prince Vyazemski--did not show themselves at the Club, but
met in private houses in intimate circles, and the Moscovites who took
their opinions from others--Ilya Rostov among them--remained for a
while without any definite opinion on the subject of the war and without
leaders.

But after a while, just as a jury comes out of its room, the bigwigs
who guided the Club's opinion reappeared, and everybody began speaking
clearly and definitely.
 Reasons were found for the incredible,
unheard-of, and impossible event of a Russian defeat, everything became
clear, and in all corners of Moscow the same things began to be
said.
 But the army, the Russian army, everyone declared,
was extraordinary and had achieved miracles of valor.
 But the hero of heroes was Prince
Bagration, distinguished by his Schon Grabern affair and by the retreat
from Austerlitz, where he alone had withdrawn his column unbroken and
had all day beaten back an enemy force twice as numerous as his own.
 In his person, honor was shown to a simple fighting Russian
soldier without connections and intrigues, and to one who was associated
by memories of the Italian campaign with the name of Suvorov.
 Kutuzov
no one spoke of, except some who abused him in whispers, calling him a
court weathercock and an old satyr.


All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgorukov's saying: "If you go on modeling
and modeling you must get smeared with clay," suggesting consolation
for our defeat by the memory of former victories; and the words of
Rostopchin, that French soldiers have to be incited to battle by
highfalutin words, and Germans by logical arguments to show them that it
is more dangerous to run away than to advance, but that Russian soldiers
only need to be restrained and held back! On all sides, new and fresh
anecdotes were heard of individual examples of heroism shown by our
officers and men at Austerlitz.
 One had saved a standard, another had
killed five Frenchmen, a third had loaded five cannon singlehanded.
 Of
Bolkonski, nothing was said, and only those who knew him intimately
regretted that he had died so young, leaving a pregnant wife with his
eccentric father.






CHAPTER III


On that third of March, all the rooms in the English Club were filled
with a hum of conversation, like the hum of bees swarming in springtime.

The members and guests of the Club wandered hither and thither, sat,
stood, met, and separated, some in uniform and some in evening dress,
and a few here and there with powdered hair and in Russian kaftans.
"

Nesvitski was there as an old member of the Club.
 Here, as
elsewhere, he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience to his
wealth, and being in the habit of lording it over these people, he
treated them with absent-minded contempt.


By his age he should have belonged to the younger men, but by his wealth
and connections he belonged to the groups old and honored guests, and
so he went from one group to another.
 Some of the most important old men
were the center of groups which even strangers approached respectfully
to hear the voices of well-known men.
 Rostopchin was describing how
the Russians had been overwhelmed by flying Austrians and had had to
force their way through them with bayonets.


Valuev was confidentially telling that Uvarov had been sent from
Petersburg to ascertain what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz.


In the third circle, Naryshkin was speaking of the meeting of the
Austrian Council of War at which Suvorov crowed like a cock in reply to
the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals.


Count Ilya Rostov, hurried and preoccupied, went about in his soft boots
between the dining and drawing rooms, hastily greeting the important and
unimportant, all of whom he knew, as if they were all equals, while his
eyes occasionally sought out his fine well-set-up young son, resting
on him and winking joyfully at him.


"Please come and visit us.
.
 you know my brave boy.
.
.
.
.


Bagration appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword,
which, in accord with the Club custom, he had given up to the hall
porter.
 Bagration was embarrassed, not
wishing to avail himself of their courtesy, and this caused some delay
at the doors, but after all he did at last enter first.
 It was
at first impossible to enter the drawing-room door for the crowd of
members and guests jostling one another and trying to get a good look at
Bagration over each other's shoulders, as if he were some rare animal.

Count Ilya Rostov, laughing and repeating the words, "Make way, dear
boy! Make way, make way!" pushed through the crowd more energetically
than anyone, led the guests into the drawing room, and seated them on
the center sofa.
 Count Ilya, again thrusting his way through the
crowd, went out of the drawing room and reappeared a minute later with
another committeeman, carrying a large silver salver which he presented
to Prince Bagration.
 Bagration, on seeing the salver, glanced around
in dismay, as though seeking help.
 Someone obligingly took the dish from Bagration
(or he would, it seemed, have held it till evening and have gone in to
dinner with it) and drew his attention to the verses.


"Well, I will read them, then!" Bagration seemed to say, and, fixing
his weary eyes on the paper, began to read them with a fixed and serious
expression.
 But the author himself took the verses and began reading
them aloud.


But before he had finished reading, a stentorian major-domo announced
that dinner was ready! The door opened, and from the dining room came
the resounding strains of the polonaise:

   Conquest's joyful thunder waken,
   Triumph, valiant Russians, now!.
 Three hundred persons took their seats in the
dining room, according to their rank and importance: the more important
nearer to the honored guest, as naturally as water flows deepest where
the land lies lowest.


Nicholas Rostov, with Denisov and his new acquaintance, Dolokhov, sat
almost at the middle of the table.
 Facing them sat Pierre, beside Prince
Nesvitski.


His efforts had not been in vain.
 The dinner, both the Lenten and the
other fare, was splendid, yet he could not feel quite at ease till the
end of the meal.
 He winked at the butler, whispered directions to the
footmen, and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety.
 Everything
was excellent.
 With the second course, a gigantic sterlet (at sight of
which Ilya Rostov blushed with self-conscious pleasure), the footmen
began popping corks and filling the champagne glasses.
 After the fish,
which made a certain sensation, the count exchanged glances with the
other committeemen.
 "There will be many toasts, it's time to begin," he
whispered, and taking up his glass, he rose.
 All were silent, waiting
for what he would say.


"To the health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!" he cried, and at the same
moment his kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy and enthusiasm.
 The
band immediately struck up "Conquest's joyful thunder waken.
 He nearly wept.
 "To the health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!"
he roared, "Hurrah!" and emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it to
the floor.
 Many followed his example, and the loud shouting continued
for a long time.
 The old count rose once more, glanced at a
note lying beside his plate, and proposed a toast, "To the health of the
hero of our last campaign, Prince Peter Ivanovich Bagration!" and again
his blue eyes grew moist.
 "Hurrah!" cried the three hundred voices
again, but instead of the band a choir began singing a cantata composed
by Paul Ivanovich Kutuzov:

   Russians! O'er all barriers on!
   Courage conquest guarantees;
   Have we not Bagration?
   He brings foe men to their knees,.
 etc.






CHAPTER IV


Pierre sat opposite Dolokhov and Nicholas Rostov.
 As usual, he ate and
drank much, and eagerly.
 But those who knew him intimately noticed that
some great change had come over him that day.
 His face was depressed and gloomy.


The unsolved problem that tormented him was caused by hints given by the
princess, his cousin, at Moscow, concerning Dolokhov's intimacy with his
wife, and by an anonymous letter he had received that morning, which in
the mean jocular way common to anonymous letters said that he saw badly
through his spectacles, but that his wife's connection with Dolokhov was
a secret to no one but himself.
 Involuntarily recalling his
wife's past and her relations with Dolokhov, Pierre saw clearly that
what was said in the letter might be true, or might at least seem to be
true had it not referred to his wife.


"Yes, he is very handsome," thought Pierre, "and I know him.
 I know and understand what a spice that would add to the pleasure
of deceiving me, if it really were true.
 Yes, if it were true, but I
do not believe it.
" He
remembered the expression Dolokhov's face assumed in his moments of
cruelty, as when tying the policeman to the bear and dropping them into
the water, or when he challenged a man to a duel without any reason,
or shot a post-boy's horse with a pistol.
 "Yes, he is a bully," thought
Pierre, "to kill a man means nothing to him.
 It must seem to him that
everyone is afraid of him, and that must please him.
 He must think that
I, too, am afraid of him--and in fact I am afraid of him," he thought,
and again he felt something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul.
 When the Emperor's health was drunk,
Pierre, lost in thought, did not rise or lift his glass.
 "Don't you hear it's His Majesty the Emperor's health?"

Pierre sighed, rose submissively, emptied his glass, and, waiting till
all were seated again, turned with his kindly smile to Rostov.


"One should make up to the husbands of pretty women," said Denisov.


Pierre did not catch what they were saying, but knew they were talking
about him.
 He reddened and turned away.


"Here's to the health of lovely women, Peterkin--and their lovers!" he
added.
 He was just going to take it when Dolokhov, leaning across,
snatched it from his hand and began reading it.
 Pierre looked at
Dolokhov and his eyes dropped, the something terrible and monstrous that
had tormented him all dinnertime rose and took possession of him.


"How dare you take it?" he shouted.


Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was addressed, Nesvitski and the
neighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bezukhov.
.
! you.
.
 scoundrel! I challenge you!" he ejaculated, and, pushing
back his chair, he rose from the table.


At the very instant he did this and uttered those words, Pierre felt
that the question of his wife's guilt which had been tormenting him the
whole day was finally and indubitably answered in the affirmative.
 He
hated her and was forever sundered from her.


"Well then, till tomorrow at Sokolniki," said Dolokhov, as he took leave
of Rostov in the Club porch.


"And do you feel quite calm?" Rostov asked.


"Well, you see, I'll tell you the whole secret of dueling in two
words.
 If you are going to fight a duel, and you make a will and write
affectionate letters to your parents, and if you think you may be
killed, you are a fool and are lost for certain.
 But go with the firm
intention of killing your man as quickly and surely as possible, and
then all will be right, as our bear huntsman at Kostroma used to tell
me.

Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations which had no
connection with the matter in hand.
 His haggard face was yellow.
.
.
 "I
should perhaps have done the same thing in his place," thought Pierre.
 I think there is no sufficient ground
for this affair, or for blood to be shed over it.
.
 You were not right,
not quite in the right, you were impetuous.
.


"Then allow me to express your regrets, and I am sure your opponent
will accept them," said Nesvitski (who like the others concerned in the
affair, and like everyone in similar cases, did not yet believe that the
affair had come to an actual duel).

There was no insult on either side.
.
"

"No! What is there to talk about?" said Pierre.
.
.


He took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working of the
trigger, as he had not before held a pistol in his hand--a fact that he
did not wish to confess.


"Oh yes, like that, I know, I only forgot," said he.


The spot chosen for the duel was some eighty paces from the road,
where the sleighs had been left, in a small clearing in the pine forest
covered with melting snow, the frost having begun to break up during the
last few days.
 The seconds, measuring the paces, left tracks in
the deep wet snow between the place where they had been standing and
Nesvitski's and Dolokhov's sabers, which were stuck into the ground
ten paces apart to mark the barrier.
 It was thawing and misty; at forty
paces' distance nothing could be seen.






CHAPTER V


"Well begin!" said Dolokhov.


"All right," said Pierre, still smiling in the same way.
 A feeling of
dread was in the air.
 It was evident that the affair so lightly begun
could no longer be averted but was taking its course independently of
men's will.
 Take your pistols, and at
the word thwee begin to advance.


"O-ne! T-wo! Thwee!" he shouted angrily and stepped aside.
 Dolokhov
walked slowly without raising his pistol, looking intently with his
bright, sparkling blue eyes into his antagonist's face.
 His mouth wore
its usual semblance of a smile.


"So I can fire when I like!" said Pierre, and at the word "three," he
went quickly forward, missing the trodden path and stepping into
the deep snow.
 He held the pistol in his right hand at arm's length,
apparently afraid of shooting himself with it.
 His left hand he held
carefully back, because he wished to support his right hand with it and
knew he must not do so.
 Having advanced six paces and strayed off
the track into the snow, Pierre looked down at his feet, then quickly
glanced at Dolokhov and, bending his finger as he had been shown, fired.

Not at all expecting so loud a report, Pierre shuddered at the sound and
then, smiling at his own sensations, stood still.
 The smoke, rendered
denser by the mist, prevented him from seeing anything for an instant,
but there was no second report as he had expected.
 He only heard
Dolokhov's hurried steps, and his figure came in view through the smoke.


"No-o-o!" muttered Dolokhov through his teeth, "no, it's not over.


"Plea.
.
" began Dolokhov, but could not at first pronounce the word.


"Please," he uttered with an effort.


Pierre, hardly restraining his sobs, began running toward Dolokhov and
was about to cross the space between the barriers, when Dolokhov cried:

"To your barrier!" and Pierre, grasping what was meant, stopped by his
saber.
 Only ten paces divided them.
 He sucked and
swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered but his eyes, still smiling,
glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his remaining
strength.
 He raised his pistol and aimed.


"Sideways! Cover yourself with your pistol!" ejaculated Nesvitski.


"Cover yourself!" even Denisov cried to his adversary.


Pierre, with a gentle smile of pity and remorse, his arms and legs
helplessly spread out, stood with his broad chest directly facing
Dolokhov looked sorrowfully at him.
 At the same instant they heard a report and
Dolokhov's angry cry.


"Missed!" shouted Dolokhov, and he lay helplessly, face downwards on the
snow.
 folly! Death.
.
.
 lies.
.
.


Nesvitski stopped him and took him home.


Rostov and Denisov drove away with the wounded Dolokhov.


The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed eyes and did not answer
a word to the questions addressed to him.
.
.
 She won't get over it! She won't survive.
.
.
"

"Who?" asked Rostov.


When he had become a little quieter, he explained to Rostov that he was
living with his mother, who, if she saw him dying, would not survive it.
 Both in Petersburg and in
Moscow their house was always full of visitors.
 The night after the
duel he did not go to his bedroom but, as he often did, remained in his
father's room, that huge room in which Count Bezukhov had died.


"What has happened?" he asked himself.


"But in what was I to blame?" he asked.
" "It all comes from that! Even then
I felt it," he thought.
 And so it turns out.

Particularly vivid, humiliating, and shameful was the recollection of
how one day soon after his marriage he came out of the bedroom into his
study a little before noon in his silk dressing gown and found his head
steward there, who, bowing respectfully, looked into his face and at
his dressing gown and smiled slightly, as if expressing respectful
understanding of his employer's happiness.
 How often when considering her character I have told myself that
I was to blame for not understanding her, for not understanding that
constant composure and complacency and lack of all interests or desires,
and the whole secret lies in the terrible truth that she is a depraved
woman.
"

Then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts and the
vulgarity of the expressions that were natural to her, though she had
been brought up in the most aristocratic circles.


"I'm not such a fool.
 Just you try it on.
.
.
 Allez-vous promener," *
she used to say.
 Often seeing the success she had with young and old men
and women Pierre could not understand why he did not love her.
"


"Yes, I never loved her," said he to himself; "I knew she was a depraved
woman," he repeated, "but dared not admit it to myself.
 And now there's
Dolokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile and perhaps dying,
while meeting my remorse with some forced bravado!"

Pierre was one of those people who, in spite of an appearance of what
is called weak character, do not seek a confidant in their troubles.
 He
digested his sufferings alone.


"It is all, all her fault," he said to himself; "but what of that? Why
did I bind myself to her? Why did I say 'Je vous aime' * to her, which
was a lie, and worse than a lie? I am guilty and must endure.
 "The slur on my name and honor--that's all apart from myself.
"


    * I love you.
 Then Robespierre was beheaded for being a despot.
 And is it worth
tormenting oneself, when one has only a moment of life in comparison
with eternity?"

But at the moment when he imagined himself calmed by such reflections,
she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the moments when he had
most strongly expressed his insincere love for her, and he felt the
blood rush to his heart and had again to get up and move about and break
and tear whatever came to his hand.
 And when he had said it for the
tenth time, Molibre's words: "Mais que diable alloit-il faire dans cette
galere?" occurred to him, and he began to laugh at himself.


In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go to
Petersburg.


Next morning when the valet came into the room with his coffee, Pierre
was lying asleep on the ottoman with an open book in his hand.


He woke up and looked round for a while with a startled expression,
unable to realize where he was.
 With her
imperturbable calm she did not begin to speak in front of the valet.

She knew of the duel and had come to speak about it.
 She waited till the
valet had set down the coffee things and left the room.
 She did not sit down
but looked at him with a contemptuous smile, waiting for the valet to
go.


"Well, what's this now? What have you been up to now, I should like to
know?" she asked sternly.


"I? What have I.
.
.


"So it seems you're a hero, eh? Come now, what was this duel about? What
is it meant to prove? What? I ask you.
.
" Helene went on.
 "You believe
everything you're told.
 You were told.
.
.
" Helene laughed, "that Dolokhov
was my lover," she said in French with her coarse plainness of speech,
uttering the word amant as casually as any other word, "and you believed
it! Well, what have you proved? What does this duel prove? That you're
a fool, que vous etes un sot, but everybody knew that.
 What will be the
result? That I shall be the laughingstock of all Moscow, that everyone
will say that you, drunk and not knowing what you were about, challenged
a man you are jealous of without cause.
" Helene raised her voice and
became more and more excited, "A man who's a better man than you in
every way.
.
.
"

"Hm.
.
.
!" growled Pierre, frowning without looking at her, and not
moving a muscle.


"And how could you believe he was my lover? Why? Because I like his
company? If you were cleverer and more agreeable, I should prefer
yours.
.
.
 I beg you," muttered Pierre hoarsely.


"Why shouldn't I speak? I can speak as I like, and I tell you plainly
that there are not many wives with husbands such as you who would not
have taken lovers (des amants), but I have not done so," said she.
 He was suffering
physically at that moment, there was a weight on his chest and he could
not breathe.
 He knew that he must do something to put an end to this
suffering, but what he wanted to do was too terrible.


"We had better separate," he muttered in a broken voice.

"Separate! That's a thing to frighten me with!"

Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed staggering toward her.


Helene's face became terrible, she shrieked and sprang aside.
 His
father's nature showed itself in Pierre.
 God knows what he would
have done at that moment had Helene not fled from the room.






CHAPTER VII


Two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of Austerlitz and
the loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spite of the
letters sent through the embassy and all the searches made, his body had
not been found nor was he on the list of prisoners.
 What was worst of
all for his relations was the fact that there was still a possibility of
his having been picked up on the battlefield by the people of the
place and that he might now be lying, recovering or dying, alone among
strangers and unable to send news of himself.
 A week after the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitz
came a letter from Kutuzov informing the prince of the fate that had
befallen his son.
 To the great regret of myself and of the whole army
it is still uncertain whether he is alive or not.
 I comfort myself and
you with the hope that your son is alive, for otherwise he would have
been mentioned among the officers found on the field of battle, a list
of whom has been sent me under flag of truce.


When Princess Mary went to him at the usual hour he was working at his
lathe and, as usual, did not look round at her.


"Ah, Princess Mary!" he said suddenly in an unnatural voice, throwing
down his chisel.
)

She approached him, saw his face, and something gave way within her.
 By the expression of her father's face, not sad, not
crushed, but angry and working unnaturally, she saw that hanging over
her and about to crush her was some terrible misfortune, the worst
in life, one she had not yet experienced, irreparable and
incomprehensible--the death of one she loved.


"Bad news! He's not among the prisoners nor among the killed! Kutuzov
writes.
.
.
" and he screamed as piercingly as if he wished to drive the
princess away by that scream.
.
.
 "Killed!"

The princess did not fall down or faint.
 She was already pale, but on
hearing these words her face changed and something brightened in her
beautiful, radiant eyes.
 It was as if joy--a supreme joy apart from the
joys and sorrows of this world--overflowed the great grief within her.
 She saw her brother now as he had been at the moment when he took
leave of her and of Lise, his look tender yet proud.
 She saw him tender
and amused as he was when he put on the little icon.


"Father, tell me how it happened," she asked through her tears.


"Go! Go! Killed in battle, where the best of Russian men and Russia's
glory were led to destruction.
 Go, Princess Mary.
 Go and tell Lise.
"

When Princess Mary returned from her father, the little princess sat
working and looked up with that curious expression of inner, happy calm
peculiar to pregnant women.
.
.
 at something
joyful and mysterious taking place within her.
" She took her sister-in-law's hand and held it below
her waist.


Her eyes were smiling expectantly, her downy lip rose and remained
lifted in childlike happiness.


Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid her face in the folds of her
sister-in-law's dress.
 And do you know, Mary,
I am going to love him very much," said Lise, looking with bright and
happy eyes at her sister-in-law.


Princess Mary could not lift her head, she was weeping.


"What is the matter, Mary?"

"Nothing.
.
.
 sad about Andrew," she said, wiping away
her tears on her sister-in-law's knee.


Several times in the course of the morning Princess Mary began trying to
prepare her sister-in-law, and every time began to cry.
 Unobservant as
was the little princess, these tears, the cause of which she did not
understand, agitated her.


"Has anything come from Andrew?" she asked.


"No, you know it's too soon for news.
 But my father is anxious and I
feel afraid.


She had determined not to tell her and persuaded her father to hide the
terrible news from her till after her confinement, which was expected
within a few days.
 Princess Mary and the old prince each bore and hid
their grief in their own way.
 The old prince would not cherish any hope:
he made up his mind that Prince Andrew had been killed, and though he
sent an official to Austria to seek for traces of his son, he ordered a
monument from Moscow which he intended to erect in his own garden to his
memory, and he told everybody that his son had been killed.


"Dearest, I'm afraid this morning's fruschtique *--as Foka the cook
calls it--has disagreed with me.



"What is the matter with you, my darling? You look pale.
 Oh, you
are very pale!" said Princess Mary in alarm, running with her soft,
ponderous steps up to her sister-in-law.


"Your excellency, should not Mary Bogdanovna be sent for?" said one
of the maids who was present.
 (Mary Bogdanovna was a midwife from the
neighboring town, who had been at Bald Hills for the last fortnight.
 Courage,
my angel.
" She kissed Lise and was about to leave the room.


"Oh, no, no!" And besides the pallor and the physical suffering on the
little princess' face, an expression of childish fear of inevitable pain
showed itself.


"No, it's only indigestion?.
.
.
 Say it's only indigestion, say so,
Mary! Say.
.
" And the little princess began to cry capriciously like
a suffering child and to wring her little hands even with some
affectation.


"Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Oh!" she heard as she left the room.


The midwife was already on her way to meet her, rubbing her small, plump
white hands with an air of calm importance.


"Mary Bogdanovna, I think it's beginning!" said Princess Mary looking at
the midwife with wide-open eyes of alarm.


"Well, the Lord be thanked, Princess," said Mary Bogdanovna, not
hastening her steps.
 "You young ladies should not know anything about
it.
"

"But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet?" said the
princess.
)

"No matter, Princess, don't be alarmed," said Mary Bogdanovna.
 "We'll
manage very well without a doctor.
 She looked out.
 On their
faces was a quiet and solemn look.
 Some women passing with quiet steps in
and out of the bedroom glanced at the princess and turned away.
 To her surprise and distress she found that her prayers
did not calm her excitement.


"I've come to sit with you a bit, Masha," said the nurse, "and here
I've brought the prince's wedding candles to light before his saint, my
angel," she said with a sigh.


"Oh, nurse, I'm so glad!"

"God is merciful, birdie.
"

The nurse lit the gilt candles before the icons and sat down by the door
with her knitting.
 Princess Mary took a book and began reading.
 Only
when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one another, the
princess anxious and inquiring, the nurse encouraging.
 Everyone in the
house was dominated by the same feeling that Princess Mary experienced
as she sat in her room.
 But owing to the superstition that the fewer
the people who know of it the less a woman in travail suffers, everyone
tried to pretend not to know; no one spoke of it, but apart from the
ordinary staid and respectful good manners habitual in the prince's
household, a common anxiety, a softening of the heart, and a
consciousness that something great and mysterious was being accomplished
at that moment made itself felt.
 In the men servants'
hall all sat waiting, silently and alert.
 In the outlying serfs'
quarters torches and candles were burning and no one slept.
--"Say only that 'the prince
told me to ask,' and come and tell me her answer.
"

"Inform the prince that labor has begun," said Mary Bogdanovna, giving
the messenger a significant look.


After a while he re-entered it as if to snuff the candles, and, seeing
the prince was lying on the sofa, looked at him, noticed his perturbed
face, shook his head, and going up to him silently kissed him on the
shoulder and left the room without snuffing the candles or saying why he
had entered.
 The most solemn mystery in the world continued its course.

Evening passed, night came, and the feeling of suspense and softening of
heart in the presence of the unfathomable did not lessen but increased.

No one slept.


It was one of those March nights when winter seems to wish to resume its
sway and scatters its last snows and storms with desperate fury.
 A relay
of horses had been sent up the highroad to meet the German doctor from
Moscow who was expected every moment, and men on horseback with lanterns
were sent to the crossroads to guide him over the country road with its
hollows and snow-covered pools of water.


Nurse Savishna, knitting in hand, was telling in low tones, scarcely
hearing or understanding her own words, what she had told hundreds of
times before: how the late princess had given birth to Princess Mary
in Kishenev with only a Moldavian peasant woman to help instead of a
midwife.


Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently against the casement of the
window, from which the double frame had been removed (by order of the
prince, one window frame was removed in each room as soon as the larks
returned), and, forcing open a loosely closed latch, set the damask
curtain flapping and blew out the candle with its chill, snowy draft.

Princess Mary shuddered; her nurse, putting down the stocking she was
knitting, went to the window and leaning out tried to catch the open
casement.
 The cold wind flapped the ends of her kerchief and her loose
locks of gray hair.


"Princess, my dear, there's someone driving up the avenue!" she said,
holding the casement and not closing it.
 "With lanterns.
 Most likely the
doctor.
"

"Oh, my God! thank God!" said Princess Mary.
"

Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran to meet the newcomer.

As she was crossing the anteroom she saw through the window a carriage
with lanterns, standing at the entrance.
 On
the landing below, Philip, the footman, stood looking scared and holding
another candle.
 Still lower, beyond the turn of the staircase, one
could hear the footstep of someone in thick felt boots, and a voice that
seemed familiar to Princess Mary was saying something.


"Thank God!" said the voice.
 "And Father?"

"Gone to bed," replied the voice of Demyan the house steward, who was
downstairs.


Then the voice said something more, Demyan replied, and the steps in the
felt boots approached the unseen bend of the staircase more rapidly.


"It's Andrew!" thought Princess Mary.
 "No it can't be, that would be too
extraordinary," and at the very moment she thought this, the face and
figure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar of which covered
with snow, appeared on the landing where the footman stood with the
candle.


"You did not get my letter?" he asked, and not waiting for a
reply--which he would not have received, for the princess was unable to
speak--he turned back, rapidly mounted the stairs again with the doctor
who had entered the hall after him (they had met at the last post
station), and again embraced his sister.
 Strands of her black hair lay round
her inflamed and perspiring cheeks, her charming rosy mouth with its
downy lip was open and she was smiling joyfully.
 Prince Andrew entered
and paused facing her at the foot of the sofa on which she was lying.

Her glittering eyes, filled with childlike fear and excitement, rested
on him without changing their expression.
 She saw her husband, but did not realize the significance of his
appearance before her now.
 Prince Andrew went round the sofa and kissed
her forehead.
 "God is
merciful.
.
.


The doctor entered.
 Prince Andrew went out and, meeting Princess Mary,
again joined her.
 They waited and listened.


"Go, dear," said Princess Mary.


Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next
to hers.
 He covered his face with his hands
and remained so for some minutes.
 Prince Andrew got up, went to the door, and tried to
open it.


He began pacing the room.
 The screaming ceased, and a few more seconds
went by.


"What have they taken a baby in there for?" thought Prince Andrew in the
first second.
 "A baby? What baby.
.
.
? Why is there a baby there? Or is
the baby born?"

Then suddenly he realized the joyful significance of that wail; tears
choked him, and leaning his elbows on the window sill be began to cry,
sobbing like a child.
 The doctor with his shirt sleeves
tucked up, without a coat, pale and with a trembling jaw, came out
of the room.
 Prince Andrew turned to him, but the doctor gave him a
bewildered look and passed by without a word.
 He went into
his wife's room.
 She was lying dead, in the same position he had seen
her in five minutes before and, despite the fixed eyes and the pallor of
the cheeks, the same expression was on her charming childlike face with
its upper lip covered with tiny black hair.


"I love you all, and have done no harm to anyone; and what have you done
to me?"--said her charming, pathetic, dead face.


In a corner of the room something red and tiny gave a grunt and squealed
in Mary Bogdanovna's trembling white hands.
 The old man already knew everything.
 He was standing close to
the door and as soon as it opened his rough old arms closed like a vise
round his son's neck, and without a word he began to sob like a child.



Three days later the little princess was buried, and Prince Andrew went
up the steps to where the coffin stood, to give her the farewell kiss.

And there in the coffin was the same face, though with closed eyes.
 The old man too
came up and kissed the waxen little hands that lay quietly crossed one
on the other on her breast, and to him, too, her face seemed to say:
"Ah, what have you done to me, and why?" And at the sight the old man
turned angrily away.



Another five days passed, and then the young Prince Nicholas Andreevich
was baptized.
 The wet nurse supported the coverlet with her chin,
while the priest with a goose feather anointed the boy's little red and
wrinkled soles and palms.
 Prince Andrew sat in another room,
faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in the font, and awaited
the termination of the ceremony.
 Dolokhov
recovered, and Rostov became very friendly with him during his
convalescence.
 No one now loves virtue; it seems like
a reproach to everyone.
 Now tell me, Count, was it right, was it
honorable, of Bezukhov? And Fedya, with his noble spirit, loved him and
even now never says a word against him.
 Those pranks in Petersburg when
they played some tricks on a policeman, didn't they do it together?
And there! Bezukhov got off scotfree, while Fedya had to bear the whole
burden on his shoulders.
 Fancy what he had to go through! It's true he
has been reinstated, but how could they fail to do that? I think there
were not many such gallant sons of the fatherland out there as he.
 And
now--this duel! Have these people no feeling, or honor? Knowing him to
be an only son, to challenge him and shoot so straight! It's well
God had mercy on us.
 And what was it for? Who doesn't have intrigues
nowadays? Why, if he was so jealous, as I see things he should have
shown it sooner, but he lets it go on for months.
 And then to call him
out, reckoning on Fedya not fighting because he owed him money! What
baseness! What meanness! I know you understand Fedya, my dear count;
that, believe me, is why I am so fond of you.
 "Let them! I don't care
a straw about anyone but those I love; but those I love, I love so that
I would give my life for them, and the others I'd throttle if they
stood in my way.
 I have an adored, a priceless mother, and two or three
friends--you among them--and as for the rest I only care about them
in so far as they are harmful or useful.
 And most of them are harmful,
especially the women.
 I have not yet met that divine purity and
devotion I look for in women.
 If I found such a one I'd give my life for
her! But those!.
.
" and he made a gesture of contempt.
 "And believe me,
if I still value my life it is only because I still hope to meet such
a divine creature, who will regenerate, purify, and elevate me.
 But you
don't understand it.
"

"Oh, yes, I quite understand," answered Rostov, who was under his new
friend's influence.


In the autumn the Rostovs returned to Moscow.
 Early in the winter
Denisov also came back and stayed with them.
 Vera was a handsome girl of
twenty; Sonya a girl of sixteen with all the charm of an opening flower;
Natasha, half grown up and half child, was now childishly amusing, now
girlishly enchanting.
 Every young man who came to the house--seeing those
impressionable, smiling young faces (smiling probably at their own
happiness), feeling the eager bustle around him, and hearing the fitful
bursts of song and music and the inconsequent but friendly prattle of
young girls ready for anything and full of hope--experienced the
same feeling; sharing with the young folk of the Rostovs' household a
readiness to fall in love and an expectation of happiness.


Among the young men introduced by Rostov one of the first was Dolokhov,
whom everyone in the house liked except Natasha.


"There's nothing for me to understand," she cried out with resolute
self-will, "he is wicked and heartless.
 There now, I like your Denisov
though he is a rake and all that, still I like him; so you see I do
understand.
.
.
 But Denisov.
"

"Oh, Denisov is quite different," replied Nicholas, implying that even
Denisov was nothing compared to Dolokhov--"you must understand what a
soul there is in Dolokhov, you should see him with his mother.
 What a
heart!"

"Well, I don't know about that, but I am uncomfortable with him.
 And do
you know he has fallen in love with Sonya?"

"What nonsense.
.
.
"

"I'm certain of it; you'll see.
 And Sonya, though she would never
have dared to say so, knew it and blushed scarlet every time Dolokhov
appeared.
 He was pointedly attentive to Sonya
and looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear his
glances without coloring, but even the old countess and Natasha blushed
when they saw his looks.


Rostov noticed something new in Dolokhov's relations with Sonya, but
he did not explain to himself what these new relations were.
 "They're
always in love with someone," he thought of Sonya and Natasha.
 But he
was not as much at ease with Sonya and Dolokhov as before and was less
frequently at home.
 Orders were
given to raise recruits, ten men in every thousand for the regular army,
and besides this, nine men in every thousand for the militia.
 Everywhere
Bonaparte was anathematized and in Moscow nothing but the coming war
was talked of.






CHAPTER XI


On the third day after Christmas Nicholas dined at home, a thing he had
rarely done of late.
 It was a grand farewell dinner, as he and Denisov
were leaving to join their regiment after Epiphany.
 About twenty people
were present, including Dolokhov and Denisov.


Never had love been so much in the air, and never had the amorous
atmosphere made itself so strongly felt in the Rostovs' house as at this
holiday time.
 It is the one thing
we are interested in here," said the spirit of the place.


Nicholas, having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses, without
visiting all the places he meant to go to and where he had been invited,
returned home just before dinner.
 Sonya, Dolokhov,
and the old countess were especially disturbed, and to a lesser degree
Natasha.
 Nicholas understood that something must have happened between
Sonya and Dolokhov before dinner, and with the kindly sensitiveness
natural to him was very gentle and wary with them both at dinner.
 On
that same evening there was to be one of the balls that Iogel (the
dancing master) gave for his pupils during the holidays.
 "He asked
you, and Vasili Dmitrich * is also going.
"


    * Denisov.
 "I'm
even weady to dance the pas de chale.
"

"And you?" he asked Dolokhov, but as soon as he had asked the question
he noticed that it should not have been put.


"Perhaps," coldly and angrily replied Dolokhov, glancing at Sonya, and,
scowling, he gave Nicholas just such a look as he had given Pierre at
the Club dinner.


"There is something up," thought Nicholas, and he was further confirmed
in this conclusion by the fact that Dolokhov left immediately after
dinner.


"And I was looking for you," said Natasha running out to him.
 "He has
proposed to Sonya!"

Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with Sonya of late, something
seemed to give way within him at this news.
 Dolokhov was a suitable and
in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless, orphan girl.
 From
the point of view of the old countess and of society it was out of the
question for her to refuse him.
.
"

"Yes, my Sonya could not have done otherwise!" thought Nicholas.
.
.


"Yes," said Natasha.
 "Do you know, Nicholas--don't be angry--but I know
you will not marry her.
 I know, heaven knows how, but I know for certain
that you won't marry her.
"

And Natasha kissed her brother and ran away.

Nicholas went up to her and kissed her hand.
 he is my friend.


"I have already refused," she said hurriedly.


"If you are refusing for my sake, I am afraid that I.
.
"

Sonya again interrupted.
 She gave him an imploring, frightened look.


"No, but I must.
 It may be arrogant of me, but still it is best to say
it.
.
"

"That is enough for me," said Sonya, blushing.
 Mamma does
not wish it.
 In a word, I make no promise.
 And I beg you to consider
Dolokhov's offer," he said, articulating his friend's name with
difficulty.


"Don't say that to me! I want nothing.
 I love you as a brother and
always shall, and I want nothing more.
"

"You are an angel: I am not worthy of you, but I am afraid of misleading
you.
"

And Nicholas again kissed her hand.
 So said the mothers as
they watched their young people executing their newly learned steps, and
so said the youths and maidens themselves as they danced till they were
ready to drop, and so said the grown-up young men and women who came to
these balls with an air of condescension and found them most enjoyable.

That year two marriages had come of these balls.
 The two pretty young
Princesses Gorchakov met suitors there and were married and so further
increased the fame of these dances.
 What distinguished them from others
was the absence of host or hostess and the presence of the good-natured
Iogel, flying about like a feather and bowing according to the rules of
his art, as he collected the tickets from all his visitors.

Sometimes the best of the pupils, of whom Natasha, who was exceptionally
graceful, was first, even danced the pas de chale, but at this last ball
only the ecossaise, the anglaise, and the mazurka, which was just coming
into fashion, were danced.
 There were
many pretty girls and the Rostov girls were among the prettiest.
 That evening, proud of Dolokhov's
proposal, her refusal, and her explanation with Nicholas, Sonya twirled
about before she left home so that the maid could hardly get her hair
plaited, and she was transparently radiant with impulsive joy.
 They were both dressed in white muslin with pink
ribbons.


"Oh, how delightful it is!" she kept saying, running up to Sonya.


Nicholas and Denisov were walking up and down, looking with kindly
patronage at the dancers.


"How sweet she is--she will be a weal beauty!" said Denisov.


"Who?"

"Countess Natasha," answered Denisov.


"Who are you talking about?"

"About your sister," ejaculated Denisov testily.


Rostov smiled.


"My dear count, you were one of my best pupils--you must dance," said
little Iogel coming up to Nicholas.


"No, my dear fellow, I'll be a wallflower," said Denisov.
 "Don't you
wecollect what bad use I made of your lessons?"

"Oh no!" said Iogel, hastening to reassure him.
 "You were only
inattentive, but you had talent--oh yes, you had talent!"

 The band struck up the newly introduced mazurka.
 Nicholas could not
refuse Iogel and asked Sonya to dance.
 Noiselessly, skillfully stepping with his little feet
in low shoes, Iogel flew first across the hall with Natasha, who, though
shy, went on carefully executing her steps.
 "What sort of Polish mazuwka is
this? But she does dance splendidly.


When it came to Natasha's turn to choose a partner, she rose and,
tripping rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows, ran
timidly to the corner where Denisov sat.
 She saw that everybody was
looking at her and waiting.
 Nicholas saw that Denisov was refusing
though he smiled delightedly.


"Please, Vasili Dmitrich," Natasha was saying, "do come!"

"Oh no, let me off, Countess," Denisov replied.


"They coax me as if I were Vaska the cat!" said Denisov jokingly.


"I'll sing for you a whole evening," said Natasha.
 Only on horse back and in the mazurka was
Denisov's short stature not noticeable and he looked the fine fellow he
felt himself to be.

First he spun her round, holding her now with his left, now with his
right hand, then falling on one knee he twirled her round him, and again
jumping up, dashed so impetuously forward that it seemed as if he would
rush through the whole suite of rooms without drawing breath, and then
he suddenly stopped and performed some new and unexpected steps.


"What does this mean?" she brought out.
 He was at once
shown to the best room, which Dolokhov had taken for that evening.
 On the table was a pile of gold and paper money, and he was
keeping the bank.


Dolokhov's clear, cold glance met Rostov as soon as he entered the door,
as though he had long expected him.


"It's a long time since we met," he said.


"You may punt," he said.


Beneath his smile Rostov saw in him the mood he had shown at the Club
dinner and at other times, when as if tired of everyday life he had felt
a need to escape from it by some strange, and usually cruel, action.


Rostov felt ill at ease.
 He tried, but failed, to find some joke
with which to reply to Dolokhov's words.
.


"Well, you'd better not play," Dolokhov added, and springing a new pack
of cards said: "Bank, gentlemen!"

Moving the money forward he prepared to deal.
 Rostov sat down by his
side and at first did not play.
 Dolokhov kept glancing at him.


"Why don't you play?" he asked.


And strange to say Nicholas felt that he could not help taking up a
card, putting a small stake on it, and beginning to play.


"I'll trust you.
"

Rostov staked five rubles on a card and lost, staked again, and again
lost.


"Gentlemen," said Dolokhov after he had dealt for some time.
"

One of the players said he hoped he might be trusted.


"Yes, you might, but I am afraid of getting the accounts mixed.


All Rostov's cards were beaten and he had eight hundred rubles scored
up against him.
 I lose to the others but win
from you.


Rostov submitted.
 He let the eight hundred remain and laid down a seven
of hearts with a torn corner, which he had picked up from the floor.
 He
well remembered that seven afterwards.
 He laid down the seven of hearts,
on which with a broken bit of chalk he had written "800 rubles" in clear
upright figures; he emptied the glass of warm champagne that was handed
him, smiled at Dolokhov's words, and with a sinking heart, waiting for
a seven to turn up, gazed at Dolokhov's hands which held the pack.
 On the
previous Sunday the old count had given his son two thousand rubles,
and though he always disliked speaking of money difficulties had told
Nicholas that this was all he could let him have till May, and asked him
to be more economical this time.
 With a sinking heart he watched Dolokhov's hands and thought,
"Now then, make haste and let me have this card and I'll take my cap
and drive home to supper with Denisov, Natasha, and Sonya, and will
certainly never touch a card again.
" At that moment his home life,
jokes with Petya, talks with Sonya, duets with Natasha, piquet with his
father, and even his comfortable bed in the house on the Povarskaya rose
before him with such vividness, clearness, and charm that it seemed as
if it were all a lost and unappreciated bliss, long past.
 He could not
conceive that a stupid chance, letting the seven be dealt to the right
rather than to the left, might deprive him of all this happiness, newly
appreciated and newly illumined, and plunge him into the depths of
unknown and undefined misery.
 That could not be, yet he awaited with
a sinking heart the movement of Dolokhov's hands.
"

"Come now, deal!" exclaimed Rostov.


"Aah!" Rostov almost screamed lifting both hands to his head.






CHAPTER XIV


An hour and a half later most of the players were but little interested
in their own play.
 Dolokhov was no longer listening to
stories or telling them, but followed every movement of Rostov's hands
and occasionally ran his eyes over the score against him.
 He had decided
to play until that score reached forty-three thousand.
 Rostov, leaning his head on both hands, sat at the table which
was scrawled over with figures, wet with spilled wine, and littered
with cards.
 One tormenting impression did not leave him: that those
broad-boned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt
sleeves, those hands which he loved and hated, held him in their power.


"Six hundred rubles, ace, a corner, a nine.
.
.
.
.
 The knave, double
or quits.
.
 And why is he doing this to me?" Rostov
pondered.
 Sometimes he staked a large sum, but Dolokhov refused to
accept it and fixed the stake himself.
 Nicholas submitted to him, and at
one moment prayed to God as he had done on the battlefield at the bridge
over the Enns, and then guessed that the card that came first to hand
from the crumpled heap under the table would save him, now counted the
cords on his coat and took a card with that number and tried staking the
total of his losses on it, then he looked round for aid from the other
players, or peered at the now cold face of Dolokhov and tried to read
what was passing in his mind.


"He knows of course what this loss means to me.

What's he to do if he has such luck?.
.
 And it's not my fault either,"
he thought to himself, "I have done nothing wrong.
 I was so happy, so free, so lighthearted!
And I did not realize how happy I was! When did that end and when did
this new, terrible state of things begin? What marked the change? I sat
all the time in this same place at this table, chose and placed cards,
and watched those broad-boned agile hands in the same way.
 When did it
happen and what has happened? I am well and strong and still the same
and in the same place.

His face was terrible and piteous to see, especially from its helpless
efforts to seem calm.


The score against him reached the fateful sum of forty-three thousand.
 Nicholas understood that it
was all over; but he said in an indifferent tone:

"Well, won't you go on? I had a splendid card all ready," as if it were
the fun of the game which interested him most.


"It's all up! I'm lost!" thought he.
 "Now a bullet through my
brain--that's all that's left me!" And at the same time he said in a
cheerful voice:

"Come now, just this one more little card!"

"All right!" said Dolokhov, having finished the addition.
 "I only want to see whether you will
let me win this ten, or beat it.
"

Dolokhov began to deal seriously.
 Oh, how Rostov detested at that moment
those hands with their short reddish fingers and hairy wrists, which
held him in their power.


"You owe forty-three thousand, Count," said Dolokhov, and stretching
himself he rose from the table.


"Yes, I'm tired too," said Rostov.


Dolokhov cut him short, as if to remind him that it was not for him to
jest.


"When am I to receive the money, Count?"

Rostov, flushing, drew Dolokhov into the next room.


"I cannot pay it all immediately.
 Will you take an I.
O.
?" he said.


"Your cousin.
.
.
" Dolokhov started to say, but Nicholas interrupted him.






CHAPTER XV


To say "tomorrow" and keep up a dignified tone was not difficult, but to
go home alone, see his sisters, brother, mother, and father, confess
and ask for money he had no right to after giving his word of honor, was
terrible.
 The young people, after returning
from the theater, had had supper and were grouped round the clavichord.

As soon as Nicholas entered, he was enfolded in that poetic atmosphere
of love which pervaded the Rostov household that winter and, now after
Dolokhov's proposal and Iogel's ball, seemed to have grown thicker
round Sonya and Natasha as the air does before a thunderstorm.
 Sonya and
Natasha, in the light-blue dresses they had worn at the theater, looking
pretty and conscious of it, were standing by the clavichord, happy and
smiling.
 The
old countess, waiting for the return of her husband and son, sat playing
patience with the old gentlewoman who lived in their house.
 Denisov,
with sparkling eyes and ruffled hair, sat at the clavichord striking
chords with his short fingers, his legs thrown back and his eyes rolling
as he sang, with his small, husky, but true voice, some verses called
"Enchantress," which he had composed, and to which he was trying to fit
music:

   Enchantress, say, to my forsaken lyre
   What magic power is this recalls me still?
   What spark has set my inmost soul on fire,
   What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill?

He was singing in passionate tones, gazing with his sparkling
black-agate eyes at the frightened and happy Natasha.


"Everything's still the same with them," thought Nicholas, glancing into
the drawing room, where he saw Vera and his mother with the old lady.


"Ah, and here's Nicholas!" cried Natasha, running up to him.


"Is Papa at home?" he asked.


"Nicholas, have you come? Come here, dear!" called the old countess from
the drawing room.


Nicholas went to her, kissed her hand, and sitting down silently at her
table began to watch her hands arranging the cards.


"All wight! All wight!" shouted Denisov.


"Oh, nothing," said he, as if weary of being continually asked the same
question.
 "Will Papa be back soon?"

"I expect so.
 They know nothing about it! Where am I
to go?" thought Nicholas, and went again into the dancing room where the
clavichord stood.


Sonya was sitting at the clavichord, playing the prelude to Denisov's
favorite barcarolle.


"My God, I'm a ruined and dishonored man! A bullet through my brain is
the only thing left me--not singing!" his thoughts ran on.


"Nikolenka, what is the matter?" Sonya's eyes fixed on him seemed to
ask.


Nicholas turned away from her.
 Natasha too, with her quick instinct, had
instantly noticed her brother's condition.
 But, though she noticed it,
she was herself in such high spirits at that moment, so far from sorrow,
sadness, or self-reproach, that she purposely deceived herself as
young people often do.
"

"Now, Sonya!" she said, going to the very middle of the room, where she
considered the resonance was best.


Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly, as ballet
dancers do, Natasha, rising energetically from her heels to her toes,
stepped to the middle of the room and stood still.


"Yes, that's me!" she seemed to say, answering the rapt gaze with which
Denisov followed her.
 "Why isn't she dull and ashamed?"

Natasha took the first note, her throat swelled, her chest rose,
her eyes became serious.
 At that moment she was oblivious of her
surroundings, and from her smiling lips flowed sounds which anyone may
produce at the same intervals and hold for the same time, but which
leave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrill
you and make you weep.
 She no longer sang
as a child, there was no longer in her singing that comical, childish,
painstaking effect that had been in it before; but she did not yet sing
well, as all the connoisseurs who heard her said: "It is not trained,
but it is a beautiful voice that must be trained.
" Only they generally
said this some time after she had finished singing.
 In her voice there was a virginal
freshness, an unconsciousness of her own powers, and an as yet untrained
velvety softness, which so mingled with her lack of art in singing that
it seemed as if nothing in that voice could be altered without spoiling
it.
".
.
.
 One, two, three.
.
.

One.
 "Oh mio crudele affetto.
.
.
.
 One.
 "Oh, this
senseless life of ours!" thought Nicholas.
 "All this misery, and money,
and Dolokhov, and anger, and honor--it's all nonsense.
.
.
.
.
 "Ah, God! How fine! Did I really take it? How
fortunate!" he thought.


Oh, how that chord vibrated, and how moved was something that was finest
in Rostov's soul! And this something was apart from everything else
in the world and above everything in the world.
.
.
 All nonsense! One might kill and rob
and yet be happy.
.
"





CHAPTER XVI


It was long since Rostov had felt such enjoyment from music as he did
that day.
 But no sooner had Natasha finished her barcarolle than
reality again presented itself.
 A quarter of an hour later the old count
came in from his Club, cheerful and contented.
 Nicholas, hearing him
drive up, went to meet him.


Nicholas tried to say "Yes," but could not: and he nearly burst into
sobs.


"Ah, it can't be avoided!" thought Nicholas, for the first and last
time.
 I was nearly forgetting.
 I
need some money.
"

"Dear me!" said his father, who was in a specially good humor.
 "I told
you it would not be enough.
"

"What! To whom?.
.
 Nonsense!" cried the count, suddenly reddening with
an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do.


"I promised to pay tomorrow," said Nicholas.


"Well!.
" said the old count, spreading out his arms and sinking
helplessly on the sofa.


"It can't be helped It happens to everyone!" said the son, with a
bold, free, and easy tone, while in his soul he regarded himself as a
worthless scoundrel whose whole life could not atone for his crime.
 He
longed to kiss his father's hands and kneel to beg his forgiveness, but
said, in a careless and even rude voice, that it happens to everyone!

The old count cast down his eyes on hearing his son's words and began
bustlingly searching for something.
.
.
 happens to everybody! Yes, who has not done it?"

And with a furtive glance at his son's face, the count went out of the
room.
.
 Nicholas had been prepared for resistance, but had not at all
expected this.


"Papa! Pa-pa!" he called after him, sobbing, "forgive me!" And seizing
his father's hand, he pressed it to his lips and burst into tears.


While father and son were having their explanation, the mother and
daughter were having one not less important.
 Natasha came running to her
mother, quite excited.
.
 Mamma!.
.
 He has made me.
.
.


The countess did not believe her ears.
 Denisov had proposed.
 To whom? To
this chit of a girl, Natasha, who not so long ago was playing with dolls
and who was still having lessons.

"I come to ask you what to do, and you call it 'nonsense!'"

The countess shrugged her shoulders.


"If it is true that Monsieur Denisov has made you a proposal, tell him
he is a fool, that's all!"

"No, he's not a fool!" replied Natasha indignantly and seriously.
 Well, if you
are in love, marry him!" said the countess, with a laugh of annoyance.
"

"Mamma, are you cross? Don't be cross, dear! Is it my fault?"

"No, but what is it, my dear? Do you want me to go and tell him?" said
the countess smiling.
 It's all very well
for you," said Natasha, with a responsive smile.
"

"No, I mustn't.
 I am so sorry for him! He's so nice.
 I don't know how I'm to say it.
"

"And there's nothing for you to say.


"No, not on any account! I will tell him myself, and you'll listen at
the door," and Natasha ran across the drawing room to the dancing hall,
where Denisov was sitting on the same chair by the clavichord with his
face in his hands.

It is in your hands.
"

"Vasili Dmitrich, I'm so sorry for you!.
 No, but you are so nice.
.

but it won't do.
.
not that.
.
 but as a friend, I shall always love you.
"

Denisov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she did not
understand.
 She kissed his rough curly black head.
 At this instant, they
heard the quick rustle of the countess' dress.


"Vasili Dmitrich, I thank you for the honor," she said, with an
embarrassed voice, though it sounded severe to Denisov--"but my daughter
is so young, and I thought that, as my son's friend, you would have
addressed yourself first to me.
"

"Countess.
.
.
" said Denisov, with downcast eyes and a guilty face.
 He
tried to say more, but faltered.


Natasha could not remain calm, seeing him in such a plight.
.
.


After Denisov's departure, Rostov spent another fortnight in Moscow,
without going out of the house, waiting for the money his father could
not at once raise, and he spent most of his time in the girls' room.


Sonya was more tender and devoted to him than ever.
 It was as if she
wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her
love him all the more, but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of
her.






BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07





CHAPTER I


After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg.
 At the
Torzhok post station, either there were no horses or the postmaster
would not supply them.
 Pierre was obliged to wait.


"Will you have the portmanteaus brought in? And a bed got ready, and
tea?" asked his valet.


Pierre gave no answer, for he neither heard nor saw anything.
 He had
begun to think of the last station and was still pondering on the same
question--one so important that he took no notice of what went on around
him.
 No
matter what he thought about, he always returned to these same questions
which he could not solve and yet could not cease to ask himself.
 It was
as if the thread of the chief screw which held his life together were
stripped, so that the screw could not get in or out, but went on turning
uselessly in the same place.


"Is this good or bad?" Pierre asked himself.
 "It is good for me, bad
for another traveler, and for himself it's unavoidable, because he needs
money for food; the man said an officer had once given him a thrashing
for letting a private traveler have the courier horses.
 But the officer
thrashed him because he had to get on as quickly as possible.
 And I,"
continued Pierre, "shot Dolokhov because I considered myself injured,
and Louis XVI was executed because they considered him a criminal, and
a year later they executed those who executed him--also for some reason.
 The answer was: "You'll
die and all will end.
 You'll die and know all, or cease asking.


The Torzhok peddler woman, in a whining voice, went on offering her
wares, especially a pair of goatskin slippers.
 "I have hundreds of
rubles I don't know what to do with, and she stands in her tattered
cloak looking timidly at me," he thought.
 "And what does she want the
money for? As if that money could add a hair's breadth to happiness or
peace of mind.
" And
again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread, and again it turned
uselessly in the same place.


His servant handed him a half-cut novel, in the form of letters, by
Madame de Souza.
 "And why did she resist her
seducer when she loved him?" he thought.
 "God could not have put into
her heart an impulse that was against His will.
 My wife--as she once
was--did not struggle, and perhaps she was right.
 And that's the height of human wisdom.
"

Everything within and around him seemed confused, senseless, and
repellent.
 Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierre
found a kind of tantalizing satisfaction.


"I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for this
gentleman," said the postmaster, entering the room followed by another
traveler, also detained for lack of horses.


The newcomer was a short, large-boned, yellow-faced, wrinkled old
man, with gray bushy eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefinite
grayish color.


Pierre took his feet off the table, stood up, and lay down on a bed that
had been got ready for him, glancing now and then at the newcomer, who,
with a gloomy and tired face, was wearily taking off his wraps with the
aid of his servant, and not looking at Pierre.
 With a pair of felt boots
on his thin bony legs, and keeping on a worn, nankeen-covered, sheepskin
coat, the traveler sat down on the sofa, leaned back his big head with
its broad temples and close-cropped hair, and looked at Bezukhov.
 His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of
them Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing a
death's head.
 Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness, and the
need, even the inevitability, of entering into conversation with this
stranger.


The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down, * with an
unfinished bit of nibbled sugar, and asked if anything more would be
wanted.



"No.
 Give me the book," said the stranger.


The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work,
and the traveler became absorbed in it.
 All at
once the stranger closed the book, putting in a marker, and again,
leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa, sat in his former
position with his eyes shut.
 Pierre looked at him and had not time
to turn away when the old man, opening his eyes, fixed his steady and
severe gaze straight on Pierre's face.


Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles.
" He seemed to emphasize the last word, as if to say--"Yes,
misfortune! Call it what you please, I know that what happened to you in
Moscow was a misfortune.
"--"I regret it very much, my dear sir.


"I have not referred to this out of curiosity, my dear sir, but for
greater reasons.
"

He paused, his gaze still on Pierre, and moved aside on the sofa by way
of inviting the other to take a seat beside him.
 Pierre felt reluctant
to enter into conversation with this old man, but, submitting to him
involuntarily, came up and sat down beside him.


"You are unhappy, my dear sir," the stranger continued.
 I should like to help you as far as lies in my power.
"

"Oh, yes!" said Pierre, with a forced smile.
 "I am very grateful to you.


"But if for reason you don't feel inclined to talk to me," said the old
man, "say so, my dear sir.
" And he suddenly smiled, in an unexpected and
tenderly paternal way.


"Oh no, not at all! On the contrary, I am very glad to make your
acquaintance," said Pierre.
 And again, glancing at the stranger's hands,
he looked more closely at the ring, with its skull--a Masonic sign.


"Allow me to ask," he said, "are you a Mason?"

"Yes, I belong to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons," said the stranger,
looking deeper and deeper into Pierre's eyes.
 "And in their name and my
own I hold out a brotherly hand to you.
"

"I am afraid," said Pierre, smiling, and wavering between the confidence
the personality of the Freemason inspired in him and his own habit
of ridiculing the Masonic beliefs--"I am afraid I am very far from
understanding--how am I to put it?--I am afraid my way of looking at the
world is so opposed to yours that we shall not understand one another.
 Your view of life is a
regrettable delusion.


"I should never dare to say that I know the truth," said the Mason,
whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness.
 Only by laying stone on stone
with the cooperation of all, by the millions of generations from our
forefather Adam to our own times, is that temple reared which is to be a
worthy dwelling place of the Great God," he added, and closed his eyes.


"I ought to tell you that I do not believe.


The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man with
millions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him that he, poor
man, had not the five rubles that would make him happy.
 "But what am I to do?"

"You know Him not, my dear sir, and so you are very unhappy.


"If He were not," he said quietly, "you and I would not be speaking
of Him, my dear sir.
 Of what, of whom, are we speaking? Whom hast thou
denied?" he suddenly asked with exulting austerity and authority in
his voice.
.
"

He stopped and remained silent for a long time.


"He exists, but to understand Him is hard," the Mason began again,
looking not at Pierre but straight before him, and turning the leaves
of his book with his old hands which from excitement he could not keep
still.
 "If it were a man whose existence thou didst doubt I could bring
him to thee, could take him by the hand and show him to thee.
 But how
can I, an insignificant mortal, show His omnipotence, His infinity, and
all His mercy to one who is blind, or who shuts his eyes that he may not
see or understand Him and may not see or understand his own vileness and
sinfulness?" He paused again.
 "And thou art more foolish and
unreasonable than a little child, who, playing with the parts of a
skillfully made watch, dares to say that, as he does not understand
its use, he does not believe in the master who made it.
 To know Him is
hard.
.
.
.
.
"

Pierre listened with swelling heart, gazing into the Mason's face with
shining eyes, not interrupting or questioning him, but believing with
his whole soul what the stranger said.


"He is not to be apprehended by reason, but by life," said the Mason.


"I do not understand," said Pierre, feeling with dismay doubts
reawakening.
 He was afraid of any want of clearness, any weakness, in
the Mason's arguments; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him.
"

The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile.


"The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish to
imbibe," he said.
"

"Yes, yes, that is so," said Pierre joyfully.


"The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone, not on those worldly
sciences of physics, history, chemistry, and the like, into which
intellectual knowledge is divided.
 The highest wisdom is one.
 And to attain this end, we have the light called conscience that
God has implanted in our souls.
"

"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.


"Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the spirit, and ask
thyself whether thou art content with thyself.
 And what have you done with all these
good gifts? Are you content with yourself and with your life?"

"No, I hate my life," Pierre muttered, wincing.


"Thou hatest it.
 Then change it, purify thyself; and as thou art
purified, thou wilt gain wisdom.
 Look at your life, my dear sir.
 How have you used it? What have you done
for your neighbor? Have you ever thought of your tens of thousands
of slaves? Have you helped them physically and morally? No! You have
profited by their toil to lead a profligate life.
 Have you chosen a post in which you might be of service to your
neighbor? No! You have spent your life in idleness.
 Then you married,
my dear sir--took on yourself responsibility for the guidance of a young
woman; and what have you done? You have not helped her to find the way
of truth, my dear sir, but have thrust her into an abyss of deceit and
misery.
 There is nothing strange in that, my dear sir!"

After these words, the Mason, as if tired by his long discourse, again
leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes.
 Pierre
looked at that aged, stern, motionless, almost lifeless face and moved
his lips without uttering a sound.
 He wished to say, "Yes, a vile, idle,
vicious life!" but dared not break the silence.


The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and called his
servant.
 "Will you
not rest here?"

"No, tell them to harness.
 "But this man knows the truth and, if he wished to,
could disclose it to me.
 The
traveler, having packed his things with his practiced hands, began
fastening his coat.
 When he had finished, he turned to Bezukhov, and
said in a tone of indifferent politeness:

"Where are you going to now, my dear sir?"

"I?.
.
 I'm going to Petersburg," answered Pierre, in a childlike,
hesitating voice.
 "I thank you.
 I agree with all you have said.
.
.
 But it is
I, above all, who am to blame for everything.
.
.
"

Pierre could not go on.
 He gulped and turned away.
 You are going to
Petersburg.
 Hand this to Count Willarski" (he took out his notebook and
wrote a few words on a large sheet of paper folded in four).
 "Allow me
to give you a piece of advice.
 When you reach the capital, first of all
devote some time to solitude and self-examination and do not resume your
former way of life.
 And now I wish you a good journey, my dear sir," he
added, seeing that his servant had entered.
.
.
 Bazdeev had been one of the best-known Freemasons and
Martinists, even in Novikov's time.
 One thing he continually realized
as he read that book: the joy, hitherto unknown to him, of believing
in the possibility of attaining perfection, and in the possibility of
active brotherly love among men, which Joseph Alexeevich had revealed to
him.
 "A person of very high standing in our Brotherhood has
made application for you to be received into our Order before the usual
term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor.
 I consider it a
sacred duty to fulfill that person's wishes.


Willarski bowed his head.


"Yes.
.
.
 yes, I believe in God," he said.


"In that case.
.
.
" began Willarski, but Pierre interrupted him.


"Yes, I do believe in God," he repeated.


"In that case we can go," said Willarski.
 "My carriage is at your
service.
"

Willarski was silent throughout the drive.
 To Pierre's inquiries as to
what he must do and how he should answer, Willarski only replied that
brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre had only to
tell the truth.


Having entered the courtyard of a large house where the Lodge had its
headquarters, and having ascended a dark staircase, they entered a small
well-lit anteroom where they took off their cloaks without the aid of
a servant.
 A man in strange
attire appeared at the door.
 Willarski, stepping toward him, said
something to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a small
wardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had never seen
before.
 Having taken a kerchief from the cupboard, Willarski bound
Pierre's eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind, catching some hairs
painfully in the knot.
 Then he drew his face down, kissed him, and
taking him by the hand led him forward.
 The hairs tied in the knot hurt
Pierre and there were lines of pain on his face and a shamefaced smile.


Having led him about ten paces, Willarski stopped.


"Whatever happens to you," he said, "you must bear it all manfully
if you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood.
 "I wish you courage and success," and,
pressing Pierre's hand, he went out.


Left alone, Pierre went on smiling in the same way.
 He experienced a variety of
most complex sensations.
 He felt curious to know what was
going to happen and what would be revealed to him; but most of all, he
felt joyful that the moment had come when he would at last start on that
path of regeneration and on the actively virtuous life of which he had
been dreaming since he met Joseph Alexeevich.
 Loud knocks were heard at
the door.
 Pierre took the bandage off his eyes and glanced around him.
 It was a coffin with bones
inside.
 He was not at all surprised by what he saw.
 Trying to stimulate his emotions he looked around.
 "God,
death, love, the brotherhood of man," he kept saying to himself,
associating these words with vague yet joyful ideas.


By the dim light, to which Pierre had already become accustomed, he
saw rather short man.
 Having evidently come from the light into the
darkness, the man paused, then moved with cautious steps toward the
table and placed on it his small leather-gloved hands.


"For what have you come hither?" asked the newcomer, turning in Pierre's
direction at a slight rustle made by the latter.
 "Why have you, who do
not believe in the truth of the light and who have not seen the light,
come here? What do you seek from us? Wisdom, virtue, enlightenment?"

At the moment the door opened and the stranger came in, Pierre felt a
sense of awe and veneration such as he had experienced in his boyhood at
confession; he felt himself in the presence of one socially a complete
stranger, yet nearer to him through the brotherhood of man.

For a long time he could not utter a word, so that the Rhetor had to
repeat his question.


"Yes.
 I.
 I.
.
 desire regeneration," Pierre uttered with difficulty.


"Very well," said Smolyaninov, and went on at once: "Have you any idea
of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach your aim?"
said he quietly and quickly.


"I.
.
.
.
 for guidance.
.
.
.
 in regeneration," said Pierre,
with a trembling voice and some difficulty in utterance due to his
excitement and to being unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters in
Russian.


"What is your conception of Freemasonry?"

"I imagine that Freemasonry is the fraternity and equality of men who
have virtuous aims," said Pierre, feeling ashamed of the inadequacy of
his words for the solemnity of the moment, as he spoke.
 "I imagine.
.
.
"

"Good!" said the Rhetor quickly, apparently satisfied with this answer.
 "I have been an atheist," answered Pierre.
 Is that not so?" said the Rhetor,
after a moment's pause.
 The first and chief object of our Order, the foundation on which
it rests and which no human power can destroy, is the preservation and
handing on to posterity of a certain important mystery.
 which has come
down to us from the remotest ages, even from the first man--a mystery on
which perhaps the fate of mankind depends.
 But since this mystery is of
such a nature that nobody can know or use it unless he be prepared by
long and diligent self-purification, not everyone can hope to attain it
quickly.
 Hence we have a secondary aim, that of preparing our members as
much as possible to reform their hearts, to purify and enlighten their
minds, by means handed on to us by tradition from those who have striven
to attain this mystery, and thereby to render them capable of receiving
it.
.
 He imagined to himself
vicious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word and deed,
imagined oppressors whose victims he would rescue.
 These virtues were:
1.
 Discretion, the keeping of the secrets of the Order.
 2.
 Obedience to
those of higher ranks in the Order.
 Morality.
 Love of mankind.
 6.
 Generosity.
 7.
 The love of death.
 "It must be so,
but I am still so weak that I love my life, the meaning of which is only
now gradually opening before me.
" But five of the other virtues which
Pierre recalled, counting them on his fingers, he felt already in his
soul: courage, generosity, morality, love of mankind, and especially
obedience--which did not even seem to him a virtue, but a joy.
) He forgot what the seventh
virtue was and could not recall it.


The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierre
whether he was still firm in his intention and determined to submit to
all that would be required of him.
 This chamber with what you see therein should already
have suggested to your heart, if it is sincere, more than words could
do.
 Our Order imitates the ancient societies that
explained their teaching by hieroglyphics.
 A hieroglyph," said the
Rhetor, "is an emblem of something not cognizable by the senses but
which possesses qualities resembling those of the symbol.
"

Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was, but dared not speak.


"If you are resolved, I must begin your initiation," said the Rhetor
coming closer to Pierre.
 "In token of generosity I ask you to give me
all your valuables.


"What you have with you: watch, money, rings.
.
"

Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch, but could not manage for
some time to get the wedding ring off his fat finger.
 The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre's left
breast, and stooping down pulled up the left leg of his trousers to
above the knee.
 With a childlike smile of embarrassment,
doubt, and self-derision, which appeared on his face against his will,
Pierre stood with his arms hanging down and legs apart, before his
brother Rhetor, and awaited his further commands.


"My passion! I have had so many," replied Pierre.


Pierre paused, seeking a reply.


The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after this
answer.
 At last he moved up to Pierre and, taking the kerchief that lay
on the table, again bound his eyes.


"For the last time I say to you--turn all your attention upon yourself,
put a bridle on your senses, and seek blessedness, not in passion but
in your own heart.
 The source of blessedness is not without us but
within.
.
.
"

Pierre had already long been feeling in himself that refreshing source
of blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion.
 To fresh questions as to the firmness of his resolution Pierre
replied: "Yes, yes, I agree," and with a beaming, childlike smile, his
fat chest uncovered, stepping unevenly and timidly in one slippered and
one booted foot, he advanced, while Willarski held a sword to his
bare chest.
 He was conducted from that room along passages that turned
backwards and forwards and was at last brought to the doors of the
Lodge.
 A bass voice (Pierre was still
blindfolded) questioned him as to who he was, when and where he was
born, and so on.

After that they took his right hand, placed it on something, and told
him to hold a pair of compasses to his left breast with the other hand
and to repeat after someone who read aloud an oath of fidelity to the
laws of the Order.
 The candles were then extinguished and some spirit
lighted, as Pierre knew by the smell, and he was told that he would now
see the lesser light.
 Among them stood a man
whose white shirt was stained with blood.

But the swords were drawn back from him and he was at once blindfolded
again.


"Now thou hast seen the lesser light," uttered a voice.
 Round a long table covered with black sat some
twelve men in garments like those he had already seen.
 Some of them
Pierre had met in Petersburg society.
 In the President's chair sat a
young man he did not know, with a peculiar cross hanging from his neck.
 Let into the wall was a star-shaped light.
 Two of the brothers led Pierre up to the altar,
placed his feet at right angles, and bade him lie down, saying that he
must prostrate himself at the Gates of the Temple.
 Pierre glanced at the
serious faces of those around, remembered all he had already gone
through, and realized that he could not stop halfway.
 He was aghast
at his hesitation and, trying to arouse his former devotional feeling,
prostrated himself before the Gates of the Temple.
 Give them to the woman whom you shall honor most of all.
 This
gift will be a pledge of your purity of heart to her whom you select to
be your worthy helpmeet in Masonry.
" And after a pause, he added: "But
beware, dear brother, that these gloves do not deck hands that are
unclean.
" While the Grand Master said these last words it seemed
to Pierre that he grew embarrassed.
 Pierre himself grew still more
confused, blushed like a child till tears came to his eyes, began
looking about him uneasily, and an awkward pause followed.

The Grand Master began reading the statutes.


"In our temples we recognize no other distinctions," read the Grand
Master, "but those between virtue and vice.
 Beware of making any
distinctions which may infringe equality.
 Fly to a brother's aid whoever
he may be, exhort him who goeth astray, raise him that falleth, never
bear malice or enmity toward thy brother.
 Be kindly and courteous.

Kindle in all hearts the flame of virtue.
 Share thy happiness with thy
neighbor, and may envy never dim the purity of that bliss.
 Forgive thy
enemy, do not avenge thyself except by doing him good.
 Thus fulfilling
the highest law thou shalt regain traces of the ancient dignity which
thou hast lost.
"

He finished and, getting up, embraced and kissed Pierre, who, with tears
of joy in his eyes, looked round him, not knowing how to answer the
congratulations and greetings from acquaintances that met him on all
sides.
 He acknowledged no acquaintances but saw in all these men only
brothers, and burned with impatience to set to work with them.


The Grand Master rapped with his mallet.


The Grand Master proposed that the last duty should be performed, and
the distinguished dignitary who bore the title of "Collector of Alms"
went round to all the brothers.
 Pierre would have liked to subscribe all
he had, but fearing that it might look like pride subscribed the same
amount as the others.






CHAPTER V


The day after he had been received into the Lodge, Pierre was sitting at
home reading a book and trying to fathom the significance of the Square,
one side of which symbolized God, another moral things, a third
physical things, and the fourth a combination of these.
 On the previous evening at the Lodge, he
had heard that a rumor of his duel had reached the Emperor and that it
would be wiser for him to leave Petersburg.


"My dear fellow, what have you been up to in Moscow? Why have you
quarreled with Helene, mon cher? You are under a delusion," said
Prince Vasili, as he entered.
"

Pierre was about to reply, but Prince Vasili interrupted him.


"And why didn't you simply come straight to me as to a friend? I know
all about it and understand it all," he said.
 "You behaved as becomes
a man who values his honor, perhaps too hastily, but we won't go into
that.
 But consider the position in which you are placing her and me
in the eyes of society, and even of the court," he added, lowering his
voice.
 I
expect you feel it so yourself.
 Let us write her a letter at once, and
she'll come here and all will be explained, or else, my dear boy, let me
tell you it's quite likely you'll have to suffer for it.
"

Prince Vasili gave Pierre a significant look.


"I know from reliable sources that the Dowager Empress is taking a keen
interest in the whole affair.
 You know she is very gracious to Helene.
"

Pierre tried several times to speak, but, on one hand, Prince Vasili did
not let him and, on the other, Pierre himself feared to begin to speak
in the tone of decided refusal and disagreement in which he had firmly
resolved to answer his father-in-law.
 He blinked, went
red, got up and sat down again, struggling with himself to do what was
for him the most difficult thing in life--to say an unpleasant thing
to a man's face, to say what the other, whoever he might be, did not
expect.


"Now, dear boy," said Prince Vasili playfully, "say 'yes,' and I'll
write to her myself, and we will kill the fatted calf.


"Go!" he repeated, amazed at himself and glad to see the look of
confusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vasili's face.
 And Prince Vasili had to go without
receiving any explanation.


A week later, Pierre, having taken leave of his new friends, the Masons,
and leaving large sums of money with them for alms, went away to his
estates.






CHAPTER VI


The duel between Pierre and Dolokhov was hushed up and, in spite of the
Emperor's severity regarding duels at that time, neither the principals
nor their seconds suffered for it.
 Now he alone was blamed for what had happened,
he was said to be insanely jealous and subject like his father to fits
of bloodthirsty rage.
"

"I said from the first," declared Anna Pavlovna referring to Pierre, "I
said at the time and before anyone else" (she insisted on her priority)
"that that senseless young man was spoiled by the depraved ideas of
these days.
 I said so even at the time when everybody was in raptures
about him, when he had just returned from abroad, and when, if you
remember, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my soirees.
 Besides
this refined selection of society Anna Pavlovna's receptions were
also distinguished by the fact that she always presented some new and
interesting person to the visitors and that nowhere else was the state
of the political thermometer of legitimate Petersburg court society so
dearly and distinctly indicated.
 The "cream of really
good society" consisted of the fascinating Helene, forsaken by her
husband, Mortemart, the delightful Prince Hippolyte who had just
returned from Vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, a young man
referred to in that drawing room as "a man of great merit" (un homme de
beaucoup de merite), a newly appointed maid of honor and her mother, and
several other less noteworthy persons.


The novelty Anna Pavlovna was setting before her guests that evening was
Boris Drubetskoy, who had just arrived as a special messenger from the
Prussian army and was aide-de-camp to a very important personage.


The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company that
evening was this:

"Whatever the European sovereigns and commanders may do to countenance
Bonaparte, and to cause me, and us in general, annoyance and
mortification, our opinion of Bonaparte cannot alter.
 Tu l'as voulu,
George Dandin,' that's all we have to say about it!"

When Boris, who was to be served up to the guests, entered the drawing
room, almost all the company had assembled, and the conversation, guided
by Anna Pavlovna, was about our diplomatic relations with Austria and
the hope of an alliance with her.


Boris, grown more manly and looking fresh, rosy and self-possessed,
entered the drawing room elegantly dressed in the uniform of an
aide-de-camp and was duly conducted to pay his respects to the aunt and
then brought back to the general circle.
 Krug, the charge d'affaires from
Copenhagen--a profound intellect," and simply, "Mr.


Thanks to Anna Mikhaylovna's efforts, his own tastes, and the
peculiarities of his reserved nature, Boris had managed during his
service to place himself very advantageously.
 He had
become thoroughly conversant with that unwritten code with which he had
been so pleased at Olmutz and according to which an ensign might rank
incomparably higher than a general, and according to which what was
needed for success in the service was not effort or work, or courage, or
perseverance, but only the knowledge of how to get on with those who can
grant rewards, and he was himself often surprised at the rapidity of his
success and at the inability of others to understand these things.

In consequence of this discovery his whole manner of life, all
his relations with old friends, all his plans for his future, were
completely altered.
 The remembrance of the Rostovs' house and of his childish love
for Natasha was unpleasant to him and he had not once been to see the
Rostovs since the day of his departure for the army.
 To be in Anna
Pavlovna's drawing room he considered an important step up in the
service, and he at once understood his role, letting his hostess make
use of whatever interest he had to offer.
 He himself carefully scanned
each face, appraising the possibilities of establishing intimacy with
each of those present, and the advantages that might accrue.
 He took the
seat indicated to him beside the fair Helene and listened to the general
conversation.


"Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable that
not even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure them, and
she doubts the means we have of gaining them.
 That is the actual phrase
used by the Vienna cabinet," said the Danish charge d'affaires.


"We must distinguish between the Vienna cabinet and the Emperor of
Austria," said Mortemart.
 "The Emperor of Austria can never have thought
of such a thing, it is only the cabinet that says it.
" *


    * "Europe will never be our sincere ally.


Boris listened attentively to each of the speakers, awaiting his turn,
but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at his neighbor, the
beautiful Helene, whose eyes several times met those of the handsome
young aide-de-camp with a smile.
 Boris, speaking with deliberation, told them in
pure, correct French many interesting details about the armies and the
court, carefully abstaining from expressing an opinion of his own about
the facts he was recounting.
 She asked him several
questions about his journey and seemed greatly interested in the state
of the Prussian army.
 As soon as he had finished she turned to him with
her usual smile.


"You absolutely must come and see me," she said in a tone that implied
that, for certain considerations he could not know of, this was
absolutely necessary.
 It will give me great pleasure.


"You know her husband, of course?" said Anna Pavlovna, closing her eyes
and indicating Helene with a sorrowful gesture.
 "Ah, she is such an
unfortunate and charming woman! Don't mention him before her--please
don't! It is too painful for her!"





CHAPTER VII


When Boris and Anna Pavlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolyte had
the ear of the company.


Bending forward in his armchair he said: "Le Roi de Prusse!" and having
said this laughed.
 Everyone turned toward him.


"Le Roi de Prusse?" Hippolyte said interrogatively, again laughing, and
then calmly and seriously sat back in his chair.
 Anna Pavlovna waited
for him to go on, but as he seemed quite decided to say no more she
began to tell of how at Potsdam the impious Bonaparte had stolen the
sword of Frederick the Great.
.
" she began, but
Hippolyte interrupted her with the words: "Le Roi de Prusse.
.
.


Anna Pavlovna frowned.
 Mortemart, Hippolyte's friend, addressed him
firmly.


"Come now, what about your Roi de Prusse?"

Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing.


"Your joke is too bad, it's witty but unjust," said Anna Pavlovna,
shaking her little shriveled finger at him.


"We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse, but for right principles.


"You know N-- N-- received a snuffbox with the portrait last year?" said
"the man of profound intellect.
" "Why shouldn't S-- S-- get the same
distinction?"

"Pardon me! A snuffbox with the Emperor's portrait is a reward but not a
distinction," said the diplomatist--"a gift, rather.
"

"There are precedents, I may mention Schwarzenberg.
"

"It's impossible," replied another.


"Will you bet? The ribbon of the order is a different matter.
.
.


"It is of great importance to me," she said, turning with a smile toward
Anna Pavlovna, and Anna Pavlovna, with the same sad smile with which she
spoke of her exalted patroness, supported Helene's wish.


It seemed as if from some words Boris had spoken that evening about the
Prussian army, Helene had suddenly found it necessary to see him.


But on Tuesday evening, having come to Helene's splendid salon, Boris
received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for him to
come.
 There were other guests and the countess talked little to him, and
only as he kissed her hand on taking leave said unexpectedly and in a
whisper, with a strangely unsmiling face: "Come to dinner tomorrow.
.
 in
the evening.
 You must come.
.
.
 Come!"

During that stay in Petersburg, Boris became an intimate in the
countess' house.






CHAPTER VIII


The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier.
" Militiamen and
recruits were being enrolled in the villages, and from the seat of
war came contradictory news, false as usual and therefore variously
interpreted.
 The life of old Prince Bolkonski, Prince Andrew, and
Princess Mary had greatly changed since 1805.

Despite the weakness of age, which had become particularly noticeable
since the time when he thought his son had been killed, he did not think
it right to refuse a duty to which he had been appointed by the Emperor
himself, and this fresh opportunity for action gave him new energy
and strength.
 The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet
nurse and nurse Savishna in the late princess' rooms and Princess Mary
spent most of the day in the nursery, taking a mother's place to her
little nephew as best she could.
 Mademoiselle Bourienne, too, seemed
passionately fond of the boy, and Princess Mary often deprived herself
to give her friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel--as she
called her nephew--and playing with him.
 The angel's upper lip was slightly raised as though
about to smile, and once on coming out of the chapel Prince Andrew and
Princess Mary admitted to one another that the angel's face reminded
them strangely of the little princess.


After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not
to continue his military service, and when the war recommenced
and everybody had to serve, he took a post under his father in the
recruitment so as to avoid active service.
 The old prince and his son
seemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805.
 The old man,
roused by activity, expected the best results from the new campaign,
while Prince Andrew on the contrary, taking no part in the war and
secretly regretting this, saw only the dark side.


On February 26, 1807, the old prince set off on one of his circuits.

Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father's
absence.
 Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days.
 The coachman who
had driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers and letters
for Prince Andrew.


Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with the
letters to Princess Mary's apartments, but did not find him there.
 He
was told that the prince had gone to the nursery.
 He threw the mixture onto the
floor and asked for some more water.
 The maid brought it.
 The curtains were drawn, and a single candle was burning on the
table, screened by a bound music book so that the light did not fall on
the cot.
.
.
.


"My dear, really.
.
 it's better not to wake him.
.
 he's asleep," said
the princess in a tone of entreaty.


"As you please.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 but as you please," said
Princess Mary, evidently intimidated and confused that her opinion had
prevailed.
 She drew her brother's attention to the maid who was calling
him in a whisper.


It was the second night that neither of them had slept, watching the boy
who was in a high fever.


"Petrusha has come with papers from your father," whispered the maid.


Prince Andrew went out.


"Well?" he asked.


"Still the same.
 He was burning hot.


"Andrew, don't!" said Princess Mary.


But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes,
and stooped glass in hand over the infant.


"But I wish it," he said.
 "I beg you--give it him!"

Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissively
and calling the nurse began giving the medicine.
 Prince Andrew winced and, clutching his head, went out and sat
down on a sofa in the next room.
 The old prince, now and then using abbreviations, wrote
in his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows:


Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyful news--if
it's not false.
 Bennigsen seems to have obtained a complete victory
over Buonaparte at Eylau.
 Though he is a German--I
congratulate him! I can't make out what the commander at Korchevo--a
certain Khandrikov--is up to; till now the additional men and provisions
have not arrived.
 When mischief-makers don't meddle even a German beats
Buonaparte.
 He is said to be fleeing in great disorder.
 Mind you gallop
off to Korchevo without delay and carry out instructions!


Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope.


"Ah yes, and what else did he say that's unpleasant?" thought Prince
Andrew, recalling his father's letter.
 "Yes, we have gained a victory
over Bonaparte, just when I'm not serving.
 Yes, yes, he's always poking
fun at me.
.
.
.
 Ah, well! Let him!" And he began reading Bilibin's letter
which was written in French.
 He read without understanding half of it,
read only to forget, if but for a moment, what he had too long been
thinking of so painfully to the exclusion of all else.
 Bilibin wrote that the obligation of
diplomatic discretion tormented him, and he was happy to have in Prince
Andrew a reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out the bile he
had accumulated at the sight of all that was being done in the army.

The letter was old, having been written before the battle at
Preussisch-Eylau.


"Since the day of our brilliant success at Austerlitz," wrote Bilibin,
"as you know, my dear prince, I never leave headquarters.
 I have
certainly acquired a taste for war, and it is just as well for me; what
I have seen during these last three months is incredible.


"I begin ab ovo.
 We take up their cause, but it turns out
that 'the enemy of the human race' pays no heed to our fine speeches
and in his rude and savage way throws himself on the Prussians without
giving them time to finish the parade they had begun, and in two twists
of the hand he breaks them to smithereens and installs himself in the
palace at Potsdam.


"'I most ardently desire,' writes the King of Prussia to Bonaparte,
'that Your Majesty should be received and treated in my palace in a
manner agreeable to yourself, and in so far as circumstances allowed, I
have hastened to take all steps to that end.
 May I have succeeded!' The
Prussian generals pride themselves on being polite to the French and lay
down their arms at the first demand.


"The head of the garrison at Glogau, with ten thousand men, asks the
King of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender.
.
 All
this is absolutely true.


"In short, hoping to settle matters by taking up a warlike attitude, it
turns out that we have landed ourselves in war, and what is more, in
war on our own frontiers, with and for the King of Prussia.
 We have
everything in perfect order, only one little thing is lacking, namely,
a commander in chief.
 As it was considered that the Austerlitz success
might have been more decisive had the commander in chief not been so
young, all our octogenarians were reviewed, and of Prozorovski
and Kamenski the latter was preferred.
 The general comes to us,
Suvorov-like, in a kibitka, and is received with acclamations of joy and
triumph.


"On the 4th, the first courier arrives from Petersburg.
 The mails
are taken to the field marshal's room, for he likes to do everything
himself.
 I am called in to help sort the letters and take those meant
for us.
 The field marshal looks on and waits for letters addressed
to him.
 We search, but none are to be found.
, and others.
 'Ah! So
that's the way they treat me! No confidence in me! Ah, ordered to keep
an eye on me! Very well then! Get along with you!' So he writes the
famous order of the day to General Bennigsen:

'I am wounded and cannot ride and consequently cannot command the army.

You have brought your army corps to Pultusk, routed: here it is exposed,
and without fuel or forage, so something must be done, and, as you
yourself reported to Count Buxhowden yesterday, you must think of
retreating to our frontier--which do today.
 In regard to which I humbly
submit my report, with the information that if the army remains in its
present bivouac another fortnight there will not be a healthy man left
in it by spring.


"'Grant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who is already
in any case dishonored by being unable to fulfill the great and
glorious task for which he was chosen.
 I shall await your most gracious
permission here in hospital, that I may not have to play the part of a
secretary rather than commander in the army.
 My removal from the army
does not produce the slightest stir--a blind man has left it.
'

"The field marshal is angry with the Emperor and he punishes us all,
isn't it logical?

"This is the first act.

Buxhowden is commander in chief by seniority, but General Bennigsen does
not quite see it; more particularly as it is he and his corps who are
within sight of the enemy and he wishes to profit by the opportunity to
fight a battle 'on his own hand' as the Germans say.
 This
is the battle of Pultusk, which is considered a great victory but in my
opinion was nothing of the kind.
 We civilians, as you know, have a very
bad way of deciding whether a battle was won or lost.
 Those who retreat
after a battle have lost it is what we say; and according to that it is
we who lost the battle of Pultusk.
 In short, we retreat after the battle
but send a courier to Petersburg with news of a victory, and General
Bennigsen, hoping to receive from Petersburg the post of commander in
chief as a reward for his victory, does not give up the command of
the army to General Buxhowden.
 During this interregnum we begin a very
original and interesting series of maneuvers.
 Buxhowden pursues us--we
scuttle.
 He hardly crosses the river to our side before we recross to
the other.
 Both
generals are angry, and the result is a challenge on Buxhowden's part
and an epileptic fit on Bennigsen's.
 But at the critical moment the
courier who carried the news of our victory at Pultusk to Petersburg
returns bringing our appointment as commander in chief, and our first
foe, Buxhowden, is vanquished; we can now turn our thoughts to the
second, Bonaparte.
 But as it turns out, just at that moment a third
enemy rises before us--namely the Orthodox Russian soldiers, loudly
demanding bread, meat, biscuits, fodder, and whatnot! The stores are
empty, the roads impassable.
 The Orthodox begin looting, and in a way
of which our last campaign can give you no idea.
 Half the regiments form
bands and scour the countryside and put everything to fire and sword.
 During one of these attacks they carried off my empty
portmanteau and my dressing gown.
"

At first Prince Andrew read with his eyes only, but after a while,
in spite of himself (although he knew how far it was safe to trust
Bilibin), what he had read began to interest him more and more.
 He shut his eyes,
rubbed his forehead as if to rid himself of all interest in what he
had read, and listened to what was passing in the nursery.
 Suddenly he
thought he heard a strange noise through the door.
 He went on tiptoe to the nursery door and opened it.


As often happens after long sleeplessness and long anxiety, he was
seized by an unreasoning panic--it occurred to him that the child was
dead.
 All that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror.


"All is over," he thought, and a cold sweat broke out on his forehead.

He went to the cot in confusion, sure that he would find it empty and
that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby.
 He drew the curtain aside
and for some time his frightened, restless eyes could not find the baby.

At last he saw him: the rosy boy had tossed about till he lay across the
bed with his head lower than the pillow, and was smacking his lips in
his sleep and breathing evenly.


Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that, as if he had
already lost him.
 He bent over him and, as his sister had taught him,
tried with his lips whether the child was still feverish.
 The soft
forehead was moist.
 Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand; even
the hair was wet, so profusely had the child perspired.
 Prince Andrew
longed to snatch up, to squeeze, to hold to his heart, this helpless
little creature, but dared not do so.
 He
heard a rustle behind him and a shadow appeared under the curtain of
the cot.
 The dark shadow was Princess Mary,
who had come up to the cot with noiseless steps, lifted the curtain,
and dropped it again behind her.
 Prince Andrew recognized her without
looking and held out his hand to her.


"He has perspired," said Prince Andrew.
 In the dim shadow of the curtain her
luminous eyes shone more brightly than usual from the tears of joy that
were in them.
 She leaned over to her brother and kissed him, slightly
catching the curtain of the cot.
 Each made the other a warning gesture
and stood still in the dim light beneath the curtain as if not wishing
to leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all the
world.


When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head office
and explained to them his intentions and wishes.


The chief steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre's intentions, but
remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go into the
general state of affairs which was far from satisfactory.


Despite Count Bezukhov's enormous wealth, since he had come into an
income which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a year,
Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him
an allowance of ten thousand rubles.
 The building of a
new church, previously begun, had cost about 10,000 in each of the last
two years, and he did not know how the rest, about 100,000 rubles, was
spent, and almost every year he was obliged to borrow.
 Besides this the
chief steward wrote every year telling him of fires and bad harvests,
or of the necessity of rebuilding factories and workshops.
 He felt that these
consultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up with
them or make them move.
 On the one hand, the chief steward put the state
of things to him in the very worst light, pointing out the necessity of
paying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor,
to which Pierre did not agree.


The steward did not say it was quite impossible, but suggested selling
the forests in the province of Kostroma, the land lower down the river,
and the Crimean estate, in order to make it possible: all of which
operations according to him were connected with such complicated
measures--the removal of injunctions, petitions, permits, and so
on--that Pierre became quite bewildered and only replied:

"Yes, yes, do so.
 The steward
for his part tried to pretend to the count that he considered these
consultations very valuable for the proprietor and troublesome to
himself.
 Again whole days,
weeks, and months of his life passed in as great a rush and were as much
occupied with evening parties, dinners, lunches, and balls, giving him
no time for reflection, as in Petersburg.
 He consoled himself with the thought that he fulfilled
another of the precepts--that of reforming the human race--and had other
virtues--love of his neighbor, and especially generosity.
 On the way he
intended to visit all his estates and see for himself how far his orders
had been carried out and in what state were the serfs whom God had
entrusted to his care and whom he intended to benefit.
 Continuing to represent the liberation of the serfs as
impracticable, he arranged for the erection of large buildings--schools,
hospitals, and asylums--on all the estates before the master arrived.

Everywhere preparations were made not for ceremonious welcomes (which
he knew Pierre would not like), but for just such gratefully religious
ones, with offerings of icons and the bread and salt of hospitality,
as, according to his understanding of his master, would touch and delude
him.


The southern spring, the comfortable rapid traveling in a Vienna
carriage, and the solitude of the road, all had a gladdening effect on
Pierre.
 The estates he had not before visited were each more picturesque
than the other; the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and touchingly
grateful for the benefits conferred on them.
 On a third estate the priest, bearing a cross, came to meet
him surrounded by children whom, by the count's generosity, he was
instructing in reading, writing, and religion.
 On all his estates Pierre
saw with his own eyes brick buildings erected or in course of erection,
all on one plan, for hospitals, schools, and almshouses, which were soon
to be opened.
 Everywhere he saw the stewards' accounts, according to
which the serfs' manorial labor had been diminished, and heard the
touching thanks of deputations of serfs in their full-skirted blue
coats.
 Peter's day,
and that the richest peasants (who formed the deputation) had begun
the chantry long before, but that nine tenths of the peasants in that
villages were in a state of the greatest poverty.
 He did not know that the
brick buildings, built to plan, were being built by serfs whose manorial
labor was thus increased, though lessened on paper.
 The steward promised to do all in his power
to carry out the count's wishes, seeing clearly that not only would the
count never be able to find out whether all measures had been taken for
the sale of the land and forests and to release them from the Land Bank,
but would probably never even inquire and would never know that the
newly erected buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continued
to give in money and work all that other people's serfs gave--that is to
say, all that could be got out of them.


Bogucharovo lay in a flat uninteresting part of the country among fields
and forests of fir and birch, which were partly cut down.
 The house lay
behind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink and with banks
still bare of grass.
 It was at the end of a village that stretched
along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in which were a few fir
trees.


The homestead consisted of a threshing floor, outhouses, stables, a
bathhouse, a lodge, and a large brick house with semicircular facade
still in course of construction.
 Everything bore an impress of
tidiness and good management.
 Anton, a man who had looked after Prince
Andrew in his boyhood, helped Pierre out of his carriage, said that the
prince was at home, and showed him into a clean little anteroom.


Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small though clean house after
the brilliant surroundings in which he had last met his friend in
Petersburg.


He quickly entered the small reception room with its still-unplastered
wooden walls redolent of pine, and would have gone farther, but Anton
ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door.


"A visitor," answered Anton.


Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to
face with Prince Andrew, who came out frowning and looking old.
 Pierre
embraced him and lifting his spectacles kissed his friend on the cheek
and looked at him closely.


"Well, I did not expect you, I am very glad," said Prince Andrew.


Pierre said nothing; he looked fixedly at his friend with surprise.
 His words were kindly and there was a
smile on his lips and face, but his eyes were dull and lifeless and in
spite of his evident wish to do so he could not give them a joyous
and glad sparkle.


As is usually the case with people meeting after a prolonged separation,
it was long before their conversation could settle on anything.
 The preoccupation and despondency which Pierre had noticed in his
friend's look was now still more clearly expressed in the smile with
which he listened to Pierre, especially when he spoke with joyful
animation of the past or the future.

The latter began to feel that it was in bad taste to speak of his
enthusiasms, dreams, and hopes of happiness or goodness, in Prince
Andrew's presence.
 He was ashamed to express his new Masonic views,
which had been particularly revived and strengthened by his late tour.

He checked himself, fearing to seem naive, yet he felt an irresistible
desire to show his friend as soon as possible that he was now a quite
different, and better, Pierre than he had been in Petersburg.


"I can't tell you how much I have lived through since then.
"

"Yes, we have altered much, very much, since then," said Prince Andrew.
 "My plans?" he said, as if
astonished at the word.
.
"

Pierre looked silently and searchingly into Prince Andrew's face, which
had grown much older.
.
" Pierre began, but Prince Andrew interrupted him.


"But why talk of me?.
.
.
"

Pierre began describing what he had done on his estates, trying as far
as possible to conceal his own part in the improvements that had been
made.


Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend's company and
at last became silent.


"I'll tell you what, my dear fellow," said Prince Andrew, who evidently
also felt depressed and constrained with his visitor, "I am only
bivouacking here and have just come to look round.
 I am going back to
my sister today.
 I will introduce you to her.
 But of course you know her
already," he said, evidently trying to entertain a visitor with whom he
now found nothing in common.
 "We will go after dinner.
 And would you now
like to look round my place?"

They went out and walked about till dinnertime, talking of the political
news and common acquaintances like people who do not know each other
intimately.
 Let us have dinner, and then
we'll set off.
"

At dinner, conversation turned on Pierre's marriage.


Pierre blushed, as he always did when it was mentioned, and said
hurriedly: "I will tell you some time how it all happened.
"

"But you know how it all ended, don't you? You heard of the duel?"

"And so you had to go through that too!"

"One thing I thank God for is that I did not kill that man," said
Pierre.
 "To kill a vicious dog is a very good
thing really.
"

"No, to kill a man is bad--wrong.
"

"Why is it wrong?" urged Prince Andrew.
"

"What does harm to another is wrong," said Pierre, feeling with pleasure
that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrew was roused, had
begun to talk, and wanted to express what had brought him to his present
state.


"And who has told you what is bad for another man?" he asked.


"Bad! Bad!" exclaimed Pierre.
 "We all know what is bad for ourselves.
"

"Yes, we know that, but the harm I am conscious of in myself is
something I cannot inflict on others," said Prince Andrew, growing more
and more animated and evidently wishing to express his new outlook to
Pierre.
 He spoke in French.
 "I only know two very real evils in life:
remorse and illness.
 The only good is the absence of those evils.
"

"And love of one's neighbor, and self-sacrifice?" began Pierre.
 "No, I
can't agree with you! To live only so as not to do evil and not to
have to repent is not enough.
 I lived like that, I lived for myself
and ruined my life.
" Prince
Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile.
 "Perhaps you are right for yourself," he added after a short
pause, "but everyone lives in his own way.
 You lived for yourself and
say you nearly ruined your life and only found happiness when you
began living for others.
 I lived for
glory.
--And after all what is glory? The same love of others, a desire
to do something for them, a desire for their approval.
--So I lived for
others, and not almost, but quite, ruined my life.
 And I have become
calmer since I began to live only for myself.
 "What about your son, your sister, and your father?"

"But that's just the same as myself--they are not others," explained
Prince Andrew.
 Le
prochain--your Kiev peasants to whom you want to do good.
"

And he looked at Pierre with a mocking, challenging expression.
 He
evidently wished to draw him on.


"You are joking," replied Pierre, growing more and more excited.
 "What
error or evil can there be in my wishing to do good, and even doing a
little--though I did very little and did it very badly? What evil can
there be in it if unfortunate people, our serfs, people like ourselves,
were growing up and dying with no idea of God and truth beyond
ceremonies and meaningless prayers and are now instructed in a
comforting belief in future life, retribution, recompense, and
consolation? What evil and error are there in it, if people were dying
of disease without help while material assistance could so easily be
rendered, and I supplied them with a doctor, a hospital, and an asylum
for the aged? And is it not a palpable, unquestionable good if a
peasant, or a woman with a baby, has no rest day or night and I give
them rest and leisure?" said Pierre, hurrying and lisping.
"

"Yes, if you put it like that it's quite a different matter," said
Prince Andrew.
 "I build a house and lay out a garden, and you build
hospitals.


"Come, let's argue then," said Prince Andrew, "You talk of schools," he
went on, crooking a finger, "education and so forth; that is, you want
to raise him" (pointing to a peasant who passed by them taking off his
cap) "from his animal condition and awaken in him spiritual needs, while
it seems to me that animal happiness is the only happiness possible, and
that is just what you want to deprive him of.
 I envy him, but you
want to make him what I am, without giving him my means.
 Then you say,
'lighten his toil.
' But as I see it, physical labor is as essential to
him, as much a condition of his existence, as mental activity is to you
or me.
 You can't help thinking.
 I go to bed after two in the morning,
thoughts come and I can't sleep but toss about till dawn, because I
think and can't help thinking, just as he can't help plowing and mowing;
if he didn't, he would go to the drink shop or fall ill.
 Just as I could
not stand his terrible physical labor but should die of it in a week, so
he could not stand my physical idleness, but would grow fat and die.

The third thing--what else was it you talked about?" and Prince Andrew
crooked a third finger.
 "Ah, yes, hospitals, medicine.
 He will drag
about as a cripple, a burden to everybody, for another ten years.
 Others are being born
and there are plenty of them as it is.
 It would be different if you
grudged losing a laborer--that's how I regard him--but you want to cure
him from love of him.
 And besides, what a
notion that medicine ever cured anyone! Killed them, yes!" said he,
frowning angrily and turning away from Pierre.


Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it was
evident he had reflected on this subject more than once, and he spoke
readily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a long time.


"Oh, that is dreadful, dreadful!" said Pierre.
 "I don't understand how
one can live with such ideas.
 I had such moments myself not long ago, in
Moscow and when traveling, but at such times I collapsed so that I don't
live at all--everything seems hateful to me.
.
.
 myself most of all.
 Then
I don't eat, don't wash.
.
 and how is it with you?.
.
"

"But with such ideas what motive have you for living? One would sit
without moving, undertaking nothing.
.
.
"

"Life as it is leaves one no peace.

They could not understand that I have not the necessary qualifications
for it--the kind of good-natured, fussy shallowness necessary for the
position.
 Then there's this house, which must be built in order to
have a nook of one's own in which to be quiet.
 And now there's this
recruiting.
 "No, thank you very
much! I have promised myself not to serve again in the active Russian
army.
 My father is chief in command of the Third
District, and my only way of avoiding active service is to serve under
him.


"And why do you serve?"

"Why, for this reason! My father is one of the most remarkable men of
his time.
 If I had been two hours late
a fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster's clerk at Yukhnovna
hanged," said Prince Andrew with a smile.
 "So I am serving because I
alone have any influence with my father, and now and then can save him
from actions which would torment him afterwards.
"

"Well, there you see!"

"Yes, but it is not as you imagine," Prince Andrew continued.
 "I did
not, and do not, in the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk who
had stolen some boots from the recruits; I should even have been very
glad to see him hanged, but I was sorry for my father--that again is for
myself.
"

Prince Andrew grew more and more animated.
 His eyes glittered feverishly
while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there was no
desire to do good to his neighbor.


"There now, you wish to liberate your serfs," he continued; "that is a
very good thing, but not for you--I don't suppose you ever had anyone
flogged or sent to Siberia--and still less for your serfs.
 If they are
beaten, flogged, or sent to Siberia, I don't suppose they are any the
worse off.
 In Siberia they lead the same animal life, and the stripes on
their bodies heal, and they are happy as before.
"

Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking
that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his father's
case.


He did not reply.
"

"No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never agree with you," said
Pierre.
 Prince Andrew, glancing at Pierre, broke the silence now and
then with remarks which showed that he was in a good temper.


Pointing to the fields, he spoke of the improvements he was making in
his husbandry.


Pierre remained gloomily silent, answering in monosyllables and
apparently immersed in his own thoughts.


He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy, had gone astray, did not
see the true light, and that he, Pierre, ought to aid, enlighten, and
raise him.
 But as soon as he thought of what he should say, he felt that
Prince Andrew with one word, one argument, would upset all his teaching,
and he shrank from beginning, afraid of exposing to possible ridicule
what to him was precious and sacred.


"No, but why do you think so?" Pierre suddenly began, lowering his
head and looking like a bull about to charge, "why do you think so? You
should not think so.
"

"Think? What about?" asked Prince Andrew with surprise.


"About life, about man's destiny.
 It can't be so.
 I myself thought
like that, and do you know what saved me? Freemasonry! No, don't smile.
 "Understand, my dear fellow, that outside this
union all is filled with deceit and falsehood and I agree with you that
nothing is left for an intelligent and good man but to live out
his life, like you, merely trying not to harm others.


Prince Andrew, looking straight in front of him, listened in silence to
Pierre's words.
 More than once, when the noise of the wheels prevented
his catching what Pierre said, he asked him to repeat it, and by the
peculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew's eyes and by his silence,
Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and that Prince Andrew would
not interrupt him or laugh at what he said.


They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which they had to
cross by ferry.
 While the carriage and horses were being placed on it,
they also stepped on the raft.
 "Why are you silent?"

"What do I think about it? I am listening to you.
.
.

You say: join our brotherhood and we will show you the aim of life, the
destiny of man, and the laws which govern the world.
 How is it you know everything? Why do I alone not see what you see?
You see a reign of goodness and truth on earth, but I don't see it.
"

Pierre interrupted him.


"You say you can't see a reign of goodness and truth on earth.
 Nor could
I, and it cannot be seen if one looks on our life here as the end
of everything.
.
.
 Why? It
cannot be that there is no answer.
.
.


"Yes, yes, of course," said Pierre, "isn't that what I'm saying?"

"No.
 All I say is that it is not argument that convinces me of the
necessity of a future life, but this: when you go hand in hand with
someone and all at once that person vanishes there, into nowhere, and
you yourself are left facing that abyss, and look in.
 And I have looked
in.
.
"

"Well, that's it then! You know that there is a there and there is a
Someone? There is the future life.
"

Prince Andrew did not reply.
 The carriage and horses had long since been
taken off, onto the farther bank, and reharnessed.
 The sun had sunk half
below the horizon and an evening frost was starring the puddles near
the ferry, but Pierre and Andrew, to the astonishment of the footmen,
coachmen, and ferrymen, still stood on the raft and talked.
 We must live, we
must love, and we must believe that we live not only today on this scrap
of earth, but have lived and shall live forever, there, in the Whole,"
said Pierre, and he pointed to the sky.
 Prince Andrew felt as if the sound
of the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre's words, whispering:

"It is true, believe it.
"

He sighed, and glanced with a radiant, childlike, tender look at
Pierre's face, flushed and rapturous, but yet shy before his superior
friend.


"Yes, if it only were so!" said Prince Andrew.
 "However, it is time to
get on," he added, and, stepping off the raft, he looked up at the sky
to which Pierre had pointed, and for the first time since Austerlitz saw
that high, everlasting sky he had seen while lying on that battlefield;
and something that had long been slumbering, something that was best
within him, suddenly awoke, joyful and youthful, in his soul.
 It
vanished as soon as he returned to the customary conditions of his
life, but he knew that this feeling which he did not know how to develop
existed within him.
 His meeting with Pierre formed an epoch in Prince
Andrew's life.
 Though outwardly he continued to live in the same old
way, inwardly he began a new life.
 A woman, bent with age, with a wallet on her back,
and a short, long-haired, young man in a black garment had rushed back
to the gate on seeing the carriage driving up.
 Two women ran out after
them, and all four, looking round at the carriage, ran in dismay up the
steps of the back porch.


"Those are Mary's 'God's folk,'" said Prince Andrew.
 "They have mistaken
us for my father.
 He
orders these pilgrims to be driven away, but she receives them.


Prince Andrew had no time to answer.
 The servants came out to meet them,
and he asked where the old prince was and whether he was expected back
soon.


The old prince had gone to the town and was expected back any minute.


"Let us go and see my sister," he said to Pierre when he returned.

"I have not found her yet, she is hiding now, sitting with her 'God's
folk.
' It's really very curious.
"

"What are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre.


"Come, and you'll see for yourself.
"

Princess Mary really was disconcerted and red patches came on her face
when they went in.


"Charmee de vous voir.
 She looked at
him with her beautiful radiant eyes and seemed to say, "I like you very
much, but please don't laugh at my people.



    * "Delighted to see you.
"


"Ah, and Ivanushka is here too!" said Prince Andrew, glancing with a
smile at the young pilgrim.
 "Il faut que vous sachiez que
c'est une femme," * said Prince Andrew to Pierre.



     * "You must know that this is a woman.
"

     * (2) "For heaven's sake.
"


It was evident that Prince Andrew's ironical tone toward the pilgrims
and Princess Mary's helpless attempts to protect them were their
customary long-established relations on the matter.
"


"Really?" said Pierre, gazing over his spectacles with curiosity and
seriousness (for which Princess Mary was specially grateful to him) into
Ivanushka's face, who, seeing that she was being spoken about, looked
round at them all with crafty eyes.


Princess Mary's embarrassment on her people's account was quite
unnecessary.
 They were not in the least abashed.

Ivanushka, sipping out of her saucer, looked with sly womanish eyes from
under her brows at the young men.


"Where have you been? To Kiev?" Prince Andrew asked the old woman.
 "Just at Christmastime I
was deemed worthy to partake of the holy and heavenly sacrament at the
shrine of the saint.
 "I only came across Pelageya in Yukhnovo.
.
"

"What is it? Some new relics?" asked Prince Andrew.


"Andrew, do leave off," said Princess Mary.
 "Don't tell him, Pelageya.
"

"No.
.
.
 why not, my dear, why shouldn't I? I like him.
 He is kind, he is
one of God's chosen, he's a benefactor, he once gave me ten rubles, I
remember.
 When I was in Kiev, Crazy Cyril says to me (he's one of God's
own and goes barefoot summer and winter), he says, 'Why are you not
going to the right place? Go to Kolyazin where a wonder-working icon of
the Holy Mother of God has been revealed.
' On hearing those words I said
good-by to the holy folk and went.
"

All were silent, only the pilgrim woman went on in measured tones,
drawing in her breath.


"So I come, master, and the people say to me: 'A great blessing has been
revealed, holy oil trickles from the cheeks of our blessed Mother, the
Holy Virgin Mother of God'.
.
.
"

"All right, all right, you can tell us afterwards," said Princess Mary,
flushing.


"Let me ask her," said Pierre.
 "Did you see it yourselves?" he inquired.


"Oh, yes, master, I was found worthy.
.
.


"Oh, master, what are you saying?" exclaimed the horrified Pelageya,
turning to Princess Mary for support.


"They impose on the people," he repeated.
' So he begged: 'Take
me to her, take me to her.
' It's the real truth I'm telling you, I saw
it myself.
' I saw it myself, master, the
star is fixed into the icon.
 Well, and what do you think? He received
his sight! It's a sin to speak so.


"And was the Holy Mother promoted to the rank of general?" said Prince
Andrew, with a smile.
 "Master, what have you said? God
forgive you!" And she crossed herself.
 "Lord forgive him! My dear, what
does it mean?.
.
" she asked, turning to Princess Mary.
 She got up
and, almost crying, began to arrange her wallet.
 She evidently felt
frightened and ashamed to have accepted charity in a house where such
things could be said, and was at the same time sorry to have now to
forgo the charity of this house.
 "Why did you come to
me?.
.
"

"Come, Pelageya, I was joking," said Pierre.
 "Princesse, ma parole,
je n'ai pas voulu l'offenser.
 * I did not mean anything, I was only
joking," he said, smiling shyly and trying to efface his offense.
 "It
was all my fault, and Andrew was only joking.






CHAPTER XIV


The pilgrim woman was appeased and, being encouraged to talk, gave a
long account of Father Amphilochus, who led so holy a life that his
hands smelled of incense, and how on her last visit to Kiev some monks
she knew let her have the keys of the catacombs, and how she, taking
some dried bread with her, had spent two days in the catacombs with the
saints.
"

Pierre listened to her attentively and seriously.


"Oh, I really did not mean to hurt her feelings.
 "How do you find Andrew?" she added hurriedly, not
giving him time to reply to her affectionate words.
 "I am very anxious
about him.
 His health was better in the winter, but last spring his
wound reopened and the doctor said he ought to go away for a cure.
 He keeps
it all within him.
 If you could
persuade him to go abroad.
"

Toward ten o'clock the men servants rushed to the front door, hearing
the bells of the old prince's carriage approaching.
 Prince Andrew and
Pierre also went out into the porch.


"Who's that?" asked the old prince, noticing Pierre as he got out of the
carriage.


Before supper, Prince Andrew, coming back to his father's study, found
him disputing hotly with his visitor.
 The old prince disputed it
chaffingly, but without getting angry.


"Drain the blood from men's veins and put in water instead, then there
will be no more war! Old women's nonsense--old women's nonsense!" he
repeated, but still he patted Pierre affectionately on the shoulder, and
then went up to the table where Prince Andrew, evidently not wishing
to join in the conversation, was looking over the papers his father
had brought from town.


"The marshal, a Count Rostov, hasn't sent half his contingent.
 He
came to town and wanted to invite me to dinner--I gave him a pretty
dinner!.
.
 And there, look at this.
.
.
 Well, my boy," the old prince
went on, addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder.
 "A fine
fellow--your friend--I like him! He stirs me up.
 Another says clever
things and one doesn't care to listen, but this one talks rubbish yet
stirs an old fellow up.
 We'll have another dispute.


Only now, on his visit to Bald Hills, did Pierre fully realize the
strength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew.
 With the stern old prince and the gentle, timid
Princess Mary, though he had scarcely known them, Pierre at once felt
like an old friend.
 Not only Princess
Mary, who had been won by his gentleness with the pilgrims, gave him her
most radiant looks, but even the one-year-old "Prince Nicholas" (as his
grandfather called him) smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken in
his arms, and Michael Ivanovich and Mademoiselle Bourienne looked at him
with pleasant smiles when he talked to the old prince.


The old prince came in to supper; this was evidently on Pierre's
account.


When Pierre had gone and the members of the household met together, they
began to express their opinions of him as people always do after a new
acquaintance has left, but as seldom happens, no one said anything but
what was good of him.






CHAPTER XV


When returning from his leave, Rostov felt, for the first time, how
close was the bond that united him to Denisov and the whole regiment.


On approaching it, Rostov felt as he had done when approaching his home
in Moscow.
 When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttoned uniform of
his regiment, when he recognized red-haired Dementyev and saw the
picket ropes of the roan horses, when Lavrushka gleefully shouted to his
master, "The count has come!" and Denisov, who had been asleep on his
bed, ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him, and the
officers collected round to greet the new arrival, Rostov experienced
the same feeling as when his mother, his father, and his sister had
embraced him, and tears of joy choked him so that he could not speak.
 But here was none of
all that turmoil of the world at large, where he did not know his right
place and took mistaken decisions; here was no Sonya with whom he ought,
or ought not, to have an explanation; here was no possibility of going
there or not going there; here there were not twenty-four hours in the
day which could be spent in such a variety of ways; there was not that
innumerable crowd of people of whom not one was nearer to him or farther
from him than another; there were none of those uncertain and undefined
money relations with his father, and nothing to recall that terrible
loss to Dolokhov.

The whole world was divided into two unequal parts: one, our Pavlograd
regiment; the other, all the rest.
 In the regiment, everything was definite: who was lieutenant, who
captain, who was a good fellow, who a bad one, and most of all, who was
a comrade.
 The canteenkeeper gave one credit, one's pay came every four
months, there was nothing to think out or decide, you had only to do
nothing that was considered bad in the Pavlograd regiment and, when
given an order, to do what was clearly, distinctly, and definitely
ordered--and all would be well.
 Life in the regiment, during this campaign, was all the pleasanter
for him, because, after his loss to Dolokhov (for which, in spite of all
his family's efforts to console him, he could not forgive himself), he
had made up his mind to atone for his fault by serving, not as he
had done before, but really well, and by being a perfectly first-rate
comrade and officer--in a word, a splendid man altogether, a thing which
seemed so difficult out in the world, but so possible in the regiment.


After his losses, he had determined to pay back his debt to his parents
in five years.


Our army, after repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pultusk
and Preussisch-Eylau, was concentrated near Bartenstein.
 It was awaiting
the Emperor's arrival and the beginning of a new campaign.
 Several
times parts of the Pavlograd regiment had exchanged shots with the
enemy, had taken prisoners, and once had even captured Marshal Oudinot's
carriages.


A thaw had set in, it was muddy and cold, the ice on the river broke,
and the roads became impassable.
 For days neither provisions for the
men nor fodder for the horses had been issued.


Everything had been eaten up and the inhabitants had all fled--if any
remained, they were worse than beggars and nothing more could be taken
from them; even the soldiers, usually pitiless enough, instead of taking
anything from them, often gave them the last of their rations.


The Pavlograd regiment had had only two men wounded in action, but had
lost nearly half its men from hunger and sickness.
" It was very bitter, but they wandered about the
fields seeking it and dug it out with their sabers and ate it, though
they were ordered not to do so, as it was a noxious plant.


The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on straw from the thatched
roofs and had become terribly thin, though still covered with tufts of
felty winter hair.


Despite this destitution, the soldiers and officers went on living just
as usual.
 Despite their pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms, the
hussars formed line for roll call, kept things in order, groomed their
horses, polished their arms, brought in straw from the thatched roofs in
place of fodder, and sat down to dine round the caldrons from which
they rose up hungry, joking about their nasty food and their hunger.
 As
usual, in their spare time, they lit bonfires, steamed themselves before
them naked; smoked, picked out and baked sprouting rotten potatoes, told
and listened to stories of Potemkin's and Suvorov's campaigns, or to
legends of Alesha the Sly, or the priest's laborer Mikolka.
 The seniors tried to collect straw and potatoes and,
in general, food for the men.
 The younger ones occupied themselves as
before, some playing cards (there was plenty of money, though there was
no food), some with more innocent games, such as quoits and skittles.


Rostov lived, as before, with Denisov, and since their furlough they had
become more friendly than ever.
 On one of his foraging expeditions, in
a deserted and ruined village to which he had come in search of
provisions, Rostov found a family consisting of an old Pole and his
daughter with an infant in arms.
 One of his
comrades, talking of women, began chaffing Rostov, saying that he was
more wily than any of them and that it would not be a bad thing if he
introduced to them the pretty Polish girl he had saved.
 When the
officer had gone away, Denisov, who did not himself know what Rostov's
relations with the Polish girl might be, began to upbraid him for his
quickness of temper, and Rostov replied:

"Say what you like.
.
.
 She is like a sister to me, and I can't tell you
how it offended me.
 because.
.
.
 well, for that reason.
.
.
.
"

Denisov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the room
without looking at Rostov, as was his way at moments of deep feeling.


"Ah, what a mad bweed you Wostovs are!" he muttered, and Rostov noticed
tears in his eyes.






CHAPTER XVI


In April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor's arrival,
but Rostov had no chance of being present at the review he held at
Bartenstein, as the Pavlograds were at the outposts far beyond that
place.


They were bivouacking.
 A
trench was dug three and a half feet wide, four feet eight inches deep,
and eight feet long.
 At one end of the trench, steps were cut out and
these formed the entrance and vestibule.
 On
each side of the trench, the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two
and a half feet, and this did duty for bedsteads and couches.
 When it was very cold,
embers from the soldiers' campfire were placed on a bent sheet of iron
on the steps in the "reception room"--as Denisov called that part of
the hut--and it was then so warm that the officers, of whom there were
always some with Denisov and Rostov, sat in their shirt sleeves.


Suddenly he heard Denisov shouting in a vibrating voice behind the hut,
evidently much excited.
 Rostov moved to the window to see whom he was
speaking to, and saw the quartermaster, Topcheenko.
 "And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarchuk bwought some fwom
the fields.
"

"I have given the order again and again, your honor, but they don't
obey," answered the quartermaster.


Rostov lay down again on his bed and thought complacently: "Let him fuss
and bustle now, my job's done and I'm lying down--capitally!" He could
hear that Lavrushka--that sly, bold orderly of Denisov's--was talking,
as well as the quartermaster.
 Lavrushka was saying something about
loaded wagons, biscuits, and oxen he had seen when he had gone out for
provisions.


Then Denisov's voice was heard shouting farther and farther away.

"Saddle! Second platoon!"

"Where are they off to now?" thought Rostov.


Five minutes later, Denisov came into the hut, climbed with muddy boots
on the bed, lit his pipe, furiously scattered his things about, took
his leaded whip, buckled on his saber, and went out again.


"Let God and our gweat monarch judge me afterwards!" said Denisov going
out, and Rostov heard the hoofs of several horses splashing through the
mud.
 He did not even trouble to find out where Denisov had gone.
 Having
got warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did not leave the hut till
toward evening.
 The weather had cleared
up, and near the next hut two officers and a cadet were playing svayka,
laughing as they threw their missiles which buried themselves in the
soft mud.
 Rostov joined them.
 In the middle of the game, the officers
saw some wagons approaching with fifteen hussars on their skinny horses
behind them.
 The wagons escorted by the hussars drew up to the picket
ropes and a crowd of hussars surrounded them.


"There now, Denisov has been worrying," said Rostov, "and here are the
provisions.
 "Won't the soldiers be glad!"

A little behind the hussars came Denisov, accompanied by two infantry
officers with whom he was talking.


Rostov went to meet them.


"Haven't I told you I won't give them up?" replied Denisov.


"You will answer for it, Captain.
 It is mutiny--seizing the transport of
one's own army.
"

"And mine have had nothing for two weeks," said Denisov.


"It is robbery! You'll answer for it, sir!" said the infantry officer,
raising his voice.


"Now, what are you pestewing me for?" cried Denisov, suddenly losing his
temper.
 Be off! Go!" he shouted at the officers.


"Very well, then!" shouted the little officer, undaunted and not riding
away.
.
.


"Very well, very well!" muttered the officer, threateningly, and turning
his horse he trotted away, jolting in his saddle.


"I've taken twansports from the infantwy by force!" he said.
"

The wagons that had reached the hussars had been consigned to an
infantry regiment, but learning from Lavrushka that the transport
was unescorted, Denisov with his hussars had seized it by force.
 The
soldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely, and they even shared
them with the other squadrons.
 If not, as the demand was
booked against an infantry regiment, there will be a row and the affair
may end badly.
 Denisov
could not speak and gasped for breath.


Alarmed at Denisov's condition, Rostov suggested that he should undress,
drink some water, and send for the doctor.


"Twy me for wobbewy.
.
.
.
.
 and I'll tell the Empewo'.
.
.
" he
muttered.
 A deep saucer of black blood was taken from his hairy arm
and only then was he able to relate what had happened to him.


"I get there," began Denisov.
 "'Now then, where's your chief's
quarters?' They were pointed out.
 'Please to wait.
' 'I've widden twenty
miles and have duties to attend to and no time to wait.
 Announce me.
'
Vewy well, so out comes their head chief--also took it into his head to
lecture me: 'It's wobbewy!'--'Wobbewy,' I say, 'is not done by man who
seizes pwovisions to feed his soldiers, but by him who takes them to
fill his own pockets!' 'Will you please be silent?' 'Vewy good!' Then he
says: 'Go and give a weceipt to the commissioner, but your affair will
be passed on to headquarters.
.
 who do you think? No, but wait a bit!.
.
 Who is it that's
starving us?" shouted Denisov, hitting the table with the fist of his
newly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down and
the tumblers on it jumped about.
 "Telyanin! 'What? So it's you who's
starving us to death! Is it? Take this and this!' and I hit him so
pat, stwaight on his snout.
.
.
 'Ah, what a.
.
.
 what a.
.
.
!' and I sta'ted
fwashing him.
 Wait, we must tie it up again.


The case, as represented by the offended parties, was that, after
seizing the transports, Major Denisov, being drunk, went to the chief
quartermaster and without any provocation called him a thief, threatened
to strike him, and on being led out had rushed into the office and given
two officials a thrashing, and dislocated the arm of one of them.


Denisov spoke contemptuously of the whole matter, but Rostov knew him
too well not to detect that (while hiding it from others) at heart
he feared a court-martial and was worried over the affair, which was
evidently taking a bad turn.
 On the previous day Platov reconnoitered with two Cossack
regiments and two squadrons of hussars.
 Denisov, as was his wont, rode
out in front of the outposts, parading his courage.
 A bullet fired by
a French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part of his leg.






CHAPTER XVII


In June the battle of Friedland was fought, in which the Pavlograds did
not take part, and after that an armistice was proclaimed.


The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastated
by Russian and French troops.
 Because it was summer, when it is so
beautiful out in the fields, the little town presented a particularly
dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences, its foul streets,
tattered inhabitants, and the sick and drunken soldiers wandering about.
 On the stairs he met a Russian army
doctor smoking a cigar.
 The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant.


"I can't tear myself to pieces," the doctor was saying.
 "Come to Makar
Alexeevich in the evening.
 I shall be there.


"Oh, do the best you can! Isn't it all the same?" The doctor noticed
Rostov coming upstairs.


"What do you want, sir?" said the doctor.
 "What do you want? The bullets
having spared you, do you want to try typhus? This is a pesthouse, sir.
"

"How so?" asked Rostov.


"Typhus, sir.
 It's death to go in.
 Only we two, Makeev and I" (he
pointed to the assistant), "keep on here.
 Some five of us doctors have
died in this place.
.
.
 "Prussian doctors have been
invited here, but our allies don't like it at all.
 I can't tell you, sir.
 "Four hundred, sir,
and they're always sending me fresh ones.
 There are four hundred? Eh?"
he asked, turning to the assistant.
 He was evidently vexed and impatient
for the talkative doctor to go.
 "He was wounded at Molliten.
 Eh, Makeev?" queried the doctor, in a tone of
indifference.


Rostov described Denisov's appearance.
 "That one is
dead, I fancy.
 However, I'll look up our list.
 "But if you'll
step into the officers' wards you'll see for yourself," he added,
turning to Rostov.


"Ah, you'd better not go, sir," said the doctor, "or you may have to
stay here yourself.
"

But Rostov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant to
show him the way.


"Only don't blame me!" the doctor shouted up after him.


Rostov and the assistant went into the dark corridor.
 The smell was so
strong there that Rostov held his nose and had to pause and collect
his strength before he could go on.
 A door opened to the right, and an
emaciated sallow man on crutches, barefoot and in underclothing, limped
out and, leaning against the doorpost, looked with glittering envious
eyes at those who were passing.
 Glancing in at the door, Rostov saw that
the sick and wounded were lying on the floor on straw and overcoats.


"May I go in and look?"

"What is there to see?" said the assistant.


But, just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in,
Rostov entered the soldiers' ward.
 The foul air, to which he had already
begun to get used in the corridor, was still stronger here.
 It was a
little different, more pungent, and one felt that this was where it
originated.
 Most of them were unconscious and
paid no attention to the newcomers.
 His face was purple, his eyes were rolled back so that
only the whites were seen, and on his bare legs and arms which were
still red, the veins stood out like cords.
 He was knocking the back of
his head against the floor, hoarsely uttering some word which he kept
repeating.


"Who looks after the sick here?" he asked the assistant.


Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital orderly, came in from the
next room, marching stiffly, and drew up in front of Rostov.


"Get him to his place and give him some water," said Rostov, pointing to
the Cossack.


"Yes, your honor," the soldier replied complacently, and rolling his
eyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter, but did not
move.
 Close to the corner, on an overcoat,
sat an old, unshaven, gray-bearded soldier as thin as a skeleton, with a
stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostov.
 His neighbor on the other side, who lay motionless some
distance from him with his head thrown back, was a young soldier with
a snub nose.
 His pale waxen face was still freckled and his eyes were
rolled back.
 Rostov looked at the young soldier and a cold chill ran
down his back.
.
.
" he began, turning to the assistant.


"And how we've been begging, your honor," said the old soldier, his
jaw quivering.
 "He's been dead since morning.
"

"I'll send someone at once.






CHAPTER XVIII


Going along the corridor, the assistant led Rostov to the officers'
wards, consisting of three rooms, the doors of which stood open.
 There
were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying or
sitting on them.
 Some were walking about the rooms in hospital dressing
gowns.
 The first person Rostov met in the officers' ward was a thin
little man with one arm, who was walking about the first room in a
nightcap and hospital dressing gown, with a pipe between his teeth.
.
.
" he went on with a smile, pointing to the empty
sleeve of his dressing gown.
 "Looking for Vasili Dmitrich Denisov? My
neighbor," he added, when he heard who Rostov wanted.
 "Here, here," and
Tushin led him into the next room, from whence came sounds of several
laughing voices.


"How can they laugh, or even live at all here?" thought Rostov, still
aware of that smell of decomposing flesh that had been so strong in
the soldiers' ward, and still seeming to see fixed on him those envious
looks which had followed him out from both sides, and the face of that
young soldier with eyes rolled back.


Denisov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket, though it
was nearly noon.


His wound, though a slight one, had not yet healed even now, six weeks
after he had been hit.
 His face had the same swollen pallor as the faces
of the other hospital patients, but it was not this that struck Rostov.

What struck him was that Denisov did not seem glad to see him, and
smiled at him unnaturally.


Rostov even noticed that Denisov did not like to be reminded of the
regiment, or in general of that other free life which was going on
outside the hospital.
 He seemed to try to forget that old life and
was only interested in the affair with the commissariat officers.
 He became animated when he began
reading his paper and specially drew Rostov's attention to the stinging
rejoinders he made to his enemies.
 His hospital companions, who had
gathered round Rostov--a fresh arrival from the world outside--gradually
began to disperse as soon as Denisov began reading his answer.
 Rostov
noticed by their faces that all those gentlemen had already heard that
story more than once and were tired of it.
 In the middle of the reading, the Uhlan interrupted
Denisov.


"But what I say is," he said, turning to Rostov, "it would be best
simply to petition the Emperor for pardon.
.
"

"Me petition the Empewo'!" exclaimed Denisov, in a voice to which he
tried hard to give the old energy and fire, but which sounded like an
expression of irritable impotence.

Let them twy me, I'm not afwaid of anyone.
 I've served the Tsar and
my countwy honowably and have not stolen! And am I to be degwaded?.
.
.
 This is what I say: 'If I had
wobbed the Tweasuwy.
.
.
'"

"It's certainly well written," said Tushin, "but that's not the point,
Vasili Dmitrich," and he also turned to Rostov.
 "One has to submit, and
Vasili Dmitrich doesn't want to.
 You know the auditor told you it was a
bad business.
"

"Well, let it be bad," said Denisov.
 No doubt he"
(indicating Rostov) "has connections on the staff.
 You won't find a
better opportunity.
"

"Haven't I said I'm not going to gwovel?" Denisov interrupted him, went
on reading his paper.


Rostov had not the courage to persuade Denisov, though he instinctively
felt that the way advised by Tushin and the other officers was the
safest, and though he would have been glad to be of service to Denisov.

He knew his stubborn will and straightforward hasty temper.


"Yes, wait a bit," said Denisov, glancing round at the officers, and
taking his papers from under his pillow he went to the window, where he
had an inkpot, and sat down to write.
 It seems.
.
.
"

He did not finish, but gave a painfully unnatural smile.






CHAPTER XIX


Having returned to the regiment and told the commander the state of
Denisov's affairs, Rostov rode to Tilsit with the letter to the Emperor.
 Boris Drubetskoy had asked the important personage on whom he
was in attendance, to include him in the suite appointed for the stay at
Tilsit.


"I should like to see the great man," he said, alluding to Napoleon,
whom hitherto he, like everyone else, had always called Buonaparte.


"You are speaking of Buonaparte?" asked the general, smiling.


Boris looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that he was
being tested.
 He saw the raft, decorated with monograms, saw Napoleon
pass before the French Guards on the farther bank of the river, saw the
pensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in silence in a tavern
on the bank of the Niemen awaiting Napoleon's arrival, saw both Emperors
get into boats, and saw how Napoleon--reaching the raft first--stepped
quickly forward to meet Alexander and held out his hand to him, and how
they both retired into the pavilion.
 At the time of the meeting
at Tilsit he asked the names of those who had come with Napoleon and
about the uniforms they wore, and listened attentively to words spoken
by important personages.
 At the moment the Emperors went into the
pavilion he looked at his watch, and did not forget to look at it
again when Alexander came out.
 The interview had lasted an hour and
fifty-three minutes.
 He noted this down that same evening, among other
facts he felt to be of historic importance.
 He had not
only become known, but people had grown accustomed to him and accepted
him.

Zhilinski, a Pole brought up in Paris, was rich, and passionately
fond of the French, and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit, French
officers of the Guard and from French headquarters were dining and
lunching with him and Boris.
 The guest of honor was an aide-de-camp of
Napoleon's, there were also several French officers of the Guard, and
a page of Napoleon's, a young lad of an old aristocratic French
family.


Rostov, in common with the whole army from which he came, was far
from having experienced the change of feeling toward Napoleon and the
French--who from being foes had suddenly become friends--that had taken
place at headquarters and in Boris.
 In the army, Bonaparte and the
French were still regarded with mingled feelings of anger, contempt,
and fear.
 Only recently, talking with one of Platov's Cossack officers,
Rostov had argued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he would be
treated not as a sovereign, but as a criminal.
 As soon as he noticed a French officer, who
thrust his head out of the door, that warlike feeling of hostility which
he always experienced at the sight of the enemy suddenly seized him.
 Boris, hearing a strange voice in the anteroom, came out to meet
him.
 An expression of annoyance showed itself for a moment on his face
on first recognizing Rostov.


"Ah, it's you? Very glad, very glad to see you," he said, however,
coming toward him with a smile.
 But Rostov had noticed his first
impulse.
 I should not have come, but I have
business," he said coldly.


"No, I only wonder how you managed to get away from your regiment.
 Dans
un moment je suis a vous," * he said, answering someone who called him.



    * "In a minute I shall be at your disposal.
"


"I see I'm intruding," Rostov repeated.


The look of annoyance had already disappeared from Boris' face: having
evidently reflected and decided how to act, he very quietly took
both Rostov's hands and led him into the next room.


"Count Zhilinski--le Comte N.
 S.
 Rostov looked frowningly at the Frenchmen, bowed
reluctantly, and remained silent.
 Boris did not
appear to notice the constraint the newcomer produced and, with the same
pleasant composure and the same veiled look in his eyes with which he
had met Rostov, tried to enliven the conversation.
 One of the Frenchmen,
with the politeness characteristic of his countrymen, addressed the
obstinately taciturn Rostov, saying that the latter had probably come to
Tilsit to see the Emperor.
 He really was in their way, for he alone
took no part in the conversation which again became general.
 "Come and talk over my
business and I'll go away.
"

"Oh, no, not at all," said Boris.
"

"Yes, really.
.
.
"

They went into the little room where Boris slept.
 When he and Boris
were alone, Rostov felt for the first time that he could not look Boris
in the face without a sense of awkwardness.
 Boris, with one leg crossed
over the other and stroking his left hand with the slender fingers of
his right, listened to Rostov as a general listens to the report of a
subordinate, now looking aside and now gazing straight into Rostov's
eyes with the same veiled look.
 Each time this happened Rostov felt
uncomfortable and cast down his eyes.


"I have heard of such cases and know that His Majesty is very severe
in such affairs.
.
.
 But in general,
I think.
.
.
"

"So you don't want to do anything? Well then, say so!" Rostov almost
shouted, not looking Boris in the face.


"On the contrary, I will do what I can.
 Only I thought.
.
 He could not himself go to the general in attendance
as he was in mufti and had come to Tilsit without permission to do
so, and Boris, even had he wished to, could not have done so on the
following day.
 Andrew of the
First Degree, and a dinner had been arranged for the evening, given by
a battalion of the French Guards to the Preobrazhensk battalion.
 The
Emperors were to be present at that banquet.


Rostov felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable with Boris that, when the
latter looked in after supper, he pretended to be asleep, and early next
morning went away, avoiding Boris.
 In his civilian clothes and a
round hat, he wandered about the town, staring at the French and their
uniforms and at the streets and houses where the Russian and French
Emperors were staying.
 "All is over between us, but I won't leave
here without having done all I can for Denisov and certainly not without
getting his letter to the Emperor.
 The Emperor!.
.
.
 He is here!" thought
Rostov, who had unconsciously returned to the house where Alexander
lodged.


Saddled horses were standing before the house and the suite were
assembling, evidently preparing for the Emperor to come out.


"I may see him at any moment," thought Rostov.
 "If only I were to hand
the letter direct to him and tell him all.
 could they really arrest me
for my civilian clothes? Surely not! He would understand on whose side
justice lies.
 Who can be
more just, more magnanimous than he? And even if they did arrest me for
being here, what would it matter?" thought he, looking at an officer who
was entering the house the Emperor occupied.
 "After all, people do go
in.
.
.


"No, I won't miss my opportunity now, as I did after Austerlitz," he
thought, expecting every moment to meet the monarch, and conscious of
the blood that rushed to his heart at the thought.
 "I will fall at his
feet and beseech him.
 He will lift me up, will listen, and will even
thank me.
 'I am happy when I can do good, but to remedy injustice is the
greatest happiness,'" Rostov fancied the sovereign saying.


A broad staircase led straight up from the entry, and to the right he
saw a closed door.
 Below, under the staircase, was a door leading to the
lower floor.


"To hand in a letter, a petition, to His Majesty," said Nicholas, with a
tremor in his voice.


"A petition? This way, to the officer on duty" (he was shown the door
leading downstairs), "only it won't be accepted.
"

On hearing this indifferent voice, Rostov grew frightened at what he
was doing; the thought of meeting the Emperor at any moment was so
fascinating and consequently so alarming that he was ready to run away,
but the official who had questioned him opened the door, and Rostov
entered.


A short stout man of about thirty, in white breeches and high boots and
a batiste shirt that he had evidently only just put on, standing in that
room, and his valet was buttoning on to the back of his breeches a
new pair of handsome silk-embroidered braces that, for some reason,
attracted Rostov's attention.
 This man was speaking to someone in the
adjoining room.
 He'll be coming out directly, we must go.
"

"Later.
.
.
"

Rostov turned and was about to go, but the man in the braces stopped
him.
 And go along with
you.
 go," and he continued to put on the uniform the valet handed him.


Rostov went back into the hall and noticed that in the porch there were
many officers and generals in full parade uniform, whom he had to pass.


Cursing his temerity, his heart sinking at the thought of finding
himself at any moment face to face with the Emperor and being put to
shame and arrested in his presence, fully alive now to the impropriety
of his conduct and repenting of it, Rostov, with downcast eyes, was
making his way out of the house through the brilliant suite when a
familiar voice called him and a hand detained him.


"What are you doing here, sir, in civilian dress?" asked a deep voice.


"I'm sorry, sorry for that fine fellow.
 Give me the letter.
"

Hardly had Rostov handed him the letter and finished explaining
Denisov's case, when hasty steps and the jingling of spurs were heard
on the stairs, and the general, leaving him, went to the porch.
 Forgetting the danger of being recognized,
Rostov went close to the porch, together with some inquisitive
civilians, and again, after two years, saw those features he adored:
that same face and same look and step, and the same union of majesty and
mildness.
.
.
 And the feeling of enthusiasm and love for his sovereign
rose again in Rostov's soul in all its old force.
 In the uniform of
the Preobrazhensk regiment--white chamois-leather breeches and high
boots--and wearing a star Rostov did not know (it was that of the Legion
d'honneur), the monarch came out into the porch, putting on his gloves
and carrying his hat under his arm.
 He stopped and looked about him,
brightening everything around by his glance.


All the suite drew back and Rostov saw the general talking for some time
to the Emperor.
 Stopping beside his horse, with
his hand on the saddle, the Emperor turned to the cavalry general and
said in a loud voice, evidently wishing to be heard by all:

"I cannot do it, General.
 I cannot, because the law is stronger than I,"
and he raised his foot to the stirrup.


The general bowed his head respectfully, and the monarch mounted and
rode down the street at a gallop.
 Beside himself with enthusiasm, Rostov
ran after him with the crowd.


As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions, which presented
arms, another group of horsemen galloped up to the opposite flank, and
at the head of them Rostov recognized Napoleon.
 It could be no one else.

He came at a gallop, wearing a small hat, a blue uniform open over a
white vest, and the St.
 On approaching Alexander he raised his hat, and as he did
so, Rostov, with his cavalryman's eye, could not help noticing that
Napoleon did not sit well or firmly in the saddle.
 The battalions
shouted "Hurrah!" and "Vive l'Empereur!" Napoleon said something to
Alexander, and both Emperors dismounted and took each other's hands.

Napoleon's face wore an unpleasant and artificial smile.
 Alexander was
saying something affable to him.


In spite of the trampling of the French gendarmes' horses, which were
pushing back the crowd, Rostov kept his eyes on every movement of
Alexander and Bonaparte.


Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train of their suites, approached
the right flank of the Preobrazhensk battalion and came straight up to
the crowd standing there.
 The crowd unexpectedly found itself so close
to the Emperors that Rostov, standing in the front row, was afraid he
might be recognized.


This was said by the undersized Napoleon, looking up straight into
Alexander's eyes.
 Alexander listened attentively to what was said to him
and, bending his head, smiled pleasantly.


"To him who has borne himself most bravely in this last war," added
Napoleon, accentuating each syllable, as with a composure and assurance
exasperating to Rostov, he ran his eyes over the Russian ranks drawn
up before him, who all presented arms with their eyes fixed on their
Emperor.


"Will Your Majesty allow me to consult the colonel?" said Alexander and
took a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozlovski, the commander of the
battalion.


Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove off his small white hand,
tore it in doing so, and threw it away.
 An aide-de-camp behind him
rushed forward and picked it up.


"To whom shall it be given?" the Emperor Alexander asked Koslovski, in
Russian in a low voice.


"To whomever Your Majesty commands.


"Can it be me?" thought Rostov.


"Where are you off to? Stop here!" voices whispered to Lazarev who did
not know where to go.
 Lazarev stopped, casting a sidelong look at his
colonel in alarm.


Napoleon slightly turned his head, and put his plump little hand out
behind him as if to take something.
 The members of his suite, guessing
at once what he wanted, moved about and whispered as they passed
something from one to another, and a page--the same one Rostov had seen
the previous evening at Boris'--ran forward and, bowing respectfully
over the outstretched hand and not keeping it waiting a moment, laid
in it an Order on a red ribbon.
 Napoleon, without looking, pressed two
fingers together and the badge was between them.
 Then he approached
Lazarev (who rolled his eyes and persistently gazed at his own monarch),
looked round at the Emperor Alexander to imply that what he was now
doing was done for the sake of his ally, and the small white hand
holding the Order touched one of Lazarev's buttons.
 It was as if
Napoleon knew that it was only necessary for his hand to deign to touch
that soldier's breast for the soldier to be forever happy, rewarded, and
distinguished from everyone else in the world.
 Napoleon merely laid
the cross on Lazarev's breast and, dropping his hand, turned toward
Alexander as though sure that the cross would adhere there.
 And it
really did.


Officious hands, Russian and French, immediately seized the cross and
fastened it to the uniform.
 Lazarev glanced morosely at the little man
with white hands who was doing something to him and, still standing
motionless presenting arms, looked again straight into Alexander's eyes,
as if asking whether he should stand there, or go away, or do something
else.
 The Preobrazhensk battalion,
breaking rank, mingled with the French Guards and sat down at the tables
prepared for them.
 Russian and French officers embraced
him, congratulated him, and pressed his hands.


"What d'you think of the treat? All on silver plate," one of them was
saying.
 "Have you seen Lazarev?"

"I have.
"

"Tomorrow, I hear, the Preobrazhenskis will give them a dinner.
"

"Yes, but what luck for Lazarev! Twelve hundred francs' pension for
life.


"It's a fine thing! First-rate!"

"Have you heard the password?" asked one Guards' officer of another.

"The day before yesterday it was 'Napoleon, France, bravoure';
yesterday, 'Alexandre, Russie, grandeur.
 He must
respond in kind.
"

Boris, too, with his friend Zhilinski, came to see the Preobrazhensk
banquet.
 On his way back, he noticed Rostov standing by the corner of a
house.


"Rostov! How d'you do? We missed one another," he said, and could
not refrain from asking what was the matter, so strangely dismal and
troubled was Rostov's face.


"Nothing, nothing," replied Rostov.


"You'll call round?"

"Yes, I will.
"

Rostov stood at that corner for a long time, watching the feast from a
distance.
 In his mind, a painful process was going on which he could
not bring to a conclusion.
 Now he
remembered Denisov with his changed expression, his submission, and the
whole hospital, with arms and legs torn off and its dirt and disease.
 So
vividly did he recall that hospital stench of dead flesh that he
looked round to see where the smell came from.
 Then why those severed
arms and legs and those dead men?.
.
 Then again he thought of Lazarev
rewarded and Denisov punished and unpardoned.
 He went to a hotel he had noticed that morning.

There he found so many people, among them officers who, like himself,
had come in civilian clothes, that he had difficulty in getting a
dinner.
 Two officers of his own division joined him.
 The conversation
naturally turned on the peace.
 The officers, his comrades, like most of
the army, were dissatisfied with the peace concluded after the battle of
Friedland.

Nicholas ate and drank (chiefly the latter) in silence.
 The process in his mind went on
tormenting him without reaching a conclusion.
 He feared to give way to
his thoughts, yet could not get rid of them.
 Suddenly, on one of the
officers' saying that it was humiliating to look at the French, Rostov
began shouting with uncalled-for wrath, and therefore much to the
surprise of the officers:

"How can you judge what's best?" he cried, the blood suddenly rushing to
his face.
 "How can you judge the Emperor's actions? What right have
we to argue? We cannot comprehend either the Emperor's aims or his
actions!"

"But I never said a word about the Emperor!" said the officer,
justifying himself, and unable to understand Rostov's outburst, except
on the supposition that he was drunk.


But Rostov did not listen to him.
 "If we are ordered to die, we must die.
 If once we begin
judging and arguing about everything, nothing sacred will be left! That
way we shall be saying there is no God--nothing!" shouted Nicholas,
banging the table--very little to the point as it seemed to his
listeners, but quite relevantly to the course of his own thoughts.
.
.


"And to drink," said one of the officers, not wishing to quarrel.


"Yes, and to drink," assented Nicholas.
 "Hullo there! Another bottle!"
he shouted.


In 1808 the Emperor Alexander went to Erfurt for a fresh interview with
the Emperor Napoleon, and in the upper circles of Petersburg there was
much talk of the grandeur of this important meeting.
 But besides considerations of
foreign policy, the attention of Russian society was at that time keenly
directed on the internal changes that were being undertaken in all the
departments of government.






BOOK SIX: 1808 - 10





CHAPTER I


Prince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the country.


All the plans Pierre had attempted on his estates--and constantly
changing from one thing to another had never accomplished--were carried
out by Prince Andrew without display and without perceptible difficulty.


Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his father and his
son, who was still in the care of nurses.


Besides being occupied with his estates and reading a great variety of
books, Prince Andrew was at this time busy with a critical survey of
our last two unfortunate campaigns, and with drawing up a proposal for a
reform of the army rules and regulations.


In the spring of 1809 he went to visit the Ryazan estates which had been
inherited by his son, whose guardian he was.


They crossed the ferry where he had talked with Pierre the year before.

They went through the muddy village, past threshing floors and green
fields of winter rye, downhill where snow still lodged near the bridge,
uphill where the clay had been liquefied by the rain, past strips of
stubble land and bushes touched with green here and there, and into a
birch forest growing on both sides of the road.
 On entering the
forest the horses began to snort and sweated visibly.


"How pleasant it is, your excellency!" he said with a respectful smile.


"What?"

"It's pleasant, your excellency!"

"What is he talking about?" thought Prince Andrew.
 "Oh, the spring,
I suppose," he thought as he turned round.
 "Yes, really everything is
green already.
.
.
.
.
 But the oaks show no sign yet.
 Ah, here is one oak!"

 At the edge of the road stood an oak.
 It was an enormous tree, its girth twice as great as a
man could embrace, and evidently long ago some of its branches had been
broken off and its bark scarred.
 With its huge ungainly limbs sprawling
unsymmetrically, and its gnarled hands and fingers, it stood an aged,
stern, and scornful monster among the smiling birch trees.


"Spring, love, happiness!" this oak seemed to say.
 "Are you not weary of
that stupid, meaningless, constantly repeated fraud? Always the same and
always a fraud? There is no spring, no sun, no happiness! Look at those
cramped dead firs, ever the same, and at me too, sticking out my broken
and barked fingers just where they have grown, whether from my back or
my sides: as they have grown so I stand, and I do not believe in your
hopes and your lies.
"

As he passed through the forest Prince Andrew turned several times to
look at that oak, as if expecting something from it.


"Yes, the oak is right, a thousand times right," thought Prince Andrew.

"Let others--the young--yield afresh to that fraud, but we know life,
our life is finished!"

A whole sequence of new thoughts, hopeless but mournfully pleasant, rose
in his soul in connection with that tree.






CHAPTER II


Prince Andrew had to see the Marshal of the Nobility for the district
in connection with the affairs of the Ryazan estate of which he was
trustee.
 This Marshal was Count Ilya Rostov, and in the middle of May
Prince Andrew went to visit him.


It was now hot spring weather.
 The whole forest was already clothed in
green.


Prince Andrew, depressed and preoccupied with the business about which
he had to speak to the Marshal, was driving up the avenue in the grounds
of the Rostovs' house at Otradnoe.
 He heard merry girlish cries behind
some trees on the right and saw a group of girls running to cross
the path of his caleche.
 Ahead of the rest and nearer to him ran a
dark-haired, remarkably slim, pretty girl in a yellow chintz dress, with
a white handkerchief on her head from under which loose locks of hair
escaped.
 The girl was shouting something but, seeing that he was a
stranger, ran back laughing without looking at him.


Suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a pang.
 The day was so beautiful,
the sun so bright, everything around so gay, but that slim pretty girl
did not know, or wish to know, of his existence and was contented and
cheerful in her own separate--probably foolish--but bright and happy
life.
 "What is she so glad about? What is she thinking of? Not of
the military regulations or of the arrangement of the Ryazan serfs'
quitrents.
 Of what is she thinking? Why is she so happy?" Prince Andrew
asked himself with instinctive curiosity.


In 1809 Count Ilya Rostov was living at Otradnoe just as he had done
in former years, that is, entertaining almost the whole province with
hunts, theatricals, dinners, and music.
 He
read awhile and then put out his candle, but relit it.
 It was hot in the
room, the inside shutters of which were closed.


He got up and went to the window to open it.
 He opened the casement.
 The night was fresh, bright, and
very still.
 Just before the window was a row of pollard trees, looking
black on one side and with a silvery light on the other.
 Beneath the
trees grewsome kind of lush, wet, bushy vegetation with silver-lit
leaves and stems here and there.
 Farther back beyond the dark trees a
roof glittered with dew, to the right was a leafy tree with brilliantly
white trunk and branches, and above it shone the moon, nearly at its
full, in a pale, almost starless, spring sky.
 Prince Andrew leaned his
elbows on the window ledge and his eyes rested on that sky.
 Those in the rooms above were also
awake.


"Just once more," said a girlish voice above him which Prince Andrew
recognized at once.
"

 Two girlish voices sang a musical passage--the end of some song.
"

"You go to sleep, but I can't," said the first voice, coming nearer to
the window.
 Prince Andrew, too, dared
not stir, for fear of betraying his unintentional presence.


"Sonya! Sonya!" he again heard the first speaker.
 "Oh, how can you
sleep? Only look how glorious it is! Ah, how glorious! Do wake up,
Sonya!" she said almost with tears in her voice.
 "There never, never was
such a lovely night before!"

Sonya made some reluctant reply.


"Do just come and see what a moon!.
.
.
 Oh, how lovely! Come here.
.
.

Darling, sweetheart, come here! There, you see? I feel like sitting down
on my heels, putting my arms round my knees like this, straining tight,
as tight as possible, and flying away! Like this.
.
.
"

"Take care, you'll fall out.
"

He heard the sound of a scuffle and Sonya's disapproving voice: "It's
past one o'clock.
"

"Oh, you only spoil things for me.
 All right, go, go!"

Again all was silent, but Prince Andrew knew she was still sitting
there.


"O God, O God! What does it mean?" she suddenly exclaimed.


"For her I might as well not exist!" thought Prince Andrew while he
listened to her voice, for some reason expecting yet fearing that she
might say something about him.


In his soul there suddenly arose such an unexpected turmoil of youthful
thoughts and hopes, contrary to the whole tenor of his life, that unable
to explain his condition to himself he lay down and fell asleep at once.


It was already the beginning of June when on his return journey he drove
into the birch forest where the gnarled old oak had made so strange and
memorable an impression on him.
 In the forest the harness bells sounded
yet more muffled than they had done six weeks before, for now all was
thick, shady, and dense, and the young firs dotted about in the forest
did not jar on the general beauty but, lending themselves to the mood
around, were delicately green with fluffy young shoots.
 Everything was in blossom, the nightingales
trilled, and their voices reverberated now near, now far away.


"Yes, here in this forest was that oak with which I agreed," thought
Prince Andrew.
 The old oak, quite transfigured, spreading
out a canopy of sappy dark-green foliage, stood rapt and slightly
trembling in the rays of the evening sun.

Through the hard century-old bark, even where there were no twigs,
leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the old veteran
could have produced.
 All the
best moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory.
.
.
.
 all this rushed suddenly to his mind.


"No, life is not over at thirty-one!" Prince Andrew suddenly decided
finally and decisively.
 "It is not enough for me to know what I have in
me--everyone must know it: Pierre, and that young girl who wanted to
fly away into the sky, everyone must know me, so that my life may not be
lived for myself alone while others live so apart from it, but so that
it may be reflected in them all, and they and I may live in harmony!"


On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that autumn
and found all sorts of reasons for this decision.
 A whole series of
sensible and logical considerations showing it to be essential for him
to go to Petersburg, and even to re-enter the service, kept springing
up in his mind.
 He could not now understand how he could ever even have
doubted the necessity of taking an active share in life, just as a month
before he had not understood how the idea of leaving the quiet country
could ever enter his head.
 It now seemed clear to him that all his
experience of life must be senselessly wasted unless he applied it to
some kind of work and again played an active part in life.
 He did not
even remember how formerly, on the strength of similar wretched logical
arguments, it had seemed obvious that he would be degrading himself if
he now, after the lessons he had had in life, allowed himself to believe
in the possibility of being useful and in the possibility of happiness
or love.
 Now reason suggested quite the opposite.
 Then he would
turn away to the portrait of his dead Lise, who with hair curled a la
grecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out of the gilt frame.
 She
did not now say those former terrible words to him, but looked simply,
merrily, and inquisitively at him.
 And Prince Andrew, crossing his
arms behind him, long paced the room, now frowning, now smiling, as
he reflected on those irrational, inexpressible thoughts, secret as a
crime, which altered his whole life and were connected with Pierre, with
fame, with the girl at the window, the oak, and woman's beauty and love.


"My dear," Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say, "little
Nicholas can't go out today, it's very cold.
 That is what
follows from the fact that it is cold; and not that a child who needs
fresh air should remain at home," he would add with extreme logic, as
if punishing someone for those secret illogical emotions that stirred
within him.


At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work dries
men up.






CHAPTER IV


Prince Andrew arrived in Petersburg in August, 1809.
 It was the time
when the youthful Speranski was at the zenith of his fame and his
reforms were being pushed forward with the greatest energy.
 That same
August the Emperor was thrown from his caleche, injured his leg, and
remained three weeks at Peterhof, receiving Speranski every day and no
one else.
 At that time the two famous decrees were being prepared that
so agitated society--abolishing court ranks and introducing
examinations to qualify for the grades of Collegiate Assessor and State
Councilor--and not merely these but a whole state constitution,
intended to change the existing order of government in Russia: legal,
administrative, and financial, from the Council of State down to the
district tribunals.
 Now those vague liberal dreams with which the
Emperor Alexander had ascended the throne, and which he had tried to put
into effect with the aid of his associates, Czartoryski, Novosiltsev,
Kochubey, and Strogonov--whom he himself in jest had called his Comite
de salut public--were taking shape and being realized.


Now all these men were replaced by Speranski on the civil side, and
Arakcheev on the military.
 Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew, as a
gentleman of the chamber, presented himself at court and at a levee.
 The
Emperor, though he met him twice, did not favor him with a single word.

It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that he was antipathetic
to the Emperor and that the latter disliked his face and personality
generally, and in the cold, repellent glance the Emperor gave him, he
now found further confirmation of this surmise.
"

He mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal, a friend of
his father's.
 The field marshal made an appointment to see him, received
him graciously, and promised to inform the Emperor.


"He is Minister of War, a man trusted by the Emperor, and I need not
concern myself about his personal qualities: he has been commissioned
to consider my project, so he alone can get it adopted," thought Prince
Andrew as he waited among a number of important and unimportant people
in Count Arakcheev's waiting room.
 Count Arakcheev's anteroom had quite a special
character.
 The faces of the unimportant people awaiting their turn for
an audience showed embarrassment and servility; the faces of those of
higher rank expressed a common feeling of awkwardness, covered by a mask
of unconcern and ridicule of themselves, their situation, and the person
for whom they were waiting.
 Some walked thoughtfully up and down,
others whispered and laughed.
 Prince Andrew heard the nickname "Sila
Andreevich" and the words, "Uncle will give it to us hot," in reference
to Count Arakcheev.


But the moment the door opened one feeling alone appeared on all
faces--that of fear.
 Prince Andrew for the second time asked the
adjutant on duty to take in his name, but received an ironical look and
was told that his turn would come in due course.
 After some others had
been shown in and out of the minister's room by the adjutant on duty,
an officer who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and frightened
air was admitted at that terrible door.
 This officer's audience lasted
a long time.


After this Prince Andrew was conducted to the door and the officer on
duty said in a whisper, "To the right, at the window.
 Arakcheev turned his head toward him without looking at him.


Arakcheev's eyes turned toward him.


"Sit down," said he.
 His Majesty the Emperor has
deigned to send your excellency a project submitted by me.
.
 Nowadays everybody designs laws, it is easier
writing than doing.


Across the paper was scrawled in pencil, without capital letters,
misspelled, and without punctuation: "Unsoundly constructed because
resembles an imitation of the French military code and from the Articles
of War needlessly deviating.
"

"To what committee has the memorandum been referred?" inquired Prince
Andrew.


"To the Committee on Army Regulations, and I have recommended that your
honor should be appointed a member, but without a salary.
"

Prince Andrew smiled.
"

"A member without salary," repeated Arakcheev.
 "I have the honor.

Eh! Call the next one! Who else is there?" he shouted, bowing to Prince
Andrew.






CHAPTER V


While waiting for the announcement of his appointment to the committee
Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances, particularly those he
knew to be in power and whose aid he might need.
 In Petersburg he now
experienced the same feeling he had had on the eve of a battle, when
troubled by anxious curiosity and irresistibly attracted to the ruling
circles where the future, on which the fate of millions depended, was
being shaped.
 From the irritation of the older men, the curiosity of the
uninitiated, the reserve of the initiated, the hurry and preoccupation
of everyone, and the innumerable committees and commissions of whose
existence he learned every day, he felt that now, in 1809, here in
Petersburg a vast civil conflict was in preparation, the commander in
chief of which was a mysterious person he did not know, but who
was supposed to be a man of genius--Speranski.


Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception in the
highest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day.
 The reforming
party cordially welcomed and courted him, in the first place because
he was reputed to be clever and very well read, and secondly because by
liberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation of being a liberal.
 The feminine
society world welcomed him gladly, because he was rich, distinguished, a
good match, and almost a newcomer, with a halo of romance on account
of his supposed death and the tragic loss of his wife.
 Besides this
the general opinion of all who had known him previously was that he had
greatly improved during these last five years, having softened and grown
more manly, lost his former affectation, pride, and contemptuous irony,
and acquired the serenity that comes with years.


The day after his interview with Count Arakcheev, Prince Andrew spent
the evening at Count Kochubey's.
 He told the count of his interview with
Sila Andreevich (Kochubey spoke of Arakcheev by that nickname with the
same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minister of War's
anteroom).


"Mon cher, even in this case you can't do without Michael Mikhaylovich
Speranski.
 He manages everything.
"

"What has Speranski to do with the army regulations?" asked Prince
Andrew.


Kochubey shook his head smilingly, as if surprised at Bolkonski's
simplicity.


"We were talking to him about you a few days ago," Kochubey continued,
"and about your freed plowmen.
"

"Oh, is it you, Prince, who have freed your serfs?" said an old man of
Catherine's day, turning contemptuously toward Bolkonski.


"It was a small estate that brought in no profit," replied Prince
Andrew, trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old man
uselessly.
.
" said the old man, looking at Kochubey.


"There's one thing I don't understand," he continued.
 "Who will plow the
land if they are set free? It is easy to write laws, but difficult to
rule.
.
.


"Well, I have Pryanichnikov serving under me, a splendid man, a
priceless man, but he's sixty.
 Is he to go up for examination?"

"Yes, that's a difficulty, as education is not at all general, but.
.
 It was Speranski.

Prince Andrew recognized him at once, and felt a throb within him, as
happens at critical moments of life.
 Whether it was from respect, envy,
or anticipation, he did not know.
 Speranski's whole figure was of a
peculiar type that made him easily recognizable.
 Such whiteness and softness
Prince Andrew had only seen on the faces of soldiers who had been long
in hospital.
 This was Speranski, Secretary of State, reporter to the
Emperor and his companion at Erfurt, where he had more than once met and
talked with Napoleon.


Speranski did not shift his eyes from one face to another as people
involuntarily do on entering a large company and was in no hurry to
speak.


Speranski told Kochubey he was sorry he had been unable to come sooner
as he had been detained at the palace.

When Kochubey introduced Prince Andrew, Speranski slowly turned his eyes
to Bolkonski with his customary smile and looked at him in silence.


"I am very glad to make your acquaintance.
 Speranski smiled more markedly.


"The chairman of the Committee on Army Regulations is my good friend
Monsieur Magnitski," he said, fully articulating every word and
syllable, "and if you like I can put you in touch with him.
"

A circle soon formed round Speranski, and the old man who had talked
about his subordinate Pryanichnikov addressed a question to him.


Prince Andrew without joining in the conversation watched every movement
of Speranski's: this man, not long since an insignificant divinity
student, who now, Bolkonski thought, held in his hands--those plump
white hands--the fate of Russia.
 Prince Andrew was struck by the
extraordinarily disdainful composure with which Speranski answered
the old man.
 He appeared to address condescending words to him from an
immeasurable height.
 When the old man began to speak too loud, Speranski
smiled and said he could not judge of the advantage or disadvantage of
what pleased the sovereign.
 It was clear that he thought it necessary to interest himself in
Bolkonski.
"

"Your father, a man of the last century, evidently stands above our
contemporaries who so condemn this measure which merely reestablishes
natural justice.
"

"I think, however, that these condemnations have some ground," returned
Prince Andrew, trying to resist Speranski's influence, of which he began
to be conscious.
 Though he usually spoke easily and well,
he felt a difficulty in expressing himself now while talking with
Speranski.
 He was too much absorbed in observing the famous man's
personality.


"I am an admirer of Montesquieu," replied Prince Andrew, "and his idea
that le principe des monarchies est l'honneur me parait incontestable.

Certains droits et privileges de la noblesse me paraissent etre des
moyens de soutenir ce sentiment.
" *


     * "The principle of monarchies is honor seems to me
     incontestable.
"


The smile vanished from Speranski's white face, which was much improved
by the change.
 Probably Prince Andrew's thought interested him.
"


Speranski went on to say that honor, l'honeur, cannot be upheld by
privileges harmful to the service; that honor, l'honneur, is either a
negative concept of not doing what is blameworthy or it is a source of
emulation in pursuit of commendation and rewards, which recognize it.

His arguments were concise, simple, and clear.


"An institution upholding honor, the source of emulation, is one similar
to the Legion d'honneur of the great Emperor Napoleon, not harmful
but helpful to the success of the service, but not a class or court
privilege.
"

Closing his eyes, he bowed a la francaise, without taking leave, and
trying to attract as little attention as possible, he left the room.


On returning home in the evening he would jot down in his notebook four
or five necessary calls or appointments for certain hours.
 He did nothing, did
not even think or find time to think, but only talked, and talked
successfully, of what he had thought while in the country.


He sometimes noticed with dissatisfaction that he repeated the same
remark on the same day in different circles.
 Had Speranski sprung from the same class as himself and possessed
the same breeding and traditions, Bolkonski would soon have discovered
his weak, human, unheroic sides; but as it was, Speranski's strange and
logical turn of mind inspired him with respect all the more because he
did not quite understand him.


During their long conversation on Wednesday evening, Speranski more than
once remarked: "We regard everything that is above the common level of
rooted custom.
.
.
" or, with a smile: "But we want the wolves to be fed
and the sheep to be safe.
.
.
.
.
" and
all in a way that seemed to say: "We, you and I, understand what they
are and who we are.
"

This first long conversation with Speranski only strengthened in Prince
Andrew the feeling he had experienced toward him at their first meeting.

He saw in him a remarkable, clear-thinking man of vast intellect who by
his energy and persistence had attained power, which he was using solely
for the welfare of Russia.
 Everything
seemed so simple and clear in Speranski's exposition that Prince Andrew
involuntarily agreed with him about everything.
 If he replied and
argued, it was only because he wished to maintain his independence and
not submit to Speranski's opinions entirely.
 Everything was right and
everything was as it should be: only one thing disconcerted Prince
Andrew.
 This mirrorlike gaze and those delicate hands irritated
Prince Andrew, he knew not why.
 He was unpleasantly struck, too, by the
excessive contempt for others that he observed in Speranski, and by the
diversity of lines of argument he used to support his opinions.
 Now he would
take up the position of a practical man and condemn dreamers; now that
of a satirist, and laugh ironically at his opponents; now grow severely
logical, or suddenly rise to the realm of metaphysics.
 (This last
resource was one he very frequently employed.
 The fact that Speranski was the son of a village priest, and
that stupid people might meanly despise him on account of his humble
origin (as in fact many did), caused Prince Andrew to cherish his
sentiment for him the more, and unconsciously to strengthen it.


On that first evening Bolkonski spent with him, having mentioned the
Commission for the Revision of the Code of Laws, Speranski told him
sarcastically that the Commission had existed for a hundred and fifty
years, had cost millions, and had done nothing except that Rosenkampf
had stuck labels on the corresponding paragraphs of the different codes.


"And that is all the state has for the millions it has spent," said he.

"We want to give the Senate new juridical powers, but we have no laws.


"But nobody possesses it, so what would you have? It is a vicious circle
from which we must break a way out.






CHAPTER VII


Nearly two years before this, in 1808, Pierre on returning to Petersburg
after visiting his estates had involuntarily found himself in a leading
position among the Petersburg Freemasons.
 He arranged dining and funeral
lodge meetings, enrolled new members, and busied himself uniting various
lodges and acquiring authentic charters.
 He gave money for the erection
of temples and supplemented as far as he could the collection of alms,
in regard to which the majority of members were stingy and irregular.


His life meanwhile continued as before, with the same infatuations and
dissipations.
 He liked to dine and drink well, and though he considered
it immoral and humiliating could not resist the temptations of the
bachelor circles in which he moved.
 When he had joined
the Freemasons he had experienced the feeling of one who confidently
steps onto the smooth surface of a bog.
 When he put his foot down it
sank in.
 To make quite sure of the firmness of the ground, he put
his other foot down and sank deeper still, became stuck in it, and
involuntarily waded knee-deep in the bog.


Joseph Alexeevich was not in Petersburg--he had of late stood aside
from the affairs of the Petersburg lodges, and lived almost entirely in
Moscow.
 All the members of the lodges were men Pierre knew in ordinary
life, and it was difficult for him to regard them merely as Brothers in
Freemasonry and not as Prince B.
, whom he knew in
society mostly as weak and insignificant men.
 Under the Masonic aprons
and insignia he saw the uniforms and decorations at which they aimed in
ordinary life.
 Often after collecting alms, and reckoning up twenty
to thirty rubles received for the most part in promises from a dozen
members, of whom half were as well able to pay as himself, Pierre
remembered the Masonic vow in which each Brother promised to devote
all his belongings to his neighbor, and doubts on which he tried not to
dwell arose in his soul.
 Pierre respected this class of Brothers to which the elder ones
chiefly belonged, including, Pierre thought, Joseph Alexeevich himself,
but he did not share their interests.
 His heart was not in the mystical
aspect of Freemasonry.


In the third category he included those Brothers (the majority) who saw
nothing in Freemasonry but the external forms and ceremonies, and prized
the strict performance of these forms without troubling about their
purport or significance.


Finally, to the fourth category also a great many Brothers belonged,
particularly those who had lately joined.


Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he was doing.
 Freemasonry,
at any rate as he saw it here, sometimes seemed to him based merely
on externals.
 He did not think of doubting Freemasonry itself, but
suspected that Russian Masonry had taken a wrong path and deviated
from its original principles.
 Our Freemasons knew
from correspondence with those abroad that Bezukhov had obtained the
confidence of many highly placed persons, had been initiated into many
mysteries, had been raised to a higher grade, and was bringing back with
him much that might conduce to the advantage of the Masonic cause
in Russia.
 The Petersburg Freemasons all came to see him, tried to
ingratiate themselves with him, and it seemed to them all that he was
preparing something for them and concealing it.


A solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened, at
which Pierre promised to communicate to the Petersburg Brothers what
he had to deliver to them from the highest leaders of their order.
 The
meeting was a full one.
 After the usual ceremonies Pierre rose and began
his address.


"Dear Brothers," he began, blushing and stammering, with a written
speech in his hand, "it is not sufficient to observe our mysteries in
the seclusion of our lodge--we must act--act! We are drowsing, but we
must act.


"For the dissemination of pure truth and to secure the triumph
of virtue," he read, "we must cleanse men from prejudice, diffuse
principles in harmony with the spirit of the times, undertake the
education of the young, unite ourselves in indissoluble bonds with the
wisest men, boldly yet prudently overcome superstitions, infidelity, and
folly, and form of those devoted to us a body linked together by unity
of purpose and possessed of authority and power.


"To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over vice
and must endeavor to secure that the honest man may, even in this world,
receive a lasting reward for his virtue.
 But in these great endeavors we
are gravely hampered by the political institutions of today.
.
.
 No! We are very far from that.

Only then will our order have the power unobtrusively to bind the hands
of the protectors of disorder and to control them without their being
aware of it.
 This aim was that of Christianity itself.

It taught men to be wise and good and for their own benefit to follow
the example and instruction of the best and wisest men.
 The novelty of Truth endowed her with
special strength, but now we need much more powerful methods.
 It is impossible to eradicate the
passions; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and it is
therefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy his passions
within the limits of virtue.
 Our order should provide means to that end.


"As soon as we have a certain number of worthy men in every state,
each of them again training two others and all being closely united,
everything will be possible for our order, which has already in secret
accomplished much for the welfare of mankind.
 The majority of the Brothers, seeing in it dangerous designs
of Illuminism, * met it with a coldness that surprised Pierre.
 The Grand
Master began answering him, and Pierre began developing his views with
more and more warmth.
 Parties were formed, some accusing Pierre of Illuminism, others
supporting him.
 At that meeting he was struck for the first time by
the endless variety of men's minds, which prevents a truth from ever
presenting itself identically to two persons.
 Even those members
who seemed to be on his side understood him in their own way with
limitations and alterations he could not agree to, as what he always
wanted most was to convey his thought to others just as he himself
understood it.



     * The Illuminati sought to substitute republican for
     monarchical institutions.



At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and ill-will
reproved Bezukhov for his vehemence and said it was not love of virtue
alone, but also a love of strife that had moved him in the dispute.

Pierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal would
be accepted.






CHAPTER VIII


Again Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded.
 For three
days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa at
home receiving no one and going nowhere.


It was just then that he received a letter from his wife, who implored
him to see her, telling him how grieved she was about him and how she
wished to devote her whole life to him.


At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she would
return to Petersburg from abroad.


Following this letter one of the Masonic Brothers whom Pierre respected
less than the others forced his way in to see him and, turning the
conversation upon Pierre's matrimonial affairs, by way of fraternal
advice expressed the opinion that his severity to his wife was wrong
and that he was neglecting one of the first rules of Freemasonry by not
forgiving the penitent.


At the same time his mother-in-law, Prince Vasili's wife, sent to
him imploring him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss a most
important matter.

Nothing in life seemed to him of much importance, and under the
influence of the depression that possessed him he valued neither his
liberty nor his resolution to punish his wife.


"No one is right and no one is to blame; so she too is not to blame," he
thought.


If he did not at once give his consent to a reunion with his wife, it
was only because in his state of depression he did not feel able to take
any step.
 Had his wife come to him, he would not have turned her away.

Compared to what preoccupied him, was it not a matter of indifference
whether he lived with his wife or not?

Without replying either to his wife or his mother-in-law, Pierre late
one night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see Joseph
Alexeevich.
 Joseph Alexeevich is living poorly and has for three
years been suffering from a painful disease of the bladder.
 No one has
ever heard him utter a groan or a word of complaint.
 From morning till
late at night, except when he eats his very plain food, he is working
at science.
 I made the sign of the Knights of the East and of
Jerusalem, and he responded in the same manner, asking me with a mild
smile what I had learned and gained in the Prussian and Scottish lodges.
 Joseph Alexeevich, having remained silent
and thoughtful for a good while, told me his view of the matter, which
at once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I should follow.

He surprised me by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of
the order: (1) The preservation and study of the mystery.
 Which
is the principal aim of these three? Certainly self-reformation and
self-purification.
 But at the same time just this aim demands the
greatest efforts of us; and so, led astray by pride, losing sight of
this aim, we occupy ourselves either with the mystery which in our
impurity we are unworthy to receive, or seek the reformation of
the human race while ourselves setting an example of baseness and
profligacy.
 Illuminism is not a pure doctrine, just because it is
attracted by social activity and puffed up by pride.
 Talking of my family affairs he
said to me, "the chief duty of a true Mason, as I have told you, lies in
perfecting himself.
 We often think that by removing all the difficulties
of our life we shall more quickly reach our aim, but on the contrary,
my dear sir, it is only in the midst of worldly cares that we can attain
our three chief aims: (1) Self-knowledge--for man can only know himself
by comparison, (2) Self-perfecting, which can only be attained by
conflict, and (3) The attainment of the chief virtue--love of death.
" These words are all
the more remarkable because, in spite of his great physical sufferings,
Joseph Alexeevich is never weary of life though he loves death, for
which--in spite of the purity and loftiness of his inner man--he does
not yet feel himself sufficiently prepared.
 My benefactor then explained
to me fully the meaning of the Great Square of creation and pointed out
to me that the numbers three and seven are the basis of everything.

I went to my room and reread Joseph Alexeevich's letters and recalled
my conversations with him, and deduced from it all that I ought not
to refuse a suppliant, and ought to reach a helping hand to
everyone--especially to one so closely bound to me--and that I must bear
my cross.
 But if I forgive her for the sake of doing right, then let
union with her have only a spiritual aim.
 I told my wife that I begged her to
forget the past, to forgive me whatever wrong I may have done her, and
that I had nothing to forgive.
 She need
not know how hard it was for me to see her again.
 I have settled on the
upper floor of this big house and am experiencing a happy feeling of
regeneration.






CHAPTER IX


At that time, as always happens, the highest society that met at court
and at the grand balls was divided into several circles, each with its
own particular tone.
 The largest of these was the French circle of the
Napoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyantsev and Caulaincourt.

In this group Helene, as soon as she had settled in Petersburg with her
husband, took a very prominent place.
 She was visited by the members of
the French embassy and by many belonging to that circle and noted for
their intellect and polished manners.


Helene had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of the Emperors
and had brought from there these connections with the Napoleonic
notabilities.
 At Erfurt her success had been brilliant.
" * Her success as a beautiful and elegant woman did not surprise
Pierre, for she had become even handsomer than before.
 What did surprise
him was that during these last two years his wife had succeeded in
gaining the reputation "d' une femme charmante, aussi spirituelle que
belle.
" *(2) The distinguished Prince de Ligne wrote her eight-page
letters.
 Bilibin saved up his epigrams to produce them in Countess
Bezukhova's presence.
 To be received in the Countess Bezukhova's salon
was regarded as a diploma of intellect.
 Young men read books before
attending Helene's evenings, to have something to say in her salon, and
secretaries of the embassy, and even ambassadors, confided diplomatic
secrets to her, so that in a way Helene was a power.
 Pierre, who knew
she was very stupid, sometimes attended, with a strange feeling of
perplexity and fear, her evenings and dinner parties, where politics,
poetry, and philosophy were discussed.
 At these parties his feelings
were like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick to be found
out at any moment.
 But whether because stupidity was just what was
needed to run such a salon, or because those who were deceived found
pleasure in the deception, at any rate it remained unexposed and Helene
Bezukhova's reputation as a lovely and clever woman became so firmly
established that she could say the emptiest and stupidest things and
everybody would go into raptures over every word of hers and look for a
profound meaning in it of which she herself had no conception.



     * "That's a superb animal.
"

     * (2) "Of a charming woman, as witty as she is lovely.
"


Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman.
 He was
that absent-minded crank, a grand seigneur husband who was in no one's
way, and far from spoiling the high tone and general impression of the
drawing room, he served, by the contrast he presented to her, as an
advantageous background to his elegant and tactful wife.
 He entered
his wife's drawing room as one enters a theater, was acquainted with
everybody, equally pleased to see everyone, and equally indifferent to
them all.
 Sometimes he joined in a conversation which interested him
and, regardless of whether any "gentlemen of the embassy" were present
or not, lispingly expressed his views, which were sometimes not at all
in accord with the accepted tone of the moment.
 But the general opinion
concerning the queer husband of "the most distinguished woman in
Petersburg" was so well established that no one took his freaks
seriously.


Among the many young men who frequented her house every day, Boris
Drubetskoy, who had already achieved great success in the service, was
the most intimate friend of the Bezukhov household since Helene's return
from Erfurt.
 Helene spoke of him as "mon page" and treated him like a
child.
 Her smile for him was the same as for everybody, but sometimes
that smile made Pierre uncomfortable.
 Toward him Boris behaved with a
particularly dignified and sad deference.
 This shade of deference also
disturbed Pierre.
 He had suffered so painfully three years before
from the mortification to which his wife had subjected him that he now
protected himself from the danger of its repetition, first by not being
a husband to his wife, and secondly by not allowing himself to suspect.


"No, now that she has become a bluestocking she has finally renounced
her former infatuations," he told himself.
 Yet strange to say Boris' presence in his wife's
drawing room (and he was almost always there) had a physical effect upon
Pierre; it constricted his limbs and destroyed the unconsciousness and
freedom of his movements.
"

In the eyes of the world Pierre was a great gentleman, the rather blind
and absurd husband of a distinguished wife, a clever crank who did
nothing but harmed nobody and was a first-rate, good-natured fellow.






CHAPTER X


Pierre went on with his diary, and this is what he wrote in it during
that time:


24th November

Got up at eight, read the Scriptures, then went to my duties.
 (By Joseph
Alexeevich's advice Pierre had entered the service of the state and
served on one of the committees.
) Returned home for dinner and dined
alone--the countess had many visitors I do not like.

In the evening I went down to the countess and told a funny story about
B.
, and only remembered that I ought not to have done so when everybody
laughed loudly at it.


I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind.
 Great God, help me to
walk in Thy paths, (1) to conquer anger by calmness and deliberation,
(2) to vanquish lust by self-restraint and repulsion, (3) to withdraw
from worldliness, but not avoid (a) the service of the state, (b) family
duties, (c) relations with my friends, and the management of my affairs.



27th November

I got up late.
 O God,
help and strengthen me that I may walk in Thy ways! Read the Scriptures,
but without proper feeling.
 Brother Urusov came and we talked about
worldly vanities.
 He told me of the Emperor's new projects.
 Brothers G.
 V.
 They laid on me the duty of
Rhetor.
 I feel myself weak and unworthy.
 Brother O.
 In the evening the admission
took place.
 It was Boris Drubetskoy who was admitted.
 That is why I should really like to save him from evil and
lead him into the path of truth, but evil thoughts of him did not leave
me.
 It seemed to me that his object in entering the Brotherhood was
merely to be intimate and in favor with members of our lodge.
 Apart
from the fact that he had asked me several times whether N.
, who
advised me to hold fast by brother A.
 Though I am unworthy, much was
revealed to me.
 The third name is the name unutterable
which means the All.
 Talks with Brother V.
 In his presence doubt has no place.
 In the
holy science of our order all is one, all is known in its entirety and
life.
 The Trinity--the three elements of matter--are sulphur, mercury,
and salt.
 Sulphur is of an oily and fiery nature; in combination with
salt by its fiery nature it arouses a desire in the latter by means
of which it attracts mercury, seizes it, holds it, and in combination
produces other bodies.

Christ, the Holy Spirit, Him!.
.
.



3rd December

Awoke late, read the Scriptures but was apathetic.
 Afterwards went and
paced up and down the large hall.
 At the time I gave
him no answer.
 Now I recalled every detail of that meeting and in my
mind gave him the most malevolent and bitter replies.
 I recollected
myself and drove away that thought only when I found myself glowing with
anger, but I did not sufficiently repent.
 He replied.
 I flared
up and said much that was unpleasant and even rude to him.
 He became
silent, and I recollected myself only when it was too late.
 My God, I
cannot get on with him at all.
 I set
myself above him and so become much worse than he, for he is lenient
to my rudeness while I on the contrary nourish contempt for him.
 O God,
grant that in his presence I may rather see my own vileness, and behave
so that he too may benefit.
 I began to throttle it with
my hands.
 I lifted it up, but the higher I lifted it the bigger and
heavier it grew.
 And suddenly Brother A.
 came and, taking my arm, led
me to a building to enter which we had to pass along a narrow plank.

I stepped on it, but it bent and gave way and I began to clamber up a
fence which I could scarcely reach with my hands.
 After much effort I
dragged myself up, so that my leg hung down on one side and my body on
the other.
 standing on the fence and
pointing me to a broad avenue and garden, and in the garden was a large
and beautiful building.
 I woke up.
 O Lord, great Architect of Nature,
help me to tear from myself these dogs--my passions especially the last,
which unites in itself the strength of all the former ones, and aid me
to enter that temple of virtue to a vision of which I attained in my
dream.



7th December

I dreamed that Joseph Alexeevich was sitting in my house, and that I
was very glad and wished to entertain him.
 Then it seemed that we all left
the room and something strange happened.
 We were sitting or lying on
the floor.
 He was telling me something, and I wished to show him my
sensibility, and not listening to what he was saying I began picturing
to myself the condition of my inner man and the grace of God sanctifying
me.
 He lay down
on the edge of it and I burned with longing to caress him and lie down
too.
" Abashed by this question,
I replied that sloth was my chief temptation.
 But I replied that I should
be ashamed to do it, and suddenly everything vanished.
 And I awoke and
found in my mind the text from the Gospel: "The life was the light of
men.
 And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it
not.
" Joseph Alexeevich's face had looked young and bright.
 That day I
received a letter from my benefactor in which he wrote about "conjugal
duties.
 I saw that
I was in Moscow in my house, in the big sitting room, and Joseph
Alexeevich came in from the drawing room.
 I embraced him and kissed his hands, and he said, "Hast
thou noticed that my face is different?" I looked at him, still holding
him in my arms, and saw that his face was young, but that he had no hair
on his head and his features were quite changed.
 I opened the book, and on all the pages there
were excellent drawings.
 And on
its pages I saw a beautiful representation of a maiden in transparent
garments and with a transparent body, flying up to the clouds.
 Lord,
help me! My God, if Thy forsaking me is Thy doing, Thy will be done; but
if I am myself the cause, teach me what I should do! I shall perish of
my debauchery if Thou utterly desertest me!





CHAPTER XI


The Rostovs' monetary affairs had not improved during the two years they
had spent in the country.


Soon after their arrival in Petersburg Berg proposed to Vera and was
accepted.
 In Petersburg they were
provincials, and the very people they had entertained in Moscow without
inquiring to what set they belonged, here looked down on them.


The Rostovs lived in the same hospitable way in Petersburg as in Moscow,
and the most diverse people met at their suppers.
 Among the men who very soon
became frequent visitors at the Rostovs' house in Petersburg were Boris,
Pierre whom the count had met in the street and dragged home with
him, and Berg who spent whole days at the Rostovs' and paid the eldest
daughter, Countess Vera, the attentions a young man pays when he intends
to propose.


Not in vain had Berg shown everybody his right hand wounded at
Austerlitz and held a perfectly unnecessary sword in his left.


Four years before, meeting a German comrade in the stalls of a Moscow
theater, Berg had pointed out Vera Rostova to him and had said in
German, "das soll mein Weib werden," * and from that moment had made up
his mind to marry her.
 Now in Petersburg, having considered the Rostovs'
position and his own, he decided that the time had come to propose.
"


Berg's proposal was at first received with a perplexity that was not
flattering to him.
 At first it seemed strange that the son of an obscure
Livonian gentleman should propose marriage to a Countess Rostova; but
Berg's chief characteristic was such a naive and good natured egotism
that the Rostovs involuntarily came to think it would be a good thing,
since he himself was so firmly convinced that it was good, indeed
excellent.
 So they gave their
consent.


"You see," said Berg to his comrade, whom he called "friend" only
because he knew that everyone has friends, "you see, I have considered
it all, and should not marry if I had not thought it all out or if it
were in any way unsuitable.
 I am not marrying for
money--I consider that dishonorable--but a wife should bring her
share and a husband his.
 I have my position in the service, she has
connections and some means.
 In our times that is worth something, isn't
it? But above all, she is a handsome, estimable girl, and she loves
me.
.
"

Berg blushed and smiled.

She is so.
.
.
.
 But my fiancee!.
.


After the first feeling of perplexity aroused in the parents by Berg's
proposal, the holiday tone of joyousness usual at such times took
possession of the family, but the rejoicing was external and insincere.
 He did not know at all how much he had, what his debts amounted
to, or what dowry he could give Vera.
 When his daughters were born
he had assigned to each of them, for her dowry, an estate with three
hundred serfs; but one of these estates had already been sold, and the
other was mortgaged and the interest so much in arrears that it would
have to be sold, so that it was impossible to give it to Vera.


Berg had already been engaged a month, and only a week remained before
the wedding, but the count had not yet decided in his own mind the
question of the dowry, nor spoken to his wife about it.
 At one time the
count thought of giving her the Ryazan estate or of selling a forest, at
another time of borrowing money on a note of hand.
 The count was so disconcerted by this
long-foreseen inquiry that without consideration he gave the first reply
that came into his head.
.
 You shall be satisfied.
.
.
.
"

And patting Berg on the shoulder he got up, wishing to end the
conversation.
 But Berg, smiling pleasantly, explained that if he did not
know for certain how much Vera would have and did not receive at least
part of the dowry in advance, he would have to break matters off.


"Because, consider, Count--if I allowed myself to marry now without
having definite means to maintain my wife, I should be acting badly.
.
"

The conversation ended by the count, who wished to be generous and to
avoid further importunity, saying that he would give a note of hand
for eighty thousand rubles.
 Berg smiled meekly, kissed the count on the
shoulder, and said that he was very grateful, but that it was impossible
for him to arrange his new life without receiving thirty thousand in
ready money.
"

"Yes, yes, all right!" said the count hurriedly.
 "Only excuse me, my
dear fellow, I'll give you twenty thousand and a note of hand for eighty
thousand as well.
 Yes, yes! Kiss me.
"





CHAPTER XII


Natasha was sixteen and it was the year 1809, the very year to which she
had counted on her fingers with Boris after they had kissed four years
ago.
 Since then she had not seen him.
 But in the secret depths of her soul the question whether
her engagement to Boris was a jest or an important, binding promise
tormented her.
 He had been in Moscow several times, and had passed near
Otradnoe, but had never been to see them.
 When the Rostovs came to Petersburg Boris called
on them.
 But he went with the firm intention of letting
her and her parents feel that the childish relations between himself and
Natasha could not be binding either on her or on him.
 When he entered
the Rostovs' drawing room Natasha was in her own room.
 When she heard
of his arrival she almost ran into the drawing room, flushed and beaming
with a more than cordial smile.


Boris remembered Natasha in a short dress, with dark eyes shining from
under her curls and boisterous, childish laughter, as he had known her
four years before; and so he was taken aback when quite a different
Natasha entered, and his face expressed rapturous astonishment.
 This
expression on his face pleased Natasha.


Boris kissed Natasha's hand and said that he was astonished at the
change in her.


"And is Papa older?" she asked.

He sat rather sideways in the armchair next to the countess, arranging
with his right hand the cleanest of gloves that fitted his left hand
like a skin, and he spoke with a particularly refined compression of his
lips about the amusements of the highest Petersburg society, recalling
with mild irony old times in Moscow and Moscow acquaintances.
 It was
not accidentally, Natasha felt, that he alluded, when speaking of the
highest aristocracy, to an ambassador's ball he had attended, and to
invitations he had received from N.
N.
S.


All this time Natasha sat silent, glancing up at him from under her
brows.
 This gaze disturbed and confused Boris more and more.
 Boris made up his mind to avoid meeting
Natasha, but despite that resolution he called again a few days later
and began calling often and spending whole days at the Rostovs'.
 It
seemed to him that he ought to have an explanation with Natasha and tell
her that the old times must be forgotten, that in spite of everything.
.
.
 From day to day he became more and more
entangled.
 She sang him his favorite songs, showed him her
album, making him write in it, did not allow him to allude to the past,
letting it be understood how delightful was the present; and every day
he went away in a fog, without having said what he meant to, and not
knowing what he was doing or why he came, or how it would all end.
 He
left off visiting Helene and received reproachful notes from her every
day, and yet he continued to spend whole days with the Rostovs.






CHAPTER XIII


One night when the old countess, in nightcap and dressing jacket,
without her false curls, and with her poor little knob of hair showing
under her white cotton cap, knelt sighing and groaning on a rug and
bowing to the ground in prayer, her door creaked and Natasha, also in
a dressing jacket with slippers on her bare feet and her hair in
curlpapers, ran in.
 She was finishing her last prayer: "Can it be that
this couch will be my grave?" Natasha, flushed and eager, seeing
her mother in prayer, suddenly checked her rush, half sat down, and
unconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself.
 Seeing that
her mother was still praying she ran on tiptoe to the bed and, rapidly
slipping one little foot against the other, pushed off her slippers and
jumped onto the bed the countess had feared might become her grave.
 This
couch was high, with a feather bed and five pillows each smaller than
the one below.
 Natasha jumped on it, sank into the feather bed, rolled
over to the wall, and began snuggling up the bedclothes as she settled
down, raising her knees to her chin, kicking out and laughing almost
inaudibly, now covering herself up head and all, and now peeping at her
mother.


"Mamma, can we have a talk? Yes?" said Natasha.
.
 that'll do!" And seizing her mother round the
neck, she kissed her on the throat.


"Well, what is it tonight?" said the mother, having arranged her pillows
and waited until Natasha, after turning over a couple of times, had
settled down beside her under the quilt, spread out her arms, and
assumed a serious expression.


These visits of Natasha's at night before the count returned from his
club were one of the greatest pleasures of both mother, and daughter.
.
"

Natasha put her hand on her mother's mouth.
.
 Don't say it--I know.
 No, do tell me!" and she removed her hand.
 You say Boris is
nice.
 He is very nice, and I love him like a son.
.
.

What are you thinking about? You have quite turned his head, I can see
that.
.
.


Natasha was listening and considering.
.
.
"

"How do you know?"

"I know.


"Leave off talking nonsense," said the countess.


"But if I want to.
.
.
"

"Natasha, I am in earnest.
 She drew the countess' large hand to
her, kissed it on the back and then on the palm, then again turned it
over and began kissing first one knuckle, then the space between the
knuckles, then the next knuckle, whispering, "January, February, March,
April, May.
.
"

"I know! Cyril Matveich.
 but he is old.
"

"He was not always old.
 But this is what I'll do, Natasha, I'll have a
talk with Boris.
 He need not come so often.
.
.
"

"Why not, if he likes to?"

"Because I know it will end in nothing.
.
.
.
 "Well, I
won't marry, but let him come if he enjoys it and I enjoy it.
" Natasha
smiled and looked at her mother.
 There's no need for me to marry him.
 But.
.
.
 just so.
"

"Just so, just so," repeated the countess, and shaking all over, she
went off into a good humored, unexpected, elderly laugh.


"Don't laugh, stop!" cried Natasha.
.
.
 Wait.
.
" and she
seized the countess' hands and kissed a knuckle of the little finger,
saying, "June," and continued, kissing, "July, August," on the other
hand.
 Only not quite my taste--he is so narrow, like the dining-room
clock.
.
.
 Don't you understand? Narrow, you know--gray, light gray.
.
.
"

"What rubbish you're talking!" said the countess.
.
.
 Bezukhov, now, is blue, dark-blue and red, and he is
square.
 He is fine, dark-blue and
red.
.
.
.
 How can I explain it to you?"

"Little countess!" the count's voice called from behind the door.

"You're not asleep?" Natasha jumped up, snatched up her slippers, and
ran barefoot to her own room.


It was a long time before she could sleep.
 She kept thinking that no one
could understand all that she understood and all there was in her.
 "No, how could she? She's virtuous.
 She
fell in love with Nicholas and does not wish to know anything more.
 Even
Mamma does not understand.
 It is wonderful how clever I am and how.
.

charming she is," she went on, speaking of herself in the third person,
and imagining it was some very wise man--the wisest and best of
men--who was saying it of her.
 "There is everything, everything in her,"
continued this man.
 "She is unusually intelligent, charming.
.
 and
then she is pretty, uncommonly pretty, and agile--she swims and rides
splendidly.
 and her voice! One can really say it's a wonderful voice!"

She hummed a scrap from her favorite opera by Cherubini, threw herself
on her bed, laughed at the pleasant thought that she would immediately
fall asleep, called Dunyasha the maid to put out the candle, and before
Dunyasha had left the room had already passed into yet another happier
world of dreams, where everything was as light and beautiful as in
reality, and even more so because it was different.



Next day the countess called Boris aside and had a talk with him, after
which he ceased coming to the Rostovs'.






CHAPTER XIV


On the thirty-first of December, New Year's Eve, 1809 - 10 an old
grandee of Catherine's day was giving a ball and midnight supper.


The grandee's well-known mansion on the English Quay glittered with
innumerable lights.
 Police were stationed at the brightly lit entrance
which was carpeted with red baize, and not only gendarmes but dozens of
police officers and even the police master himself stood at the porch.

Carriages kept driving away and fresh ones arriving, with red-liveried
footmen and footmen in plumed hats.
 From the carriages emerged men
wearing uniforms, stars, and ribbons, while ladies in satin and ermine
cautiously descended the carriage steps which were let down for them
with a clatter, and then walked hurriedly and noiselessly over the baize
at the entrance.


Almost every time a new carriage drove up a whisper ran through the
crowd and caps were doffed.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 ambassador.
 Don't you see
the plumes?.


Marya Ignatevna Peronskaya, a thin and shallow maid of honor at the
court of the Dowager Empress, who was a friend and relation of the
countess and piloted the provincial Rostovs in Petersburg high society,
was to accompany them to the ball.


They were to call for her at her house in the Taurida Gardens at ten
o'clock, but it was already five minutes to ten, and the girls were not
yet dressed.
 She had got up at eight that
morning and had been in a fever of excitement and activity all day.
 All
her powers since morning had been concentrated on ensuring that they
all--she herself, Mamma, and Sonya--should be as well dressed as
possible.
 Sonya and her mother put themselves entirely in her hands.
 The
countess was to wear a claret-colored velvet dress, and the two girls
white gauze over pink silk slips, with roses on their bodices and their
hair dressed a la grecque.
 Sonya was finishing dressing and so was
the countess, but Natasha, who had bustled about helping them all, was
behindhand.
 She was still sitting before a looking-glass with a dressing
jacket thrown over her slender shoulders.
 Sonya stood ready dressed in
the middle of the room and, pressing the head of a pin till it hurt her
dainty finger, was fixing on a last ribbon that squeaked as the pin went
through it.
 Come
here!"

Sonya sat down and Natasha pinned the ribbon on differently.


"Allow me, Miss! I can't do it like that," said the maid who was holding
Natasha's hair.


"Oh, dear! Well then, wait.
 That's right, Sonya.
"

"Aren't you ready? It is nearly ten," came the countess' voice.
"

"Don't do it without me!" called Natasha.
"

They had decided to be at the ball by half past ten, and Natasha had
still to get dressed and they had to call at the Taurida Gardens.


When her hair was done, Natasha, in her short petticoat from under which
her dancing shoes showed, and in her mother's dressing jacket, ran up to
Sonya, scrutinized her, and then ran to her mother.
 Turning her mother's
head this way and that, she fastened on the cap and, hurriedly kissing
her gray hair, ran back to the maids who were turning up the hem of her
skirt.
 Two
maids were turning up the hem and hurriedly biting off the ends of
thread.
 A third with pins in her mouth was running about between the
countess and Sonya, and a fourth held the whole of the gossamer garment
up high on one uplifted hand.
.
"

"Whenever will you be ready?" asked the count coming to the door.
"

"It's ready, Miss," said the maid, holding up the shortened gauze dress
with two fingers, and blowing and shaking something off it, as if by
this to express a consciousness of the airiness and purity of what she
held.


Natasha began putting on the dress.


"In a minute! In a minute! Don't come in, Papa!" she cried to her father
as he opened the door--speaking from under the filmy skirt which still
covered her whole face.
 A minute later they let the count in.
 He was
wearing a blue swallow-tail coat, shoes and stockings, and was perfumed
and his hair pomaded.


"If you please, Miss! allow me," said the maid, who on her knees was
pulling the skirt straight and shifting the pins from one side of her
mouth to the other with her tongue.
 The dress was
too long.


"Really, madam, it is not at all too long," said Mavra, crawling on her
knees after her young lady.


"Well, if it's too long we'll take it up.
 we'll tack it up in one
minute," said the resolute Dunyasha taking a needle that was stuck on
the front of her little shawl and, still kneeling on the floor, set to
work once more.


At that moment, with soft steps, the countess came in shyly, in her cap
and velvet gown.


"Oo-oo, my beauty!" exclaimed the count, "she looks better than any of
you!"

He would have embraced her but, blushing, she stepped aside fearing to
be rumpled.


"Mamma, your cap, more to this side," said Natasha.
 "I'll arrange it,"
and she rushed forward so that the maids who were tacking up her skirt
could not move fast enough and a piece of gauze was torn off.


"Oh goodness! What has happened? Really it was not my fault!"

"Never mind, I'll run it up, it won't show," said Dunyasha.


Peronskaya was quite ready.


She praised the Rostovs' toilets.
 They praised her taste and toilet, and
at eleven o'clock, careful of their coiffures and dresses, they settled
themselves in their carriages and drove off.
 The
prospect was so splendid that she hardly believed it would come true,
so out of keeping was it with the chill darkness and closeness of the
carriage.
 Only then did she
remember how she must behave at a ball, and tried to assume the majestic
air she considered indispensable for a girl on such an occasion.
 But,
fortunately for her, she felt her eyes growing misty, she saw nothing
clearly, her pulse beat a hundred to the minute, and the blood throbbed
at her heart.
 Before and behind them other visitors were entering,
also talking in low tones and wearing ball dresses.
 The mirrors on the
landing reflected ladies in white, pale-blue, and pink dresses, with
diamonds and pearls on their bare necks and arms.
 All was blended into one brilliant procession.

On entering the ballroom the regular hum of voices, footsteps, and
greetings deafened Natasha, and the light and glitter dazzled her still
more.
 The host and hostess, who had already been standing at the door
for half an hour repeating the same words to the various arrivals,
"Charme de vous voir," * greeted the Rostovs and Peronskaya in the same
manner.



    * "Delighted to see you.
 Looking at
her she may have recalled the golden, irrecoverable days of her own
girlhood and her own first ball.
 The host also followed Natasha with his
eyes and asked the count which was his daughter.


"Charming!" said he, kissing the tips of his fingers.
 The countess took up a position in one of the front rows of
that crowd.
 She realized that those noticing her liked her,
and this observation helped to calm her.


Peronskaya was pointing out to the countess the most important people at
the ball.


"That is the Dutch ambassador, do you see? That gray-haired man," she
said, indicating an old man with a profusion of silver-gray curly hair,
who was surrounded by ladies laughing at something he said.


"Ah, here she is, the Queen of Petersburg, Countess Bezukhova," said
Peronskaya, indicating Helene who had just entered.
 Beautiful and clever.
.
 But see, those two, though not good-looking, are even more
run after.
"

"That is Bezukhova's brother, Anatole Kuragin," she said, indicating a
handsome officer of the Horse Guards who passed by them with head erect,
looking at something over the heads of the ladies.
 "He's handsome,
isn't he? I hear they will marry him to that rich girl.
 But your cousin,
Drubetskoy, is also very attentive to her.
 They say she has millions.
 Oh
yes, that's the French ambassador himself!" she replied to the countess'
inquiry about Caulaincourt.
 "Looks as if he were a king! All the same,
the French are charming, very charming.
 No one more charming in society.

Ah, here she is! Yes, she is still the most beautiful of them all, our
Marya Antonovna! And how simply she is dressed! Lovely! And that stout
one in spectacles is the universal Freemason," she went on, indicating
Pierre.
 He pushed through, evidently
looking for someone.


Natasha looked joyfully at the familiar face of Pierre, "the buffoon,"
as Peronskaya had called him, and knew he was looking for them, and
for her in particular.
 Natasha at once
recognized the shorter and younger man in the white uniform: it was
Bolkonski, who seemed to her to have grown much younger, happier, and
better-looking.


"There's someone else we know--Bolkonski, do you see, Mamma?" said
Natasha, pointing out Prince Andrew.
 Il fait a
present la pluie et le beau temps.
 * He's too proud for anything.
 Just look how he treats the ladies! There's one
talking to him and he has turned away," she said, pointing at him.
"





CHAPTER XVI


Suddenly everybody stirred, began talking, and pressed forward and then
back, and between the two rows, which separated, the Emperor entered to
the sounds of music that had immediately struck up.
 The band
played the polonaise in vogue at that time on account of the words that
had been set to it, beginning: "Alexander, Elisaveta, all our hearts you
ravish quite.
" The Emperor passed on to the drawing room, the crowd
made a rush for the doors, and several persons with excited faces
hurried there and back again.
 The host followed with Marya Antonovna Naryshkina; then came
ambassadors, ministers, and various generals, whom Peronskaya diligently
named.
 "They must know
how I long to dance, how splendidly I dance, and how they would enjoy
dancing with me.
 She
wanted to cry.
 The count was at the other end
of the room.
 Prince Andrew with a lady
passed by, evidently not recognizing them.
 The handsome Anatole was
smilingly talking to a partner on his arm and looked at Natasha as one
looks at a wall.
 Berg
and his wife, who were not dancing, came up to them.


This family gathering seemed humiliating to Natasha--as if there were
nowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball.
 She did not
listen to or look at Vera, who was telling her something about her own
green dress.


At last the Emperor stopped beside his last partner (he had danced
with three) and the music ceased.
 A minute passed but no one had yet begun
dancing.
 She smilingly raised her hand and laid
it on his shoulder without looking at him.
 The aide-de-camp, an adept
in his art, grasping his partner firmly round her waist, with confident
deliberation started smoothly, gliding first round the edge of the
circle, then at the corner of the room he caught Helene's left hand
and turned her, the only sound audible, apart from the ever-quickening
music, being the rhythmic click of the spurs on his rapid, agile feet,
while at every third beat his partner's velvet dress spread out and
seemed to flash as she whirled round.
 Natasha gazed at them and was
ready to cry because it was not she who was dancing that first turn of
the waltz.
 Baron Firhoff was
talking to him about the first sitting of the Council of State to be
held next day.
 Prince Andrew, as one closely connected with Speranski
and participating in the work of the legislative commission, could give
reliable information about that sitting, concerning which various rumors
were current.


Prince Andrew was watching these men abashed by the Emperor's presence,
and the women who were breathlessly longing to be asked to dance.


"You always dance.
 I have a protegee, the young Rostova, here.
 "Excuse me!" he added, turning to the
baron, "we will finish this conversation elsewhere--at a ball one
must dance.
" He stepped forward in the direction Pierre indicated.

He recognized her, guessed her feelings, saw that it was her debut,
remembered her conversation at the window, and with an expression of
pleasure on his face approached Countess Rostova.


"Allow me to introduce you to my daughter," said the countess, with
heightened color.
 That tremulous expression on
Natasha's face, prepared either for despair or rapture, suddenly
brightened into a happy, grateful, childlike smile.


"I have long been waiting for you," that frightened happy little girl
seemed to say by the smile that replaced the threatened tears, as she
raised her hand to Prince Andrew's shoulder.
 They were the second couple
to enter the circle.
 Her little feet in their white satin
dancing shoes did their work swiftly, lightly, and independently of
herself, while her face beamed with ecstatic happiness.
 Her slender bare
arms and neck were not beautiful--compared to Helene's her shoulders
looked thin and her bosom undeveloped.
 But Helene seemed, as it were,
hardened by a varnish left by the thousands of looks that had scanned
her person, while Natasha was like a girl exposed for the first time,
who would have felt very much ashamed had she not been assured that this
was absolutely necessary.


Prince Andrew liked dancing, and wishing to escape as quickly as
possible from the political and clever talk which everyone addressed
to him, wishing also to break up the circle of restraint he disliked,
caused by the Emperor's presence, he danced, and had chosen Natasha
because Pierre pointed her out to him and because she was the first
pretty girl who caught his eye; but scarcely had he embraced that
slender supple figure and felt her stirring so close to him and smiling
so near him than the wine of her charm rose to his head, and he
felt himself revived and rejuvenated when after leaving her he stood
breathing deeply and watching the other dancers.






CHAPTER XVII


After Prince Andrew, Boris came up to ask Natasha for a dance, and then
the aide-de-camp who had opened the ball, and several other young men,
so that, flushed and happy, and passing on her superfluous partners to
Sonya, she did not cease dancing all the evening.
 She noticed and saw
nothing of what occupied everyone else.
 Not only did she fail to notice
that the Emperor talked a long time with the French ambassador, and how
particularly gracious he was to a certain lady, or that Prince So-and-so
and So-and-so did and said this and that, and that Helene had great
success and was honored by the special attention of So-and-so, but she
did not even see the Emperor, and only noticed that he had gone because
the ball became livelier after his departure.
 For one of the merry
cotillions before supper Prince Andrew was again her partner.
 Natasha blushed at that recollection
and tried to excuse herself, as if there had been something to be
ashamed of in what Prince Andrew had overheard.


Like all men who have grown up in society, Prince Andrew liked meeting
someone there not of the conventional society stamp.
 With her he behaved with special care and
tenderness, sitting beside her and talking of the simplest and most
unimportant matters; he admired her shy grace.
 She was
tired and panting and evidently thought of declining, but immediately
put her hand gaily on the man's shoulder, smiling at Prince Andrew.


"If she goes to her cousin first and then to another lady, she will be
my wife," said Prince Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise, as he
watched her.
 She did go first to her cousin.


"What rubbish sometimes enters one's head!" thought Prince Andrew, "but
what is certain is that that girl is so charming, so original, that she
won't be dancing here a month before she will be married.
.
.
 He invited Prince Andrew to come and see them, and asked
his daughter whether she was enjoying herself.
 Natasha was happier than she had
ever been in her life.
 A
deep furrow ran across his forehead, and standing by a window he stared
over his spectacles seeing no one.
 She stopped in front of him.
 "Isn't it?"

Pierre smiled absent-mindedly, evidently not grasping what she said.

"Especially such a capital fellow as Bezukhov!" In Natasha's eyes all
the people at the ball alike were good, kind, and splendid people,
loving one another; none of them capable of injuring another--and so
they ought all to be happy.
 "Yes, it was a very brilliant ball," and then.
.


But either from fatigue or want of sleep he was ill-disposed for work
and could get nothing done.
 He kept criticizing his own work, as he
often did, and was glad when he heard someone coming.


The visitor was Bitski, who served on various committees, frequented all
the societies in Petersburg, and a passionate devotee of the new ideas
and of Speranski, and a diligent Petersburg newsmonger--one of those men
who choose their opinions like their clothes according to the fashion,
but who for that very reason appear to be the warmest partisans.
 He had just heard particulars
of that morning's sitting of the Council of State opened by the Emperor,
and he spoke of it enthusiastically.
 The Emperor's speech had been
extraordinary.
 It had been a speech such as only constitutional monarchs
deliver.
 "The Sovereign plainly said that the Council and Senate are
estates of the realm, he said that the government must rest not on
authority but on secure bases.
 The Emperor said that the fiscal system
must be reorganized and the accounts published," recounted Bitski,
emphasizing certain words and opening his eyes significantly.


"Ah, yes! Today's events mark an epoch, the greatest epoch in our
history," he concluded.


Prince Andrew listened to the account of the opening of the Council of
State, which he had so impatiently awaited and to which he had attached
such importance, and was surprised that this event, now that it had
taken place, did not affect him, and even seemed quite insignificant.
 He was going to dine that
evening at Speranski's, "with only a few friends," as the host had said
when inviting him.
 The prospect of that dinner in the intimate home
circle of the man he so admired had greatly interested Prince
Andrew, especially as he had not yet seen Speranski in his domestic
surroundings, but now he felt disinclined to go to it.


At the appointed hour, however, he entered the modest house Speranski
owned in the Taurida Gardens.
 Prince Andrew had never
before heard Speranski's famous laugh, and this ringing, high pitched
laughter from a statesman made a strange impression on him.


He entered the dining room.
 His
guests surrounded him.
 Magnitski, addressing himself to Speranski, was
relating an anecdote, and Speranski was laughing in advance at what
Magnitski was going to say.
 Gervais laughed
softly with a hissing chuckle, and Speranski in a high-pitched staccato
manner.


Still laughing, Speranski held out his soft white hand to Prince Andrew.


"Very pleased to see you, Prince," he said.
 "One moment.
.
 "We have agreed that
this is a dinner for recreation, with not a word about business!" and
turning again to the narrator he began to laugh afresh.
 Everything that had formerly appeared
mysterious and fascinating in Speranski suddenly became plain and
unattractive.


At dinner the conversation did not cease for a moment and seemed to
consist of the contents of a book of funny anecdotes.
 Speranski related how at the Council that morning a deaf
dignitary, when asked his opinion, replied that he thought so too.


Evidently Speranski liked to rest after his labors and find amusement
in a circle of friends, and his guests, understanding his wish, tried
to enliven him and amuse themselves.
 Prince Andrew did not laugh and feared that he would be a damper
on the spirits of the company, but no one took any notice of his being
out of harmony with the general mood.
 They all seemed very gay.


There was nothing wrong or unseemly in what they said, it was witty and
might have been funny, but it lacked just that something which is the
salt of mirth, and they were not even aware that such a thing existed.


The men remained at table over their port--English fashion.
 In the midst
of a conversation that was started about Napoleon's Spanish affairs,
which they all agreed in approving, Prince Andrew began to express a
contrary opinion.


Having sat some time at table, Speranski corked a bottle of wine and,
remarking, "Nowadays good wine rides in a carriage and pair," passed it
to the servant and got up.
 All rose and continuing to talk loudly went
into the drawing room.
 Two letters brought by a courier were handed to
Speranski and he took them to his study.
 As soon as he had left the room
the general merriment stopped and the guests began to converse sensibly
and quietly with one another.


"Now for the recitation!" said Speranski on returning from his study.


"Where are you off to so early?" asked Speranski.
"

They said no more.
 Prince Andrew looked closely into those mirrorlike,
impenetrable eyes, and felt that it had been ridiculous of him to have
expected anything from Speranski and from any of his own activities
connected with him, or ever to have attributed importance to what
Speranski was doing.
 That precise, mirthless laughter rang in Prince
Andrew's ears long after he had left the house.


When he reached home Prince Andrew began thinking of his life in
Petersburg during those last four months as if it were something new.
 He remembered
how carefully and at what length everything relating to form and
procedure was discussed at those meetings, and how sedulously and
promptly all that related to the gist of the business was evaded.
 He
recalled his labors on the Legal Code, and how painstakingly he had
translated the articles of the Roman and French codes into Russian,
and he felt ashamed of himself.






CHAPTER XIX


Next day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visited before,
and among them at the Rostovs' with whom he had renewed acquaintance
at the ball.


Natasha was one of the first to meet him.
 She was wearing a dark-blue
house dress in which Prince Andrew thought her even prettier than in her
ball dress.
 The old count's hospitality and good nature, which struck one
especially in Petersburg as a pleasant surprise, were such that Prince
Andrew could not refuse to stay to dinner.
 Now this world disconcerted him no
longer and was no longer alien to him, but he himself having entered it
found in it a new enjoyment.


After dinner Natasha, at Prince Andrew's request, went to the clavichord
and began singing.
 Prince Andrew stood by a window talking to the ladies
and listened to her.
 In the midst of a phrase he ceased speaking and
suddenly felt tears choking him, a thing he had thought impossible for
him.
 He looked at Natasha as she sang, and something new and joyful
stirred in his soul.
 He had
absolutely nothing to weep about yet he was ready to weep.
 What about?
His former love? The little princess? His disillusionments?.
.
.
 His hopes
for the future?.
.
 This contrast weighed on and yet cheered him while
she sang.


As soon as Natasha had finished she went up to him and asked how he
liked her voice.
 She asked this and then became confused, feeling that
she ought not to have asked it.
 He smiled, looking at her, and said he
liked her singing as he liked everything she did.


Prince Andrew left the Rostovs' late in the evening.
 He went to bed from
habit, but soon realized that he could not sleep.
 Having lit his candle
he sat up in bed, then got up, then lay down again not at all troubled
by his sleeplessness: his soul was as fresh and joyful as if he had
stepped out of a stuffy room into God's own fresh air.
 It did not enter
his head that he was in love with Natasha; he was not thinking about
her, but only picturing her to himself, and in consequence all life
appeared in a new light.
 "Why do I strive, why do I toil in this narrow,
confined frame, when life, all life with all its joys, is open to me?"
said he to himself.
 And for the first time for a very long while he
began making happy plans for the future.
 "I must use my freedom while I feel so
much strength and youth in me," he said to himself.


"I have just been to see the countess, your wife.


"What is it you wish, Colonel? I am at your service.
" (He smiled still more pleasantly.
) "I wished to ask the
countess and you to do me the honor of coming to tea and to supper.
"

Only Countess Helene, considering the society of such people as the
Bergs beneath her, could be cruel enough to refuse such an invitation.

Berg explained so clearly why he wanted to collect at his house a small
but select company, and why this would give him pleasure, and why though
he grudged spending money on cards or anything harmful, he was prepared
to run into some expense for the sake of good society--that Pierre could
not refuse, and promised to come.
 Our general is coming.
 So you will do me the
favor.
"

Contrary to his habit of being late, Pierre on that day arrived at the
Bergs' house, not at ten but at fifteen minutes to eight.
) "My comrades are still nobodies, while I am only
waiting for a vacancy to command a regiment, and have the happiness to
be your husband.
" (He rose and kissed Vera's hand, and on the way to
her straightened out a turned-up corner of the carpet.
 Berg,
judging by his wife, thought all women weak and foolish.
 Vera, judging
only by her husband and generalizing from that observation, supposed
that all men, though they understand nothing and are conceited and
selfish, ascribe common sense to themselves alone.



    * To be a man.



Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully, so as not to crush her lace
fichu for which he had paid a good price, kissing her straight on the
lips.


"The only thing is, we mustn't have children too soon," he continued,
following an unconscious sequence of ideas.

"This is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself.
"

"But please don't interrupt me when I am entertaining the guests," said
Vera, "because I know what interests each of them and what to say to
different people.
"

Berg smiled again.

Berg, having decided that masculine conversation was required,
interrupted his wife's remarks and touched on the question of the war
with Austria, and unconsciously jumped from the general subject to
personal considerations as to the proposals made him to take part in the
Austrian campaign and the reasons why he had declined them.
 Berg and Vera could not repress their smiles of
satisfaction at the sight of all this movement in their drawing room,
at the sound of the disconnected talk, the rustling of dresses, and the
bowing and scraping.
 Everything was just as everybody always has it,
especially so the general, who admired the apartment, patted Berg on the
shoulder, and with parental authority superintended the setting out of
the table for boston.
 The general sat down by Count Ilya Rostov, who was
next to himself the most important guest.
 Everything was just as it was everywhere
else.






CHAPTER XXI


Pierre, as one of the principal guests, had to sit down to boston
with Count Rostov, the general, and the colonel.
 At the card table he
happened to be directly facing Natasha, and was struck by a curious
change that had come over her since the ball.
 She was silent, and not
only less pretty than at the ball, but only redeemed from plainness by
her look of gentle indifference to everything around.
 She was
sitting by her sister at the tea table, and reluctantly, without looking
at him, made some reply to Boris who sat down beside her.


Prince Andrew was standing before her, saying something to her with a
look of tender solicitude.
 And
the bright glow of some inner fire that had been suppressed was again
alight in her.


Prince Andrew went up to Pierre, and the latter noticed a new and
youthful expression in his friend's face.


Pierre changed places several times during the game, sitting now with
his back to Natasha and now facing her, but during the whole of the six
rubbers he watched her and his friend.


After six rubbers the general got up, saying that it was no use playing
like that, and Pierre was released.
 Vera, having noticed Prince
Andrew's attentions to Natasha, decided that at a party, a real evening
party, subtle allusions to the tender passion were absolutely necessary
and, seizing a moment when Prince Andrew was alone, began a conversation
with him about feelings in general and about her sister.
 With so
intellectual a guest as she considered Prince Andrew to be, she felt
that she had to employ her diplomatic tact.


When Pierre went up to them he noticed that Vera was being carried away
by her self-satisfied talk, but that Prince Andrew seemed embarrassed, a
thing that rarely happened with him.


"What do you think?" Vera was saying with an arch smile.
 "You are so
discerning, Prince, and understand people's characters so well at a
glance.
 What do you think, Prince?"

"I know your sister too little," replied Prince Andrew, with a sarcastic
smile under which he wished to hide his embarrassment, "to be able to
solve so delicate a question, and then I have noticed that the less
attractive a woman is the more constant she is likely to be," he added,
and looked up at Pierre who was just approaching them.
 In our days," continued Vera--mentioning
"our days" as people of limited intelligence are fond of doing,
imagining that they have discovered and appraised the peculiarities of
"our days" and that human characteristics change with the times--"in our
days a girl has so much freedom that the pleasure of being courted often
stifles real feeling in her.
 And it must be confessed that Natalie is
very susceptible.
.
.
" (alluding to a map of
love much in vogue at that time).


"You are friendly with Boris, aren't you?" asked Vera.


"Yes, I know him.
.
"


"Oh, undoubtedly!" said Prince Andrew, and with sudden and unnatural
liveliness he began chaffing Pierre about the need to be very careful
with his fifty-year-old Moscow cousins, and in the midst of these
jesting remarks he rose, taking Pierre by the arm, and drew him aside.


"Well?" asked Pierre, seeing his friend's strange animation with
surprise, and noticing the glance he turned on Natasha as he rose.


"I must.
.
 I must have a talk with you," said Prince Andrew.
 "You know
that pair of women's gloves?" (He referred to the Masonic gloves given
to a newly initiated Brother to present to the woman he loved.
) "I.
.

but no, I will talk to you later on," and with a strange light in his
eyes and restlessness in his movements, Prince Andrew approached
Natasha and sat down beside her.
 Pierre saw how Prince Andrew asked her
something and how she flushed as she replied.
 The smile of pleasure never left his face.

The party was very successful and quite like other parties he had seen.
 They had not yet had a loud conversation
among the men and a dispute about something important and clever.
 Now
the general had begun such a discussion and so Berg drew Pierre to it.


Everyone in the house realized for whose sake Prince Andrew came, and
without concealing it he tried to be with Natasha all day.
 The countess looked with sad and sternly serious eyes
at Prince Andrew when he talked to Natasha and timidly started some
artificial conversation about trifles as soon as he looked her way.

Sonya was afraid to leave Natasha and afraid of being in the way when
she was with them.
 Natasha grew pale, in a panic of expectation, when
she remained alone with him for a moment.
 Prince Andrew surprised her by
his timidity.


In the evening, when Prince Andrew had left, the countess went up to
Natasha and whispered: "Well, what?"

"Mamma! For heaven's sake don't ask me anything now! One can't talk
about that," said Natasha.


But all the same that night Natasha, now agitated and now frightened,
lay a long time in her mother's bed gazing straight before her.
 She told
her how he had complimented her, how he told her he was going abroad,
asked her where they were going to spend the summer, and then how he had
asked her about Boris.


"But such a.
.
 such a.
.
.
 never happened to me before!" she said.
 I am always afraid when I'm with him.
 "Now go!"

"All the same I shan't sleep.
 What silliness, to sleep! Mummy! Mummy!
such a thing never happened to me before," she said, surprised and
alarmed at the feeling she was aware of in herself.
 "And could we ever
have thought!.
.
"

It seemed to Natasha that even at the time she first saw Prince Andrew
at Otradnoe she had fallen in love with him.
 And it had to happen that we should meet at that ball.
.


"Mamma, one need not be ashamed of his being a widower?"

"Don't, Natasha! Pray to God.
 'Marriages are made in heaven,'" said her
mother.


"Darling Mummy, how I love you! How happy I am!" cried Natasha, shedding
tears of joy and excitement and embracing her mother.


That day Countess Helene had a reception at her house.
 The French
ambassador was there, and a foreign prince of the blood who had of
late become a frequent visitor of hers, and many brilliant ladies and
gentlemen.
 At the same time
the feeling he had noticed between his protegee Natasha and Prince
Andrew accentuated his gloom by the contrast between his own position
and his friend's.
 It was Prince Andrew.


"Ah, it's you!" said Pierre with a preoccupied, dissatisfied air.
 "And
I, you see, am hard at it.
" He pointed to his manuscript book with that
air of escaping from the ills of life with which unhappy people look at
their work.


Prince Andrew, with a beaming, ecstatic expression of renewed life on
his face, paused in front of Pierre and, not noticing his sad look,
smiled at him with the egotism of joy.


"Well, dear heart," said he, "I wanted to tell you about it yesterday
and I have come to do so today.
 I never experienced anything like it
before.
 I am in love, my friend!"

Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his heavy person down on
the sofa beside Prince Andrew.


"With Natasha Rostova, yes?" said he.
 At last I live, but I can't live
without her! But can she love me?.
.
 I am too old for her.
.
.
 Why don't
you speak?"

"I? I? What did I tell you?" said Pierre suddenly, rising and beginning
to pace up and down the room.
 "I always thought it.
.
.
 That girl is
such a treasure.
.
.
.
.
.
 And I am sure
there will not be a happier man than you.
"

"Don't talk rubbish.
.
" said Prince Andrew, smiling and looking into
Pierre's eyes.


"She does, I know," Pierre cried fiercely.


"But do listen," returned Prince Andrew, holding him by the arm.
"

"Well, go on, go on.
 Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, quite a different, quite
a new man.
 Where was his spleen, his contempt for life, his
disillusionment? Pierre was the only person to whom he made up his mind
to speak openly; and to him he told all that was in his soul.
 Now he
boldly and lightly made plans for an extended future, said he could not
sacrifice his own happiness to his father's caprice, and spoke of how he
would either make his father consent to this marriage and love her, or
would do without his consent; then he marveled at the feeling that had
mastered him as at something strange, apart from and independent of
himself.


"I should not have believed anyone who told me that I was capable of
such love," said Prince Andrew.
 The whole world is now for me divided into two
halves: one half is she, and there all is joy, hope, light: the
other half is everything where she is not, and there is all gloom and
darkness.
.
.
"

"Darkness and gloom," reiterated Pierre: "yes, yes, I understand that.






CHAPTER XXIII


Prince Andrew needed his father's consent to his marriage, and to obtain
this he started for the country next day.


His father received his son's communication with external composure, but
inward wrath.
 "If only they would let me end my days as I want to," thought
the old man, "then they might do as they please.


In the first place the marriage was not a brilliant one as regards
birth, wealth, or rank.
 Secondly, Prince Andrew was no longer as young
as he had been and his health was poor (the old man laid special stress
on this), while she was very young.
 Thirdly, he had a son whom it would
be a pity to entrust to a chit of a girl.
 Then if your love or passion or obstinacy--as
you please--is still as great, marry! And that's my last word on it.

Mind, the last.
.


Three weeks after the last evening he had spent with the Rostovs, Prince
Andrew returned to Petersburg.



Next day after her talk with her mother Natasha expected Bolkonski all
day, but he did not come.
 On the second and third day it was the same.

Pierre did not come either and Natasha, not knowing that Prince Andrew
had gone to see his father, could not explain his absence to herself.


Three weeks passed in this way.
 Natasha had no desire to go out anywhere
and wandered from room to room like a shadow, idle and listless; she
wept secretly at night and did not go to her mother in the evenings.
 She
blushed continually and was irritable.
 It seemed to her that everybody
knew about her disappointment and was laughing at her and pitying her.

Strong as was her inward grief, this wound to her vanity intensified her
misery.


Once she came to her mother, tried to say something, and suddenly began
to cry.
 Her tears were those of an offended child who does not know why
it is being punished.


The countess began to soothe Natasha, who after first listening to her
mother's words, suddenly interrupted her:

"Leave off, Mamma! I don't think, and don't want to think about it! He
just came and then left off, left off.
.
.
"

Her voice trembled, and she again nearly cried, but recovered and went
on quietly:

"And I don't at all want to get married.
"

The day after this conversation Natasha put on the old dress which
she knew had the peculiar property of conducing to cheerfulness in the
mornings, and that day she returned to the old way of life which she had
abandoned since the ball.
 Having finished her morning tea she went to
the ballroom, which she particularly liked for its loud resonance, and
began singing her solfeggio.
 When she had finished her first exercise
she stood still in the middle of the room and sang a musical phrase that
particularly pleased her.
 She listened joyfully (as though she had not
expected it) to the charm of the notes reverberating, filling the
whole empty ballroom, and slowly dying away; and all at once she felt
cheerful.
 "There, that's me!" the expression of her face
seemed to say as she caught sight of herself.
 "Well, and very nice too!
I need nobody.
"

A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in the room but she
would not let him, and having closed the door behind him continued her
walk.
 That morning she had returned to her favorite mood--love of, and
delight in, herself.
 "How charming that Natasha is!" she said again,
speaking as some third, collective, male person.
 "Pretty, a good voice,
young, and in nobody's way if only they leave her in peace.
" But
however much they left her in peace she could not now be at peace, and
immediately felt this.
 She listened to the sounds in the hall.
 When she saw
herself, her face was pale.
 It was he.


Pale and agitated, Natasha ran into the drawing room.


"Mamma! Bolkonski has come!" she said.
 "Mamma, it is awful, it is
unbearable! I don't want.
.
.
 As soon as he saw Natasha his face
brightened.
 He kissed the countess' hand and Natasha's, and sat down
beside the sofa.
.
.
" began the countess, but Prince
Andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question, obviously in
haste to say what he had to.
 I had to talk over a very important matter with him.
 I only
got back last night," he said glancing at Natasha; "I want to have a
talk with you, Countess," he added after a moment's pause.


The countess lowered her eyes, sighing deeply.


"I am at your disposal," she murmured.


Natasha knew that she ought to go away, but was unable to do so:
something gripped her throat, and regardless of manners she stared
straight at Prince Andrew with wide-open eyes.


"At once? This instant!.
.
.
 No, it can't be!" she thought.
 Yes, at once, that very instant, her fate would be decided.


Natasha glanced with frightened imploring eyes at Prince Andrew and at
her mother and went out.


"I have come, Countess, to ask for your daughter's hand," said Prince
Andrew.
.
.
" she began at last sedately.
.
.
" (she grew confused) "is agreeable to us,
and I accept your offer.
 And my husband.
.
.
 I hope.
.
 but it
will depend on her.
.
.
.
.
.


"Yes," replied the countess.
 "I am
sure my husband will consent," said the countess, "but your father.
.
"

"My father, to whom I have told my plans, has made it an express
condition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for a
year.
 And I wished to tell you of that," said Prince Andrew.
"

"It is unavoidable," said Prince Andrew with a sigh.


"I will send her to you," said the countess, and left the room.


"Lord have mercy upon us!" she repeated while seeking her daughter.


Sonya said that Natasha was in her bedroom.
 Natasha was sitting on
the bed, pale and dry eyed, and was gazing at the icons and whispering
something as she rapidly crossed herself.
 Seeing her mother she jumped
up and flew to her.


"Well, Mamma?.
.
.
 Well?.
.
 He is asking for your hand," said the countess,
coldly it seemed to Natasha.
.


Natasha never remembered how she entered the drawing room.
 "Is it possible that this stranger has now
become everything to me?" she asked herself, and immediately answered,
"Yes, everything! He alone is now dearer to me than everything in the
world.
" Prince Andrew came up to her with downcast eyes.
 Her face said: "Why ask? Why doubt what you cannot but know?
Why speak, when words cannot express what one feels?"

She drew near to him and stopped.
 He took her hand and kissed it.


"Do you love me?"

"Yes, yes!" Natasha murmured as if in vexation.


"What is it? What's the matter?"

"Oh, I am so happy!" she replied, smiled through her tears, bent over
closer to him, paused for an instant as if asking herself whether she
might, and then kissed him.
 The present feeling, though
not so bright and poetic as the former, was stronger and more serious.


"Forgive me!" he said.
 "But you are so young, and I have already been
through so much in life.
.


"Why do you say that?" Natasha interrupted him.
 "You know that from the
very day you first came to Otradnoe I have loved you," she cried, quite
convinced that she spoke the truth.
.
.
.
"

"A whole year!" Natasha repeated suddenly, only now realizing that
the marriage was to be postponed for a year.
.
.

Natasha did not hear him.


"And can't it be helped?" she asked.
 Prince Andrew did not reply, but
his face expressed the impossibility of altering that decision.
 "I shall die, waiting a year: it's impossible, it's
awful!" She looked into her lover's face and saw in it a look of
commiseration and perplexity.


"No, no! I'll do anything!" she said, suddenly checking her tears.
"

The father and mother came into the room and gave the betrothed couple
their blessing.


From that day Prince Andrew began to frequent the Rostovs' as Natasha's
affianced lover.






CHAPTER XXIV


No betrothal ceremony took place and Natasha's engagement to Bolkonski
was not announced; Prince Andrew insisted on that.
 If after six
months she felt that she did not love him she would have full right to
reject him.
 Naturally neither Natasha nor her parents wished to hear of
this, but Prince Andrew was firm.
 After
their engagement, quite different, intimate, and natural relations
sprang up between them.
 It was as if they had not known each other till
now.
 At
first the family felt some constraint in intercourse with Prince Andrew;
he seemed a man from another world, and for a long time Natasha trained
the family to get used to him, proudly assuring them all that he only
appeared to be different, but was really just like all of them, and that
she was not afraid of him and no one else ought to be.
 After a few
days they grew accustomed to him, and without restraint in his presence
pursued their usual way of life, in which he took his part.
 He could
talk about rural economy with the count, fashions with the countess
and Natasha, and about albums and fancywork with Sonya.
 Sometimes the
household both among themselves and in his presence expressed their
wonder at how it had all happened, and at the evident omens there had
been of it: Prince Andrew's coming to Otradnoe and their coming to
Petersburg, and the likeness between Natasha and Prince Andrew which
her nurse had noticed on his first visit, and Andrew's encounter with
Nicholas in 1805, and many other incidents betokening that it had to be.


In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reigned which always
accompanies the presence of a betrothed couple.
 Often when all sitting
together everyone kept silent.
 They rarely
spoke of their future life.
 Natasha shared this as she did all his feelings, which she
constantly divined.
 Once she began questioning him about his son.
 Prince
Andrew blushed, as he often did now--Natasha particularly liked it in
him--and said that his son would not live with them.


"Why not?" asked Natasha in a frightened tone.


"I cannot take him away from his grandfather, and besides.
.
"

"How I should have loved him!" said Natasha, immediately guessing his
thought; "but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for finding fault
with us.
 The old countess
sighed as she looked at them; Sonya was always getting frightened lest
she should be in the way and tried to find excuses for leaving them
alone, even when they did not wish it.
 He seldom laughed, but
when he did he abandoned himself entirely to his laughter, and after
such a laugh she always felt nearer to him.
 Natasha would have been
completely happy if the thought of the separation awaiting her and
drawing near had not terrified her, just as the mere thought of it made
him turn pale and cold.
 Pierre
seemed disconcerted and embarrassed.


"You have known Bezukhov a long time?" he asked.
 "Do you like him?"

"Yes, he's a dear, but very absurd.
 I beg you, Natalie," Prince Andrew
said with sudden seriousness--"I am going away and heaven knows what may
happen.
 You may cease to.
.
 Only
this, then: whatever may happen to you when I am not here.
.
"

Neither her father, nor her mother, nor Sonya, nor Prince Andrew himself
could have foreseen how the separation from her lover would act on
Natasha.
 Flushed and agitated she went about the house all that day,
dry-eyed, occupied with most trivial matters as if not understanding
what awaited her.
 Nor did she cry when he was gone; but for several days she
sat in her room dry-eyed, taking no interest in anything and only saying
now and then, "Oh, why did he go away?"

But a fortnight after his departure, to the surprise of those around
her, she recovered from her mental sickness just as suddenly and became
her old self again, but with a change in her moral physiognomy, as a
child gets up after a long illness with a changed expression of face.
 He seemed carefully to seek out her tender spots so
as to torture her mentally as harshly as possible.

"You want to make him"--little Nicholas--"into an old maid like
yourself! A pity! Prince Andrew wants a son and not an old maid," he
would say.


He continually hurt Princess Mary's feelings and tormented her, but it
cost her no effort to forgive him.
 Could he be to blame toward her, or
could her father, whom she knew loved her in spite of it all, be unjust?
And what is justice? The princess never thought of that proud word
"justice.
 What had she to
do with the justice or injustice of other people? She had to endure and
love, and that she did.


During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and had been gay,
gentle, and more affectionate than Princess Mary had known him for a
long time past.


Soon after Prince Andrew had gone, Princess Mary wrote to her friend
Julie Karagina in Petersburg, whom she had dreamed (as all girls dream)
of marrying to her brother, and who was at that time in mourning for her
own brother, killed in Turkey.
 Oh, my friend! Religion, and religion alone, can--I
will not say comfort us--but save us from despair.
 Religion alone can
explain to us what without its help man cannot comprehend: why, for what
cause, kind and noble beings able to find happiness in life--not merely
harming no one but necessary to the happiness of others--are called away
to God, while cruel, useless, harmful persons, or such as are a burden
to themselves and to others, are left living.
 And what do you think, dear friend? Five years have passed since
then, and already I, with my petty understanding, begin to see clearly
why she had to die, and in what way that death was but an expression
of the infinite goodness of the Creator, whose every action, though
generally incomprehensible to us, is but a manifestation of His infinite
love for His creatures.
 Then, at
the moment of our loss, these thoughts could not occur to me; I should
then have dismissed them with horror, but now they are very clear and
certain.
 I write all this to you, dear friend, only to convince you
of the Gospel truth which has become for me a principle of life: not
a single hair of our heads will fall without His will.
 And His will is
governed only by infinite love for us, and so whatever befalls us is for
our good.


You ask whether we shall spend next winter in Moscow.
 In spite of my
wish to see you, I do not think so and do not want to do so.
 You will
be surprised to hear that the reason for this is Buonaparte! The case
is this: my father's health is growing noticeably worse, he cannot stand
any contradiction and is becoming irritable.
 He cannot endure
the notion that Buonaparte is negotiating on equal terms with all the
sovereigns of Europe and particularly with our own, the grandson of the
Great Catherine! As you know, I am quite indifferent to politics, but
from my father's remarks and his talks with Michael Ivanovich I know all
that goes on in the world and especially about the honors conferred on
Buonaparte, who only at Bald Hills in the whole world, it seems, is not
accepted as a great man, still less as Emperor of France.
 And my father
cannot stand this.
 All the benefit he might
derive from a course of treatment he would lose as a result of the
disputes about Buonaparte which would be inevitable.
 In any case it will
be decided very shortly.
 After
his sorrow he only this year quite recovered his spirits.
 He has again
become as I used to know him when a child: kind, affectionate, with that
heart of gold to which I know no equal.
 He has realized, it seems to me,
that life is not over for him.
 But together with this mental change
he has grown physically much weaker.
 He has become thinner and more
nervous.
 I am anxious about him and glad he is taking this trip abroad
which the doctors recommended long ago.
 You
write that in Petersburg he is spoken of as one of the most active,
cultivated, and capable of the young men.
 Forgive my vanity as a
relation, but I never doubted it.
 The good he has done to everybody
here, from his peasants up to the gentry, is incalculable.
 On his
arrival in Petersburg he received only his due.
 I always wonder at the
way rumors fly from Petersburg to Moscow, especially such false ones as
that you write about--I mean the report of my brother's betrothal to
the little Rostova.
 I do not think my brother will ever marry again, and
certainly not her; and this is why: first, I know that though he rarely
speaks about the wife he has lost, the grief of that loss has gone too
deep in his heart for him ever to decide to give her a successor and our
little angel a stepmother.
 Secondly because, as far as I know, that girl
is not the kind of girl who could please Prince Andrew.
 But I am
running on too long and am at the end of my second sheet.
 Good-by,
my dear friend.
 May God keep you in His holy and mighty care.
 My dear
friend, Mademoiselle Bourienne, sends you kisses.


MARY





CHAPTER XXVI


In the middle of the summer Princess Mary received an unexpected letter
from Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he gave her strange and
surprising news.
 He informed her of his engagement to Natasha Rostova.

The whole letter breathed loving rapture for his betrothed and tender
and confiding affection for his sister.
 He asked his sister to forgive him for not having told her of his
resolve when he had last visited Bald Hills, though he had spoken of it
to his father.
 "Besides," he wrote,
"the matter was not then so definitely settled as it is now.
 I am now writing to him about the same
question, and beg you to choose a good moment to hand him the letter
and to let me know how he looks at the whole matter and whether there is
hope that he may consent to reduce the term by four months.
.
 It won't be
long--I shall soon set him free.
"

The princess was about to reply, but her father would not let her speak
and, raising his voice more and more, cried:

"Marry, marry, my boy!.
.
.
.
 Clever people, eh? Rich,
eh? Yes, a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have! Write and tell
him that he may marry tomorrow if he likes.
 She will be little Nicholas'
stepmother and I'll marry Bourienne!.
.
 Ha, ha, ha! He mustn't be
without a stepmother either! Only one thing, no more women are wanted
in my house--let him marry and live by himself.
 "Go in heavens
name! Go out into the frost.
.
.
 the frost.
.
.
 the frost!"

After this outburst the prince did not speak any more about the matter.

But repressed vexation at his son's poor-spirited behavior found
expression in his treatment of his daughter.
 To his former pretexts
for irony a fresh one was now added--allusions to stepmothers and
amiabilities to Mademoiselle Bourienne.


Little Nicholas and his education, her brother Andrew, and religion were
Princess Mary's joys and consolations; but besides that, since everyone
must have personal hopes, Princess Mary in the profoundest depths of her
heart had a hidden dream and hope that supplied the chief consolation
of her life.
 This comforting dream and hope were given her by God's
folk--the half-witted and other pilgrims who visited her without the
prince's knowledge.
 The longer she lived, the more experience and
observation she had of life, the greater was her wonder at the
short-sightedness of men who seek enjoyment and happiness here on earth:
toiling, suffering, struggling, and harming one another, to obtain that
impossible, visionary, sinful happiness.
 Prince Andrew had loved his
wife, she died, but that was not enough: he wanted to bind his happiness
to another woman.
 Her father objected to this because he wanted a more
distinguished and wealthier match for Andrew.
 Not only do we know this ourselves, but Christ, the Son of God,
came down to earth and told us that this life is but for a moment and is
a probation; yet we cling to it and think to find happiness in it.
 "How
is it that no one realizes this?" thought Princess Mary.
 "No one except
these despised God's folk who, wallet on back, come to me by the back
door, afraid of being seen by the prince, not for fear of ill-usage by
him but for fear of causing him to sin.
 To leave family, home, and all
the cares of worldly welfare, in order without clinging to anything to
wander in hempen rags from place to place under an assumed name, doing
no one any harm but praying for all--for those who drive one away as
well as for those who protect one: higher than that life and truth there
is no life or truth!"

There was one pilgrim, a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty called
Theodosia, who for over thirty years had gone about barefoot and worn
heavy chains.
 When Theodosia had gone to sleep Princess Mary
thought about this for a long time, and at last made up her mind that,
strange as it might seem, she must go on a pilgrimage.
 She disclosed
this thought to no one but to her confessor, Father Akinfi, the monk,
and he approved of her intention.


Often, listening to the pilgrims' tales, she was so stimulated by their
simple speech, mechanical to them but to her so full of deep meaning,
that several times she was on the point of abandoning everything and
running away from home.
 In imagination she already pictured herself by
Theodosia's side, dressed in coarse rags, walking with a staff, a wallet
on her back, along the dusty road, directing her wanderings from one
saint's shrine to another, free from envy, earthly love, or desire, and
reaching at last the place where there is no more sorrow or sighing, but
eternal joy and bliss.


"I shall come to a place and pray there, and before having time to get
used to it or getting to love it, I shall go farther.
 I will go on till
my legs fail, and I'll lie down and die somewhere, and shall at last
reach that eternal, quiet haven, where there is neither sorrow nor
sighing.
" thought Princess Mary.


But afterwards, when she saw her father and especially little Koko
(Nicholas), her resolve weakened.
 She wept quietly, and felt that she
was a sinner who loved her father and little nephew more than God.






BOOK SEVEN: 1810 - 11





CHAPTER I


The Bible legend tells us that the absence of labor--idleness--was a
condition of the first man's blessedness before the Fall.
 Fallen man has
retained a love of idleness, but the curse weighs on the race not only
because we have to seek our bread in the sweat of our brows, but because
our moral nature is such that we cannot be both idle and at ease.
 If man could
find a state in which he felt that though idle he was fulfilling his
duty, he would have found one of the conditions of man's primitive
blessedness.
 The chief attraction of
military service has consisted and will consist in this compulsory and
irreproachable idleness.


Rostov had become a bluff, good-natured fellow, whom his Moscow
acquaintances would have considered rather bad form, but who was liked
and respected by his comrades, subordinates, and superiors, and was well
contented with his life.


Reading these letters, Nicholas felt a dread of their wanting to
take him away from surroundings in which, protected from all the
entanglements of life, he was living so calmly and quietly.
 In 1810 he received letters
from his parents, in which they told him of Natasha's engagement to
Bolkonski, and that the wedding would be in a year's time because
the old prince made difficulties.
 In the first place he was sorry that Natasha, for whom he
cared more than for anyone else in the family, should be lost to the
home; and secondly, from his hussar point of view, he regretted not to
have been there to show that fellow Bolkonski that connection with him
was no such great honor after all, and that if he loved Natasha he
might dispense with permission from his dotard father.
 But in the spring of that year, he received a letter from
his mother, written without his father's knowledge, and that letter
persuaded him to return.
 "For God's sake, I implore
you, come at once if you do not wish to make me and the whole family
wretched," wrote the countess.
 He had that common sense of a
matter-of-fact man which showed him what he ought to do.
 Anne for the last maneuvers; strange as it was to think
that he would go away without having sold his three roans to the Polish
Count Golukhovski, who was bargaining for the horses Rostov had betted
he would sell for two thousand rubles; incomprehensible as it
seemed that the ball the hussars were giving in honor of the Polish
Mademoiselle Przazdziecka (out of rivalry to the Uhlans who had given
one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska) would take place
without him--he knew he must go away from this good, bright world to
somewhere where everything was stupid and confused.
 His hussar comrades--not only those of his own
regiment, but the whole brigade--gave Rostov a dinner to which the
subscription was fifteen rubles a head, and at which there were two
bands and two choirs of singers.
 Rostov danced the Trepak with Major
Basov; the tipsy officers tossed, embraced, and dropped Rostov; the
soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too, and shouted "hurrah!"
and then they put him in his sleigh and escorted him as far as the first
post station.
 At
the last post station before Otradnoe he gave the driver a three-ruble
tip, and on arriving he ran breathlessly, like a boy, up the steps of
his home.
 His father
and mother were much the same, only a little older.
 Sonya was nearly twenty; she had stopped growing prettier
and promised nothing more than she was already, but that was enough.


"Yes, yes, yes!" cried Natasha, joyfully.


She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit to
Otradnoe and showed him his last letter.


"Well, are you glad?" Natasha asked.
"

"Very glad," answered Nicholas.
 "He is an excellent fellow.
.
.
 And are
you very much in love?"

"How shall I put it?" replied Natasha.
 "I was in love with Boris, with
my teacher, and with Denisov, but this is quite different.
 I feel at
peace and settled.
 I know that no better man than he exists, and I am
calm and contented now.
 Not at all as before.
"

Nicholas expressed his disapproval of the postponement of the marriage
for a year; but Natasha attacked her brother with exasperation, proving
to him that it could not be otherwise, and that it would be a bad thing
to enter a family against the father's will, and that she herself wished
it so.


"You don't at all understand," she said.


Her brother often wondered as he looked at her.

He could not believe that her fate was sealed, especially as he had
not seen her with Prince Andrew.
 It always seemed to him that there was
something not quite right about this intended marriage.


"Why this delay? Why no betrothal?" he thought.
 What can be keeping him? Illness, probably! His health
is very delicate.
 And don't attach importance to her
being so bright: that's because she's living through the last days of
her girlhood, but I know what she is like every time we receive a letter
from him! However, God grant that everything turns out well!" (She
always ended with these words.
 He was
worried by the impending necessity of interfering in the stupid business
matters for which his mother had called him home.
 To throw off this
burden as quickly as possible, on the third day after his arrival he
went, angry and scowling and without answering questions as to where he
was going, to Mitenka's lodge and demanded an account of everything.
 The conversation and the examination
of the accounts with Mitenka did not last long.
.
 Ungrateful wretch!.
.
 Robbing us!.
.
.
" and so on.
 (This shrubbery was a well-known haven of refuge for culprits
at Otradnoe.
 Mitenka himself, returning tipsy from the town, used to
hide there, and many of the residents at Otradnoe, hiding from Mitenka,
knew of its protective qualities.
)

Mitenka's wife and sisters-in-law thrust their heads and frightened
faces out of the door of a room where a bright samovar was boiling and
where the steward's high bedstead stood with its patchwork quilt.


The young count paid no heed to them, but, breathing hard, passed by
with resolute strides and went into the house.
 She went several times to his door on
tiptoe and listened, as he lighted one pipe after another.
"

"You were angry that he had not entered those 700 rubles.
 But they were
carried forward--and you did not look at the other page.
"

"Papa, he is a blackguard and a thief! I know he is! And what I have
done, I have done; but, if you like, I won't speak to him again.
"

"No, my dear boy" (the count, too, felt embarrassed.
 He knew he had
mismanaged his wife's property and was to blame toward his children,
but he did not know how to remedy it).
.
 Forgive me if I have caused you unpleasantness.
 I understand
it all less than you do.
"

"Devil take all these peasants, and money matters, and carryings forward
from page to page," he thought.
 But once the countess called her son and
informed him that she had a promissory note from Anna Mikhaylovna for
two thousand rubles, and asked him what he thought of doing with it.


"This," answered Nicholas.
 "You say it rests with me.
 Well then, this!" and he tore up the note, and by so doing caused
the old countess to weep tears of joy.
 After that, young Rostov took
no further part in any business affairs, but devoted himself with
passionate enthusiasm to what was to him a new pursuit--the chase--for
which his father kept a large establishment.






CHAPTER III


The weather was already growing wintry and morning frosts congealed
an earth saturated by autumn rains.
 The verdure had thickened and its
bright green stood out sharply against the brownish strips of winter rye
trodden down by the cattle, and against the pale-yellow stubble of the
spring buckwheat.
 The
hares had already half changed their summer coats, the fox cubs were
beginning to scatter, and the young wolves were bigger than dogs.
 It was
the best time of the year for the chase.
 It was frosty and the air was
sharp, but toward evening the sky became overcast and it began to thaw.

On the fifteenth, when young Rostov, in his dressing gown, looked out of
the window, he saw it was an unsurpassable morning for hunting: it was
as if the sky were melting and sinking to the earth without any wind.

The only motion in the air was that of the dripping, microscopic
particles of drizzling mist.
 The bare twigs in the garden were hung with
transparent drops which fell on the freshly fallen leaves.
 The earth in
the kitchen garden looked wet and black and glistened like poppy seed
and at a short distance merged into the dull, moist veil of mist.

Nicholas went out into the wet and muddy porch.
 Another borzoi, a dog, catching
sight of his master from the garden path, arched his back and, rushing
headlong toward the porch with lifted tail, began rubbing himself
against his legs.
 This scorn was not offensive
to his master.
 Nicholas knew that this Daniel, disdainful of everybody
and who considered himself above them, was all the same his serf and
huntsman.
 "Can you
resist it?" those eyes seemed to be asking.


Daniel did not answer, but winked instead.
 "He says she's moved them into the Otradnoe enclosure.
" (This meant that the she-wolf, about whom they both
knew, had moved with her cubs to the Otradnoe copse, a small place a
mile and a half from the house.
"

"As you please.
"

"Then put off feeding them.
"

Five minutes later Daniel and Uvarka were standing in Nicholas' big
study.
 Daniel himself felt this, and as usual stood
just inside the door, trying to speak softly and not move, for fear of
breaking something in the master's apartment, and he hastened to say all
that was necessary so as to get from under that ceiling, out into the
open under the sky once more.


Having finished his inquiries and extorted from Daniel an opinion that
the hounds were fit (Daniel himself wished to go hunting), Nicholas
ordered the horses to be saddled.
 But just as Daniel was about to
go Natasha came in with rapid steps, not having done up her hair or
finished dressing and with her old nurse's big shawl wrapped round her.

Petya ran in at the same time.


"You are going?" asked Natasha.

"We are going, but only wolf hunting: it would be dull for you.
 "It's not fair; you
are going by yourself, are having the horses saddled and said nothing to
us about it.


"Yes, I'll go.
 I shall certainly go," said Natasha decisively.
 "Daniel,
tell them to saddle for us, and Michael must come with my dogs," she
added to the huntsman.


It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all, but to
have anything to do with a young lady seemed to him impossible.
 He
cast down his eyes and hurried out as if it were none of his business,
careful as he went not to inflict any accidental injury on the young
lady.






CHAPTER IV


The old count, who had always kept up an enormous hunting establishment
but had now handed it all completely over to his son's care, being in
very good spirits on this fifteenth of September, prepared to go out
with the others.


In an hour's time the whole hunting party was at the porch.
 He had a look at all the details of the hunt, sent
a pack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to find the quarry, mounted his
chestnut Donets, and whistling to his own leash of borzois, set off
across the threshing ground to a field leading to the Otradnoe wood.

The old count's horse, a sorrel gelding called Viflyanka, was led by the
groom in attendance on him, while the count himself was to drive in a
small trap straight to a spot reserved for him.
 Besides the family, there were eight borzoi kennelmen
and more than forty borzois, so that, with the borzois on the leash
belonging to members of the family, there were about a hundred and
thirty dogs and twenty horsemen.


Each dog knew its master and its call.
 Each man in the hunt knew his
business, his place, what he had to do.


The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet, now and then
splashing into puddles as they crossed a road.


When they had gone a little less than a mile, five more riders with
dogs appeared out of the mist, approaching the Rostovs.


"That's it.
 Come on!.
.
) "Take the covert at once, for my Girchik says the Ilagins
are at Korniki with their hounds.
 That's it.
 Come on!.
 They'll take
the cubs from under your very nose.
 Natasha, muffled up in shawls which did not hide her eager
face and shining eyes, galloped up to them.
 Natasha sat easily and confidently on her black Arabchik
and reined him in without effort with a firm hand.


"Uncle" looked round disapprovingly at Petya and Natasha.
 He did not
like to combine frivolity with the serious business of hunting.


"Good morning, Uncle! We are going too!" shouted Petya.


"Good morning, good morning! But don't go overriding the hounds," said
"Uncle" sternly.


"In the first place, Trunila is not a 'dog,' but a harrier," thought
Nicholas, and looked sternly at his sister, trying to make her feel the
distance that ought to separate them at that moment.
 "We'll go
to our places and won't budge.
"

The oasis of the Otradnoe covert came in sight a few hundred yards off,
the huntsmen were already nearing it.


"Well, nephew, you're going for a big wolf," said "Uncle.
" "Mind and
don't let her slip!"

"That's as may happen," answered Rostov.
 "Karay, here!" he shouted,
answering "Uncle's" remark by this call to his borzoi.
 Karay was a
shaggy old dog with a hanging jowl, famous for having tackled a big wolf
unaided.


The old count, knowing his son's ardor in the hunt, hurried so as not
to be late, and the huntsmen had not yet reached their places when Count
Ilya Rostov, cheerful, flushed, and with quivering cheeks, drove up
with his black horses over the winter rye to the place reserved for him,
where a wolf might come out.


Beside him was Simon Chekmar, his personal attendant, an old horseman
now somewhat stiff in the saddle.
 Chekmar held in leash three formidable
wolfhounds, who had, however, grown fat like their master and his horse.
 His eyes were
rather moist and glittered more than usual, and as he sat in his saddle,
wrapped up in his fur coat, he looked like a child taken out for an
outing.
 A third person rode up circumspectly through the wood (it was
plain that he had had a lesson) and stopped behind the count.
 This
person was a gray-bearded old man in a woman's cloak, with a tall
peaked cap on his head.
 "If you
scare away the beast, Daniel'll give it you!"

"I know a thing or two myself!" said Nastasya Ivanovna.


"Hush!" whispered the count and turned to Simon.
 "Though she's a lady, she's very fond of hunting.
"

"And you're surprised at the way she rides, Simon, eh?" said the count.
 So bold, so easy!"

"And Nicholas? Where is he? By the Lyadov upland, isn't he?"

"Yes, sir.
 He knows where to stand.
 He understands the matter so well
that Daniel and I are often quite astounded," said Simon, well knowing
what would please his master.


"Rides well, eh? And how well he looks on his horse, eh?"

"A perfect picture! How he chased a fox out of the rank grass by the
Zavarzinsk thicket the other day! Leaped a fearful place; what a sight
when they rushed from the covert.
.
 the horse worth a thousand rubles
and the rider beyond all price! Yes, one would have to search far to
find another as smart.
.
" repeated the count, evidently sorry Simon had not
said more.
 "To search far," he said, turning back the skirt of his coat
to get at his snuffbox.


"The other day when he came out from Mass in full uniform, Michael
Sidorych.
.
.
" Simon did not finish, for on the still air he had
distinctly caught the music of the hunt with only two or three hounds
giving tongue.
"

The count, forgetting to smooth out the smile on his face, looked into
the distance straight before him, down the narrow open space, holding
the snuffbox in his hand but not taking any.
 The sounds
of both packs mingled and broke apart again, but both were becoming more
distant.


Simon sighed and stooped to straighten the leash a young borzoi had
entangled; the count too sighed and, noticing the snuffbox in his hand,
opened it and took a pinch.
 "Back!" cried Simon to a borzoi that was
pushing forward out of the wood.
 Nastasya Ivanovna dismounted to pick it up.
 The count and
Simon were looking at him.


Then, unexpectedly, as often happens, the sound of the hunt suddenly
approached, as if the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuing were just
in front of them.


The count turned and saw on his right Mitka staring at him with eyes
starting out of his head, raising his cap and pointing before him to the
other side.


"Look out!" he shouted, in a voice plainly showing that he had long
fretted to utter that word, and letting the borzois slip he galloped
toward the count.


The wolf paused, turned its heavy forehead toward the dogs awkwardly,
like a man suffering from the quinsy, and, still slightly swaying
from side to side, gave a couple of leaps and with a swish of its tail
disappeared into the skirt of the wood.
 At the same instant, with a cry
like a wail, first one hound, then another, and then another, sprang
helter-skelter from the wood opposite and the whole pack rushed across
the field toward the very spot where the wolf had disappeared.
 The hazel
bushes parted behind the hounds and Daniel's chestnut horse appeared,
dark with sweat.
.
" he cried.


"You've let the wolf go!.
.
 The count, like a punished
schoolboy, looked round, trying by a smile to win Simon's sympathy for
his plight.
 But Simon was no longer there.
 He made thousands of different conjectures as to where and
from what side the beast would come and how he would set upon it.
 Hope
alternated with despair.
 He prayed with that passionate and
shamefaced feeling with which men pray at moments of great excitement
arising from trivial causes.


"No, I shan't have such luck," thought Rostov, "yet what wouldn't it
be worth! It is not to be! Everywhere, at cards and in war, I am always
unlucky.
 The wolf ran forward and jumped heavily over
a gully that lay in her path.
 She was an old animal with a gray back and
big reddish belly.
 Rostov, holding his breath, looked round at the borzois.

They stood or lay not seeing the wolf or understanding the situation.


"Ulyulyulyu!" whispered Rostov, pouting his lips.
 Karay finished
scratching his hindquarters and, cocking his ears, got up with quivering
tail from which tufts of matted hair hung down.


"Shall I loose them or not?" Nicholas asked himself as the wolf
approached him coming from the copse.


"Back or forward? Eh, no matter, forward.
.
.

The first to come into view was Milka, with her black markings and
powerful quarters, gaining upon the wolf.
.
 now she
was ahead of it; but the wolf turned its head to face her, and instead
of putting on speed as she usually did Milka suddenly raised her tail
and stiffened her forelegs.


"Ulyulyulyulyu!" shouted Nicholas.
 The wolf crouched, gnashed her teeth, and again rose
and bounded forward, followed at the distance of a couple of feet by all
the borzois, who did not get any closer to her.
.
 But, coming toward
him, he saw hounds and a huntsman galloping almost straight at the wolf.
 But the wolf jumped up more quickly
than anyone could have expected and, gnashing her teeth, flew at the
yellowish borzoi, which, with a piercing yelp, fell with its head on the
ground, bleeding from a gash in its side.


"Karay? Old fellow!.
" wailed Nicholas.
 But
here Nicholas only saw that something happened to Karay--the borzoi was
suddenly on the wolf, and they rolled together down into a gully just in
front of them.


That instant, when Nicholas saw the wolf struggling in the gully
with the dogs, while from under them could be seen her gray hair and
outstretched hind leg and her frightened choking head, with her ears
laid back (Karay was pinning her by the throat), was the happiest moment
of his life.
 She
clicked her teeth (Karay no longer had her by the throat), leaped with
a movement of her hind legs out of the gully, and having disengaged
herself from the dogs, with tail tucked in again, went forward.
 Karay,
his hair bristling, and probably bruised or wounded, climbed with
difficulty out of the gully.


"Oh my God! Why?" Nicholas cried in despair.


"Uncle's" huntsman was galloping from the other side across the wolf's
path and his borzois once more stopped the animal's advance.
 She was
again hemmed in.


Nicholas and his attendant, with "Uncle" and his huntsman, were all
riding round the wolf, crying "ulyulyu!" shouting and preparing to
dismount each moment that the wolf crouched back, and starting forward
again every time she shook herself and moved toward the wood where she
would be safe.


Already, at the beginning of this chase, Daniel, hearing the ulyulyuing,
had rushed out from the wood.
 He saw Karay seize the wolf, and checked
his horse, supposing the affair to be over.
 But when he saw that the
horsemen did not dismount and that the wolf shook herself and ran for
safety, Daniel set his chestnut galloping, not at the wolf but straight
toward the wood, just as Karay had run to cut the animal off.


Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel until the chestnut, breathing
heavily, panted past him, and he heard the fall of a body and saw Daniel
lying on the wolf's back among the dogs, trying to seize her by the
ears.
 It was evident to the dogs, the hunters, and to the wolf herself
that all was now over.
 The terrified wolf pressed back her ears and
tried to rise, but the borzois stuck to her.
 Daniel rose a little, took
a step, and with his whole weight, as if lying down to rest, fell on
the wolf, seizing her by the ears.
 A stick was thrust between her jaws
and she was fastened with a leash, as if bridled, her legs were bound
together, and Daniel rolled her over once or twice from side to side.
 The hounds had killed two of
the cubs and the borzois three.
 The huntsmen assembled with their booty
and their stories, and all came to look at the wolf, which, with her
broad-browed head hanging down and the bitten stick between her jaws,
gazed with great glassy eyes at this crowd of dogs and men surrounding
her.
 Old Count Rostov also rode up and touched the
wolf.


"Yes, your excellency," answered Daniel, quickly doffing his cap.


The count remembered the wolf he had let slip and his encounter with
Daniel.


For sole reply Daniel gave him a shy, childlike, meek, and amiable
smile.






CHAPTER VI


The old count went home, and Natasha and Petya promised to return very
soon, but as it was still early the hunt went farther.

Nicholas standing in a fallow field could see all his whips.
 The hounds had scarcely been loosed
before Nicholas heard one he knew, Voltorn, giving tongue at intervals;
other hounds joined in, now pausing and now again giving tongue.
 A
moment later he heard a cry from the wooded ravine that a fox had been
found, and the whole pack, joining together, rushed along the ravine
toward the ryefield and away from Nicholas.


He saw the whips in their red caps galloping along the edge of the
ravine, he even saw the hounds, and was expecting a fox to show itself
at any moment on the ryefield opposite.


The huntsman standing in the hollow moved and loosed his borzois, and
Nicholas saw a queer, short-legged red fox with a fine brush going hard
across the field.
.
.
 Now they drew close
to the fox which began to dodge between the field in sharper and sharper
curves, trailing its brush, when suddenly a strange white borzoi dashed
in followed by a black one, and everything was in confusion; the borzois
formed a star-shaped figure, scarcely swaying their bodies and with
tails turned away from the center of the group.
 Two huntsmen galloped up
to the dogs; one in a red cap, the other, a stranger, in a green coat.
"

The huntsmen got the fox, but stayed there a long time without strapping
it to the saddle.
 Their horses, bridled and with high saddles, stood
near them and there too the dogs were lying.
 The huntsmen waved their
arms and did something to the fox.
 Then from that spot came the sound of
a horn, with the signal agreed on in case of a fight.


"That's Ilagin's huntsman having a row with our Ivan," said Nicholas'
groom.

Several of the field galloped to the spot where the fight was going on.


Nicholas dismounted, and with Natasha and Petya, who had ridden up,
stopped near the hounds, waiting to see how the matter would end.
 Out of
the bushes came the huntsman who had been fighting and rode toward
his young master, with the fox tied to his crupper.


"What has happened?" asked Nicholas.


"A likely thing, killing a fox our dogs had hunted! And it was my gray
bitch that caught it! Go to law, indeed!.
.
.
 He snatches at the fox! I
gave him one with the fox.
.
" said the huntsman, pointing to his dagger and probably
imagining himself still speaking to his foe.


The facts were that Ilagin, with whom the Rostovs had a quarrel and were
at law, hunted over places that belonged by custom to the Rostovs, and
had now, as if purposely, sent his men to the very woods the Rostovs
were hunting and let his man snatch a fox their dogs had chased.


Nicholas, though he had never seen Ilagin, with his usual absence
of moderation in judgment, hated him cordially from reports of his
arbitrariness and violence, and regarded him as his bitterest foe.
 He hoped to become better acquainted with the count and invited
him to draw his covert.


Natasha, afraid that her brother would do something dreadful, had
followed him in some excitement.
 Ilagin lifted his beaver cap still
higher to Natasha and said, with a pleasant smile, that the young
countess resembled Diana in her passion for the chase as well as in her
beauty, of which he had heard much.
 The hunt servants fell
into line.
 "Uncle," Rostov, and Ilagin kept
stealthily glancing at one another's dogs, trying not to be observed by
their companions and searching uneasily for rivals to their own borzois.
 He had heard of the
swiftness of Ilagin's borzois, and in that beautiful bitch saw a rival
to his own Milka.


In the middle of a sober conversation begun by Ilagin about the year's
harvest, Nicholas pointed to the red-spotted bitch.


"A fine little bitch, that!" said he in a careless tone.
 And considering it polite
to return the young count's compliment, Ilagin looked at his borzois
and picked out Milka who attracted his attention by her breadth.


"I don't understand," continued Ilagin, "how some sportsmen can be so
jealous about game and dogs.
 For myself, I can tell you, Count, I enjoy
riding in company such as this.
.
 All I care about is to enjoy seeing the chase, is it not so,
Count? For I consider that.
.
"

"A-tu!" came the long-drawn cry of one of the borzoi whippers-in, who
had halted.
 He stood on a knoll in the stubble, holding his whip aloft,
and again repeated his long-drawn cry, "A-tu!" (This call and the
uplifted whip meant that he saw a sitting hare.
 "Yes, we must
ride up.
.
.
.
 Shall we both course it?" answered Nicholas, seeing in Erza
and "Uncle's" red Rugay two rivals he had never yet had a chance of
pitting against his own borzois.
 "And suppose they outdo my Milka at
once!" he thought as he rode with "Uncle" and Ilagin toward the hare.


"A full-grown one?" asked Ilagin as he approached the whip who had
sighted the hare--and not without agitation he looked round and whistled
to Erza.


"And you, Michael Nikanorovich?" he said, addressing "Uncle.
"

The latter was riding with a sullen expression on his face.


"How can I join in? Why, you've given a village for each of your
borzois! That's it, come on! Yours are worth thousands.
 Try yours
against one another, you two, and I'll look on!"

"Rugay, hey, hey!" he shouted.
 All were moving slowly and sedately.


But before the whip could reply, the hare, scenting the frost coming
next morning, was unable to rest and leaped up.
 All the hunt,
who had been moving slowly, shouted, "Stop!" calling in the hounds,
while the borzoi whips, with a cry of "A-tu!" galloped across the field
setting the borzois on the hare.
 When
he jumped up he did not run at once, but pricked his ears listening to
the shouting and trampling that resounded from all sides at once.
 The hare arched his
back and bounded off yet more swiftly.


"Milashka, dear!" rose Nicholas' triumphant cry.
 It looked as if Milka
would immediately pounce on the hare, but she overtook him and flew
past.
 Again the beautiful Erza reached him, but
when close to the hare's scut paused as if measuring the distance, so as
not to make a mistake this time but seize his hind leg.


"Erza, darling!" Ilagin wailed in a voice unlike his own.
 Erza did not
hearken to his appeal.
 Again Erza and Milka were abreast, running like a pair
of carriage horses, and began to overtake the hare, but it was easier
for the hare to run on the balk and the borzois did not overtake him so
quickly.


"Rugay, Rugayushka! That's it, come on!" came a third voice just then,
and "Uncle's" red borzoi, straining and curving its back, caught up
with the two foremost borzois, pushed ahead of them regardless of the
terrible strain, put on speed close to the hare, knocked it off the balk
onto the ryefield, again put on speed still more viciously, sinking to
his knees in the muddy field, and all one could see was how, muddying
his back, he rolled over with the hare.
 A ring of borzois surrounded
him.
 A moment later everyone had drawn up round the crowd of dogs.
 Only
the delighted "Uncle" dismounted, and cut off a pad, shaking the hare
for the blood to drip off, and anxiously glancing round with restless
eyes while his arms and legs twitched.
 He spoke without himself knowing
whom to or what about.
 "That's it, come on! That's a dog!.
.
.
.
 That's it,
come on!.
.
.


"Once she had missed it and turned it away, any mongrel could take it,"
Ilagin was saying at the same time, breathless from his gallop and his
excitement.
 By that shriek she expressed what the others expressed by all
talking at once, and it was so strange that she must herself have been
ashamed of so wild a cry and everyone else would have been amazed at it
at any other time.
 "Uncle" himself twisted up the hare, threw it neatly
and smartly across his horse's back as if by that gesture he meant to
rebuke everybody, and, with an air of not wishing to speak to anyone,
mounted his bay and rode off.


"Well, I am like any other dog as long as it's not a question of
coursing.






CHAPTER VII


Toward evening Ilagin took leave of Nicholas, who found that they were
so far from home that he accepted "Uncle's" offer that the hunting party
should spend the night in his little village of Mikhaylovna.


"And if you put up at my house that will be better still.
"

"Uncle's" offer was accepted.


Some five male domestic serfs, big and little, rushed out to the front
porch to meet their master.
 A score of women serfs, old and young, as
well as children, popped out from the back entrance to have a look at
the hunters who were arriving.
 The presence of Natasha--a woman, a lady,
and on horseback--raised the curiosity of the serfs to such a degree
that many of them came up to her, stared her in the face, and unabashed
by her presence made remarks about her as though she were some prodigy
on show and not a human being able to hear or understand what was said
about her.


"Arinka! Look, she sits sideways! There she sits and her skirt
dangles.
.
.
.
"

"Isn't she a Tartar!"

"How is it you didn't go head over heels?" asked the boldest of all,
addressing Natasha directly.


"Uncle" dismounted at the porch of his little wooden house which
stood in the midst of an overgrown garden and, after a glance at his
retainers, shouted authoritatively that the superfluous ones should take
themselves off and that all necessary preparations should be made to
receive the guests and the visitors.


The serfs all dispersed.
 "Uncle" lifted Natasha off her horse and taking
her hand led her up the rickety wooden steps of the porch.
 The house,
with its bare, unplastered log walls, was not overclean--it did not seem
that those living in it aimed at keeping it spotless--but neither was
it noticeably neglected.
 In the entry there was a smell of fresh apples,
and wolf and fox skins hung about.
 The
study smelt strongly of tobacco and dogs.
 "Uncle" asked his visitors
to sit down and make themselves at home, and then went out of the room.

From behind this came women's laughter and whispers.
 Natasha, Nicholas,
and Petya took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa.
 Petya, leaning
on his elbow, fell asleep at once.
 Natasha and Nicholas were silent.

Their faces glowed, they were hungry and very cheerful.
 They looked
at one another (now that the hunt was over and they were in the house,
Nicholas no longer considered it necessary to show his manly superiority
over his sister), Natasha gave him a wink, and neither refrained long
from bursting into a peal of ringing laughter even before they had a
pretext ready to account for it.
 And Natasha felt that this costume, the very one she
had regarded with surprise and amusement at Otradnoe, was just the right
thing and not at all worse than a swallow-tail or frock coat.
 "Uncle"
too was in high spirits and far from being offended by the brother's
and sister's laughter (it could never enter his head that they might be
laughing at his way of life) he himself joined in the merriment.
 With hospitable dignity and cordiality in her glance
and in every motion, she looked at the visitors and, with a pleasant
smile, bowed respectfully.
 "Here I am.
 I am she! Now
do you understand 'Uncle'?" her expression said to Rostov.
 Afterwards she brought a freshly roasted chicken, ham, preserves
made with honey, and preserves made with sugar.


All this was the fruit of Anisya Fedorovna's housekeeping, gathered and
prepared by her.


"Take this, little Lady-Countess!" she kept saying, as she offered
Natasha first one thing and then another.


Natasha ate of everything and thought she had never seen or eaten such
buttermilk cakes, such aromatic jam, such honey-and-nut sweets, or such
a chicken anywhere.


After supper, over their cherry brandy, Rostov and "Uncle" talked of
past and future hunts, of Rugay and Ilagin's dogs, while Natasha sat
upright on the sofa and listened with sparkling eyes.
 She tried several
times to wake Petya that he might eat something, but he only muttered
incoherent words without waking up.
 Death will come.

Involuntarily Rostov recalled all the good he had heard about him from
his father and the neighbors.
 Throughout the whole province "Uncle" had
the reputation of being the most honorable and disinterested of cranks.

They called him in to decide family disputes, chose him as executor,
confided secrets to him, elected him to be a justice and to other posts;
but he always persistently refused public appointments, passing the
autumn and spring in the fields on his bay gelding, sitting at home in
winter, and lying in his overgrown garden in summer.


"Why don't you enter the service, Uncle?"

"I did once, but gave it up.
 I am not fit for it.
 That's it, come on! I
can't make head or tail of it.
 That's for you--I haven't brains enough.

Now, hunting is another matter--that's it, come on! Open the door,
there!" he shouted.


There was a rapid patter of bare feet, and an unseen hand opened the
door into the huntsmen's room, from which came the clear sounds of a
balalayka on which someone, who was evidently a master of the art, was
playing.
 Natasha had been listening to those strains for some time and
now went out into the passage to hear better.


"That's Mitka, my coachman.
 I'm fond
of it," said "Uncle.
"

It was the custom for Mitka to play the balalayka in the huntsmen's room
when "Uncle" returned from the chase.
 "Uncle" was fond of such music.


"How good! Really very good!" said Nicholas with some unintentional
superciliousness, as if ashamed to confess that the sounds pleased him
very much.

"Not 'very good' it's simply delicious!"

Just as "Uncle's" pickled mushrooms, honey, and cherry brandy had seemed
to her the best in the world, so also that song, at that moment, seemed
to her the acme of musical delight.


"More, please, more!" cried Natasha at the door as soon as the balalayka
ceased.
 Anisya Fedorovna came in
and leaned her portly person against the doorpost.
" "That's a good player of ours," she added.


"He doesn't play that part right!" said "Uncle" suddenly, with an
energetic gesture.
 "Here he ought to burst out--that's it, come
on!--ought to burst out.


"Anisya, go and see if the strings of my guitar are all right.
 I haven't
touched it for a long time.
 That's it--come on! I've given it up.


Without looking at anyone, "Uncle" blew the dust off it and, tapping the
case with his bony fingers, tuned the guitar and settled himself in his
armchair.
 The
tune, played with precision and in exact time, began to thrill in the
hearts of Nicholas and Natasha, arousing in them the same kind of sober
mirth as radiated from Anisya Fedorovna's whole being.
 Anisya Fedorovna
flushed, and drawing her kerchief over her face went laughing out of
the room.
 "Uncle" continued to play correctly, carefully, with energetic
firmness, looking with a changed and inspired expression at the spot
where Anisya Fedorovna had just stood.


"Lovely, lovely! Go on, Uncle, go on!" shouted Natasha as soon as he had
finished.
 Anisya Fedorovna's smiling face reappeared
in the doorway and behind hers other faces.
.


    Fetching water clear and sweet,
    Stop, dear maiden, I entreat--

played "Uncle" once more, running his fingers skillfully over the
strings, and then he stopped short and jerked his shoulders.


"Go on, Uncle dear," Natasha wailed in an imploring tone as if her life
depended on it.


"Now then, niece!" he exclaimed, waving to Natasha the hand that had
just struck a chord.


Natasha threw off the shawl from her shoulders, ran forward to face
"Uncle," and setting her arms akimbo also made a motion with her
shoulders and struck an attitude.
 As soon as she had struck her pose, and smiled triumphantly,
proudly, and with sly merriment, the fear that had at first seized
Nicholas and the others that she might not do the right thing was at an
end, and they were already admiring her.
 That's it--come on!"

"He's chosen already," said Nicholas smiling.
 As a result of this the unconsidered
tune, like the song of a bird, was extraordinarily good.
 She resolved to give up learning the
harp and to play only the guitar.
 She asked "Uncle" for his guitar and
at once found the chords of the song.


After nine o'clock two traps and three mounted men, who had been sent
to look for them, arrived to fetch Natasha and Petya.
 Natasha and Nicholas got into the other.
 "Uncle" wrapped
Natasha up warmly and took leave of her with quite a new tenderness.
 He
accompanied them on foot as far as the bridge that could not be crossed,
so that they had to go round by the ford, and he sent huntsmen to ride
in front with lanterns.


"Good-by, dear niece," his voice called out of the darkness--not the
voice Natasha had known previously, but the one that had sung As 'twas
growing dark last night.


In the village through which they passed there were red lights and a
cheerful smell of smoke.


"What a darling Uncle is!" said Natasha, when they had come out onto the
highroad.
 I'm quite, quite all right.
 The night was dark and damp.
 They could not see the horses, but
only heard them splashing through the unseen mud.


What was passing in that receptive childlike soul that so eagerly caught
and assimilated all the diverse impressions of life? How did they all
find place in her? But she was very happy.
 As they were nearing home she
suddenly struck up the air of As 'twas growing dark last night--the tune
of which she had all the way been trying to get and had at last caught.


"What were you thinking about just now, Nicholas?" inquired Natasha.


They were fond of asking one another that question.


"I?" said Nicholas, trying to remember.
.
.
.
.
.
 Yes, first I thought that we are driving along
and imagining that we are going home, but that heaven knows where we are
really going in the darkness, and that we shall arrive and suddenly find
that we are not in Otradnoe, but in Fairyland.
 And then I thought.
.
.
 No,
nothing else.


"No," said Natasha, though she had in reality been thinking about Prince
Andrew at the same time as of the rest, and of how he would have liked
"Uncle.
"

"Rubbish, nonsense, humbug!" exclaimed Nicholas, and he thought: "How
charming this Natasha of mine is! I have no other friend like her and
never shall have.
 Why should she marry? We might always drive about
together!"

"What a darling this Nicholas of mine is!" thought Natasha.


"Ah, there are still lights in the drawingroom!" she said, pointing to
the windows of the house that gleamed invitingly in the moist velvety
darkness of the night.






CHAPTER VIII


Count Ilya Rostov had resigned the position of Marshal of the Nobility
because it involved him in too much expense, but still his affairs did
not improve.
 Natasha and Nicholas often noticed their parents conferring
together anxiously and privately and heard suggestions of selling the
fine ancestral Rostov house and estate near Moscow.
 It was not necessary
to entertain so freely as when the count had been Marshal, and life at
Otradnoe was quieter than in former years, but still the enormous house
and its lodges were full of people and more than twenty sat down to
table every day.
 They had not as many visitors as before, but the old
habits of life without which the count and countess could not
conceive of existence remained unchanged.


The count moved in his affairs as in a huge net, trying not to believe
that he was entangled but becoming more and more so at every step, and
feeling too feeble to break the meshes or to set to work carefully and
patiently to disentangle them.
 The countess, with her loving heart, felt
that her children were being ruined, that it was not the count's fault
for he could not help being what he was--that (though he tried to
hide it) he himself suffered from the consciousness of his own and his
children's ruin, and she tried to find means of remedying the position.

From her feminine point of view she could see only one solution, namely,
for Nicholas to marry a rich heiress.
 She felt this to be their last
hope and that if Nicholas refused the match she had found for him, she
would have to abandon the hope of ever getting matters right.
 This match
was with Julie Karagina, the daughter of excellent and virtuous parents,
a girl the Rostovs had known from childhood, and who had now become a
wealthy heiress through the death of the last of her brothers.


The countess had written direct to Julie's mother in Moscow suggesting a
marriage between their children and had received a favorable answer
from her.
 She said she could lie down in her grave peacefully if that
were accomplished.
 Then she told him that she knew of a splendid girl
and tried to discover what he thought about marriage.
 Nicholas guessed what his mother's
remarks were leading to and during one of these conversations induced
her to speak quite frankly.
 She told him that her only hope of getting
their affairs disentangled now lay in his marrying Julie Karagina.


"But, Mamma, suppose I loved a girl who has no fortune, would you expect
me to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for the sake of money?" he
asked his mother, not realizing the cruelty of his question and only
wishing to show his noble-mindedness.
 "You have not understood me, Nikolenka.
 She began to cry.


"Mamma, don't cry! Only tell me that you wish it, and you know I will
give my life, anything, to put you at ease," said Nicholas.


"Maybe I do love a poor girl," said Nicholas to himself.
 Because Sonya is poor I must not love her," he thought,
"must not respond to her faithful, devoted love? Yet I should certainly
be happier with her than with some doll-like Julie.
 If I love Sonya, that feeling is for me
stronger and higher than all else.
 She saw with sorrow, and sometimes
with exasperation, symptoms of a growing attachment between her son and
the portionless Sonya.
 A fourth letter had
come from Prince Andrew, from Rome, in which he wrote that he would have
been on his way back to Russia long ago had not his wound unexpectedly
reopened in the warm climate, which obliged him to defer his return till
the beginning of the new year.
 Natasha was still as much in love with
her betrothed, found the same comfort in that love, and was still as
ready to throw herself into all the pleasures of life as before; but at
the end of the fourth month of their separation she began to have fits
of depression which she could not master.
 She felt sorry for herself:
sorry that she was being wasted all this time and of no use to
anyone--while she felt herself so capable of loving and being loved.


Things were not cheerful in the Rostovs' home.






CHAPTER IX


Christmas came and except for the ceremonial Mass, the solemn and
wearisome Christmas congratulations from neighbors and servants, and the
new dresses everyone put on, there were no special festivities, though
the calm frost of twenty degrees Reaumur, the dazzling sunshine by day,
and the starlight of the winter nights seemed to call for some special
celebration of the season.


On the third day of Christmas week, after the midday dinner, all the
inmates of the house dispersed to various rooms.
 It was the dullest time
of the day.
 Nicholas, who had been visiting some neighbors that morning,
was asleep on the sitting-room sofa.
 Sonya sat in the drawing room at the round table, copying a
design for embroidery.
 Nastasya
Ivanovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at the window with two old
ladies.


"Why are you wandering about like an outcast?" asked her mother.
 "What
do you want?"

"Him.
.
.
.
 now, this minute! I want him!" said Natasha, with
glittering eyes and no sign of a smile.


The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her daughter.


"Don't look at me, Mamma! Don't look; I shall cry directly.


"Mamma, I want him.
 Why should I be wasted like this, Mamma?"

Her voice broke, tears gushed from her eyes, and she turned quickly to
hide them and left the room.
 There an old maidservant was grumbling at a
young girl who stood panting, having just run in through the cold from
the serfs' quarters.
 "Go, Mavrushka, go.
 There an old footman and two young ones were playing
cards.


"What can I do with them?" thought Natasha.
.
 where can I send him?.
.


"Go, go quickly," the old man urged him.


"And you, Theodore, get me a piece of chalk.


No one in the house sent people about or gave them as much trouble as
Natasha did.
 She could not see people unconcernedly, but had to send
them on some errand.
 She seemed to be trying whether any of them would
get angry or sulky with her; but the serfs fulfilled no one's orders so
readily as they did hers.
 "What can I do, where can I go?" thought she,
as she went slowly along the passage.


"O Lord, O Lord, it's always the same! Oh, where am I to go? What am I
to do with myself?" And tapping with her heels, she ran quickly upstairs
to see Vogel and his wife who lived on the upper story.
 The governesses were discussing
whether it was cheaper to live in Moscow or Odessa.
 Natasha sat down,
listened to their talk with a serious and thoughtful air, and then got
up again.


"The island of Madagascar," she said, "Ma-da-gas-car," she repeated,
articulating each syllable distinctly, and, not replying to Madame
Schoss who asked her what she was saying, she went out of the room.


Her brother Petya was upstairs too; with the man in attendance on him he
was preparing fireworks to let off that night.
 "Carry me downstairs.
"

Petya ran up and offered her his back.
 She jumped on it, putting her
arms round his neck, and he pranced along with her.


"No, don't.
.
 the island of Madagascar!" she said, and jumping off his
back she went downstairs.


Having as it were reviewed her kingdom, tested her power, and made sure
that everyone was submissive, but that all the same it was dull, Natasha
betook herself to the ballroom, picked up her guitar, sat down in a dark
corner behind a bookcase, and began to run her fingers over the strings
in the bass, picking out a passage she recalled from an opera she had
heard in Petersburg with Prince Andrew.
 What she drew from the guitar
would have had no meaning for other listeners, but in her imagination
a whole series of reminiscences arose from those sounds.
 "Yes it was exactly the same," thought
Natasha.


"Sonya, what is this?" she cried, twanging a thick string.
 "I don't know.
 A storm?" she ventured timidly, afraid of being
wrong.


"There! That's just how she started and just how she came up smiling
timidly when all this happened before," thought Natasha, "and in just
the same way I thought there was something lacking in her.
"

"No, it's the chorus from The Water-Carrier, listen!" and Natasha sang
the air of the chorus so that Sonya should catch it.


"To change the water in this glass.
"

"You always find something to do, but I can't," said Natasha.
"

She sat awhile, wondering what the meaning of it all having happened
before could be, and without solving this problem, or at all regretting
not having done so, she again passed in fancy to the time when she was
with him and he was looking at her with a lover's eyes.


"Oh, if only he would come quicker! I am so afraid it will never be!
And, worst of all, I am growing old--that's the thing! There won't then
be in me what there is now.
 Perhaps he has come and is sitting in the drawing room.

Perhaps he came yesterday and I have forgotten it.


All the domestic circle, tutors, governesses, and guests, were already
at the tea table.


"Ah, here she is!" said the old count, when he saw Natasha enter.
" But Natasha stayed by her mother and glanced round as
if looking for something.


"Mamma!" she muttered, "give him to me, give him, Mamma, quickly,
quickly!" and she again had difficulty in repressing her sobs.


She sat down at the table and listened to the conversation between the
elders and Nicholas, who had also come to the table.

Once in the regiment I had not gone to some merrymaking where there was
music.
.
.
.
 "When I was
quite little that used to be so with me.
 Do you remember when I was
punished once about some plums? You were all dancing, and I sat sobbing
in the schoolroom? I shall never forget it: I felt sad and sorry for
everyone, for myself, and for everyone.
 "Do you remember?"

"I remember," answered Nicholas.
 "I remember that I came to you
afterwards and wanted to comfort you, but do you know, I felt ashamed
to.
 Do you remember?"

"And do you remember," Natasha asked with a pensive smile, "how once,
long, long ago, when we were quite little, Uncle called us into the
study--that was in the old house--and it was dark--we went in and
suddenly there stood.
.
"

"A Negro," chimed in Nicholas with a smile of delight.
 "Of course I
remember.
"

"He was gray, you remember, and had white teeth, and stood and looked at
us.
.
.
"

"Sonya, do you remember?" asked Nicholas.


"Yes, yes, I do remember something too," Sonya answered timidly.


"You know I have asked Papa and Mamma about that Negro," said Natasha,
"and they say there was no Negro at all.
"

"How strange it is! It's as if it were a dream! I like that.
"

"And do you remember how we rolled hard-boiled eggs in the ballroom, and
suddenly two old women began spinning round on the carpet? Was that real
or not? Do you remember what fun it was?"

"Yes, and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a gun in the
porch?"

So they went through their memories, smiling with pleasure: not the sad
memories of old age, but poetic, youthful ones--those impressions of
one's most distant past in which dreams and realities blend--and they
laughed with quiet enjoyment.


Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind, and what she
recalled did not arouse the same poetic feeling as they experienced.
 She
simply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it.
 She
told them how afraid she had been of Nicholas because he had on a corded
jacket and her nurse had told her that she, too, would be sewn up with
cords.


"And I remember their telling me that you had been born under a
cabbage," said Natasha, "and I remember that I dared not disbelieve it
then, but knew that it was not true, and I felt so uncomfortable.
"

While they were talking a maid thrust her head in at the other door of
the sitting room.


"It isn't wanted, Petya.
 Tell them to take it away," replied Natasha.


"Mr.
 Dimmler, please play my favorite nocturne by Field," came the old
countess' voice from the drawing room.


Dimmler struck a chord and, turning to Natasha, Nicholas, and Sonya,
remarked: "How quiet you young people are!"

"Yes, we're philosophizing," said Natasha, glancing round for a moment
and then continuing the conversation.
 They were now discussing dreams.


Dimmler began to play; Natasha went on tiptoe noiselessly to the table,
took up a candle, carried it out, and returned, seating herself quietly
in her former place.
 It was dark in the room especially where they were
sitting on the sofa, but through the big windows the silvery light of
the full moon fell on the floor.
 Dimmler had finished the piece but
still sat softly running his fingers over the strings, evidently
uncertain whether to stop or to play something else.


"Do you know," said Natasha in a whisper, moving closer to Nicholas and
Sonya, "that when one goes on and on recalling memories, one at last
begins to remember what happened before one was in the world.
.
.
"

"That is metempsychosis," said Sonya, who had always learned well, and
remembered everything.
 "The Egyptians believed that our souls have lived
in animals, and will go back into animals again.
"

"No, I don't believe we ever were in animals," said Natasha, still in
a whisper though the music had ceased.
 "But I am certain that we
were angels somewhere there, and have been here, and that is why we
remember.
.
"

"May I join you?" said Dimmler who had come up quietly, and he sat down
by them.
.
.
 "The soul is immortal--well then, if I
shall always live I must have lived before, lived for a whole eternity.
"

"Yes, but it is hard for us to imagine eternity," remarked Dimmler,
who had joined the young folk with a mildly condescending smile but now
spoke as quietly and seriously as they.
 "It is now today,
and it will be tomorrow, and always; and there was yesterday, and the
day before.
.
.


None of them, not even the middle-aged Dimmler, wanted to break off
their conversation and quit that corner in the sitting room, but Natasha
got up and Nicholas sat down at the clavichord.
 Standing as usual in the
middle of the hall and choosing the place where the resonance was best,
Natasha began to sing her mother's favorite song.


She had said she did not want to sing, but it was long since she had
sung, and long before she again sang, as she did that evening.
 The
count, from his study where he was talking to Mitenka, heard her and,
like a schoolboy in a hurry to run out to play, blundered in his talk
while giving orders to the steward, and at last stopped, while Mitenka
stood in front of him also listening and smiling.
 Nicholas did not take
his eyes off his sister and drew breath in time with her.
 Sonya, as she
listened, thought of the immense difference there was between herself
and her friend, and how impossible it was for her to be anything like as
bewitching as her cousin.
 The old countess sat with a blissful yet sad
smile and with tears in her eyes, occasionally shaking her head.
 She
thought of Natasha and of her own youth, and of how there was something
unnatural and dreadful in this impending marriage of Natasha and Prince
Andrew.


Dimmler, who had seated himself beside the countess, listened with
closed eyes.
.
 Her maternal instinct told her that
Natasha had too much of something, and that because of this she would
not be happy.


Natasha stopped abruptly.


"Idiot!" she screamed at her brother and, running to a chair, threw
herself on it, sobbing so violently that she could not stop for a long
time.


"It's nothing, Mamma, really it's nothing; only Petya startled me," she
said, trying to smile, but her tears still flowed and sobs still choked
her.


The mummers (some of the house serfs) dressed up as bears, Turks,
innkeepers, and ladies--frightening and funny--bringing in with them the
cold from outside and a feeling of gaiety, crowded, at first timidly,
into the anteroom, then hiding behind one another they pushed into
the ballroom where, shyly at first and then more and more merrily and
heartily, they started singing, dancing, and playing Christmas games.

The countess, when she had identified them and laughed at their
costumes, went into the drawing room.
 The count sat in the ballroom,
smiling radiantly and applauding the players.
 An hussar was Natasha, and a
Circassian was Sonya with burnt-cork mustache and eyebrows.


After the condescending surprise, nonrecognition, and praise, from those
who were not themselves dressed up, the young people decided that their
costumes were so good that they ought to be shown elsewhere.


Nicholas, who, as the roads were in splendid condition, wanted to take
them all for a drive in his troyka, proposed to take with them about a
dozen of the serf mummers and drive to "Uncle's.
 "Besides, you
wouldn't have room to turn round there.
 If you must go, go to the
Melyukovs'.
"

Melyukova was a widow, who, with her family and their tutors and
governesses, lived three miles from the Rostovs.


"That's right, my dear," chimed in the old count, thoroughly aroused.

"I'll dress up at once and go with them.
 I'll make Pashette open her
eyes.
 It was decided that the count must not go, but that
if Louisa Ivanovna (Madame Schoss) would go with them, the young ladies
might go to the Melyukovs', Sonya, generally so timid and shy, more
urgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse.


Sonya's costume was the best of all.
 Her mustache and eyebrows were
extraordinarily becoming.


Natasha was foremost in setting a merry holiday tone, which, passing
from one to another, grew stronger and reached its climax when they all
came out into the frost and got into the sleighs, talking, calling to
one another, laughing, and shouting.


Two of the troykas were the usual household sleighs, the third was
the old count's with a trotter from the Orlov stud as shaft horse,
the fourth was Nicholas' own with a short shaggy black shaft horse.

Nicholas, in his old lady's dress over which he had belted his hussar
overcoat, stood in the middle of the sleigh, reins in hand.


It was so light that he could see the moonlight reflected from the metal
harness disks and from the eyes of the horses, who looked round in alarm
at the noisy party under the shadow of the porch roof.


Natasha, Sonya, Madame Schoss, and two maids got into Nicholas' sleigh;
Dimmler, his wife, and Petya, into the old count's, and the rest of the
mummers seated themselves in the other two sleighs.


The old count's troyka, with Dimmler and his party, started forward,
squeaking on its runners as though freezing to the snow, its deep-toned
bell clanging.
 At first they drove at a steady
trot along the narrow road.
 While they drove past the garden the shadows
of the bare trees often fell across the road and hid the brilliant
moonlight, but as soon as they were past the fence, the snowy plain
bathed in moonlight and motionless spread out before them glittering
like diamonds and dappled with bluish shadows.
 Bang, bang! went the
first sleigh over a cradle hole in the snow of the road, and each of
the other sleighs jolted in the same way, and rudely breaking the
frost-bound stillness, the troykas began to speed along the road, one
after the other.


"A hare's track, a lot of tracks!" rang out Natasha's voice through the
frost-bound air.
 The shaft horse swayed from
side to side, moving his ears as if asking: "Isn't it time to begin
now?" In front, already far ahead the deep bell of the sleigh ringing
farther and farther off, the black horses driven by Zakhar could be
clearly seen against the white snow.


It was only by the keener wind that met them and the jerks given by the
side horses who pulled harder--ever increasing their gallop--that one
noticed how fast the troyka was flying.


Nicholas overtook the first sleigh.
 "It's the Kosoy meadow, I suppose.
 But
no--this is something new I've never seen before.
 This isn't the Kosoy
meadow nor the Demkin hill, and heaven only knows what it is! It is
something new and enchanted.
 Well, whatever it may be.
.
.
" And shouting
to his horses, he began to pass the first sleigh.


Nicholas gave the horses the rein, and Zakhar, stretching out his arms,
clucked his tongue and let his horses go.


"Now, look out, master!" he cried.


Faster still the two troykas flew side by side, and faster moved the
feet of the galloping side horses.
 Nicholas began to draw ahead.


"No you won't, master!" he shouted.


Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed Zakhar.
 The horses
showered the fine dry snow on the faces of those in the sleigh--beside
them sounded quick ringing bells and they caught confused glimpses of
swiftly moving legs and the shadows of the troyka they were passing.

The whistling sound of the runners on the snow and the voices of girls
shrieking were heard from different sides.


Again checking his horses, Nicholas looked around him.
 They were still
surrounded by the magic plain bathed in moonlight and spangled with
stars.


"Zakhar is shouting that I should turn to the left, but why to the
left?" thought Nicholas.
 "Are we getting to the Melyukovs'? Is this
Melyukovka? Heaven only knows where we are going, and heaven knows what
is happening to us--but it is very strange and pleasant whatever it is.
"
And he looked round in the sleigh.


"Look, his mustache and eyelashes are all white!" said one of the
strange, pretty, unfamiliar people--the one with fine eyebrows and
mustache.
"

"Aren't you cold?" he asked.
 Dimmler from the sleigh behind
shouted something--probably something funny--but they could not make out
what he said.


"Yes, yes!" some voices answered, laughing.


"But here was a fairy forest with black moving shadows, and a glitter
of diamonds and a flight of marble steps and the silver roofs of fairy
buildings and the shrill yells of some animals.


It really was Melyukovka, and maids and footmen with merry faces came
running, out to the porch carrying candles.


"Who is it?" asked someone in the porch.


"The mummers from the count's.
 I know by the horses," replied some
voices.


Hussars, ladies, witches, clowns, and bears, after clearing their
throats and wiping the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule,
came into the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lighted.
 The
clown--Dimmler--and the lady--Nicholas--started a dance.
 Surrounded by
the screaming children the mummers, covering their faces and disguising
their voices, bowed to their hostess and arranged themselves about the
room.
 But Herr Dimmler--isn't
he good! I didn't know him! And how he dances.
 Dear me, there's a
Circassian.
 Really, how becoming it is to dear Sonya.
 And who is that?
Well, you have cheered us up! Nikita and Vanya--clear away the tables!
And we were sitting so quietly.
 Ha, ha, ha!.
.
.
 The hussar, the hussar!
Just like a boy! And the legs!.
.
.
 I can't look at him.
.
.
 Ten minutes later, all the young Melyukovs joined the
mummers.


Pelageya Danilovna, having given orders to clear the rooms for the
visitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs,
went about among the mummers without removing her spectacles, peering
into their faces with a suppressed smile and failing to recognize any of
them.
 It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostovs she failed to recognize,
she did not even recognize her own daughters, or her late husband's,
dressing gowns and uniforms, which they had put on.


"And who is this?" she asked her governess, peering into the face of her
own daughter dressed up as a Kazan-Tartar.
 "I suppose it is one of the
Rostovs! Well, Mr.
 Hussar, and what regiment do you serve in?" she asked
Natasha.
 "Here, hand some fruit jelly to the Turk!" she ordered the
butler who was handing things round.
 "That's not forbidden by his law.
"

Sometimes, as she looked at the strange but amusing capers cut by the
dancers, who--having decided once for all that being disguised, no one
would recognize them--were not at all shy, Pelageya Danilovna hid
her face in her handkerchief, and her whole stout body shook with
irrepressible, kindly, elderly laughter.


"My little Sasha! Look at Sasha!" she said.


After Russian country dances and chorus dances, Pelageya Danilovna made
the serfs and gentry join in one large circle: a ring, a string, and a
silver ruble were fetched and they all played games together.


In an hour, all the costumes were crumpled and disordered.
 The visitors were invited to supper in the drawing room, and the
serfs had something served to them in the ballroom.


"Now to tell one's fortune in the empty bathhouse is frightening!" said
an old maid who lived with the Melyukovs, during supper.


"Why?" said the eldest Melyukov girl.
.
"

"I'll go," said Sonya.
.
.
 a sleigh drives up with
harness bells; she hears him coming! He comes in, just in the shape of a
man, like an officer--comes in and sits down to table with her.
"

"Ah! ah!" screamed Natasha, rolling her eyes with horror.


"Yes? And how.
.
.


"Mamma, you used to try your fate yourself.
.
" said her daughter.


"And how does one do it in a barn?" inquired Sonya.


"Well, say you went to the barn now, and listened.
"

"Mamma, tell us what happened to you in the barn.
.
" she replied.
 "But none of you would go?"

"Yes, I will; Pelageya Danilovna, let me! I'll go," said Sonya.


"Well, why not, if you're not afraid?"

"Louisa Ivanovna, may I?" asked Sonya.


Whether they were playing the ring and string game or the ruble game or
talking as now, Nicholas did not leave Sonya's side, and gazed at her
with quite new eyes.


"I'm not afraid of anything," said Sonya.


They told her where the barn was and how she should stand and listen,
and they handed her a fur cloak.
 She threw this over her head and
shoulders and glanced at Nicholas.


"What a darling that girl is!" thought he.
 Nicholas went hastily
to the front porch, saying he felt too hot.
 The crowd of people really
had made the house stuffy.
 The light was so strong and the snow sparkled with
so many stars that one did not wish to look up at the sky and the real
stars were unnoticed.
 Halfway lay some snow-covered piles of firewood and across and
along them a network of shadows from the bare old lime trees fell on the
snow and on the path.
"

"I am not afraid," answered Sonya's voice, and along the path toward
Nicholas came the crunching, whistling sound of Sonya's feet in her thin
shoes.


Sonya came along, wrapped in her cloak.
 He was in a woman's dress, with
tousled hair and a happy smile new to Sonya.
 She ran rapidly toward him.


"Quite different and yet the same," thought Nicholas, looking at her
face all lit up by the moonlight.
 He slipped his arms under the cloak
that covered her head, embraced her, pressed her to him, and kissed her
on the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt cork.
 Sonya
kissed him full on the lips, and disengaging her little hands pressed
them to his cheeks.
.
.
 was all they said.
 They ran to the barn and
then back again, re-entering, he by the front and she by the back porch.


On the way back Nicholas drove at a steady pace instead of racing and
kept peering by that fantastic all-transforming light into Sonya's face
and searching beneath the eyebrows and mustache for his former and his
present Sonya from whom he had resolved never to be parted again.


"Sonya, is it well with thee?" he asked from time to time.


"Yes!" she replied.
 "And with thee?"

When halfway home Nicholas handed the reins to the coachman and ran for
a moment to Natasha's sleigh and stood on its wing.


"Oh, how strange you are with that mustache and those eyebrows!.
.
.
 "Now I am so glad! Well, run back to
her.
.
 "Natasha, it's
magical, isn't it?"

"Yes," she replied.
"

"So you are glad and I have done right?"

"Oh, quite right! I had a quarrel with Mamma some time ago about it.
 I will never let anyone say anything bad of
Sonya, for there is nothing but good in her.
"

"Then it's all right?" said Nicholas, again scrutinizing the expression
of his sister's face to see if she was in earnest.


When they reached home and had told their mother how they had spent the
evening at the Melyukovs', the girls went to their bedroom.
 When they
had undressed, but without washing off the cork mustaches, they sat a
long time talking of their happiness.
 They talked of how they would live
when they were married, how their husbands would be friends, and how
happy they would be.
 On Natasha's table stood two looking glasses which
Dunyasha had prepared beforehand.
.
 It would be too
good!" said Natasha, rising and going to the looking glasses.


Natasha lit the candles, one on each side of one of the looking glasses,
and sat down.


"You mustn't laugh, Miss," said Dunyasha.
 But ready as she was to take the
smallest speck for the image of a man or of a coffin, she saw nothing.


"Why is it others see things and I don't?" she said.
 "You sit down now,
Sonya.
 You absolutely must, tonight! Do it for me.
.
.
 Today I feel so
frightened!"

Sonya sat down before the glasses, got the right position, and began
looking.
 She saw something last year.
.
.


Sonya had not seen anything, she was just wanting to blink and to get
up when she heard Natasha say, "Of course she will!" She did not wish to
disappoint either Dunyasha or Natasha, but it was hard to sit still.

She did not herself know how or why the exclamation escaped her when she
covered her eyes.


"Yes.
 Wait a bit.
.
 saw him," Sonya could not help saying, not yet
knowing whom Natasha meant by him, Nicholas or Prince Andrew.


"But why shouldn't I say I saw something? Others do see! Besides who can
tell whether I saw anything or not?" flashed through Sonya's mind.


"How? Standing or lying?"

"No, I saw.
.


"Well, and then, Sonya?.
.
.
"

"Sonya! When will he come back? When shall I see him! O, God, how afraid
I am for him and for myself and about everything!.
.
" Natasha began, and
without replying to Sonya's words of comfort she got into bed, and long
after her candle was out lay open-eyed and motionless, gazing at the
moonlight through the frosty windowpanes.
 The old
count began irresolutely to admonish Nicholas and beg him to abandon his
purpose.
 Nicholas replied that he could not go back on his word, and his
father, sighing and evidently disconcerted, very soon became silent and
went in to the countess.
 Sonya listened silently with downcast eyes
to the countess' cruel words, without understanding what was required
of her.
 She was ready to sacrifice everything for her benefactors.

Self-sacrifice was her most cherished idea but in this case she could
not see what she ought to sacrifice, or for whom.
 She could not help
loving the countess and the whole Rostov family, but neither could she
help loving Nicholas and knowing that his happiness depended on that
love.
 She was silent and sad and did not reply.
 Nicholas felt the
situation to be intolerable and went to have an explanation with his
mother.
 He first implored her to forgive him and Sonya and consent to
their marriage, then he threatened that if she molested Sonya he would
at once marry her secretly.


The countess, with a coldness her son had never seen in her before,
replied that he was of age, that Prince Andrew was marrying without his
father's consent, and he could do the same, but that she would never
receive that intriguer as her daughter.


Exploding at the word intriguer, Nicholas, raising his voice, told
his mother he had never expected her to try to force him to sell his
feelings, but if that were so, he would say for the last time.
.
 But he
had no time to utter the decisive word which the expression of his face
caused his mother to await with terror, and which would perhaps have
forever remained a cruel memory to them both.
 He had not time to say it,
for Natasha, with a pale and set face, entered the room from the door at
which she had been listening.


"Nicholas, you are talking nonsense! Be quiet, be quiet, be quiet, I
tell you!.
.
" she almost screamed, so as to drown his voice.
.
 my poor, sweet darling," she
said to her mother, who conscious that they had been on the brink of
a rupture gazed at her son with terror, but in the obstinacy and
excitement of the conflict could not and would not give way.
 Go away! Listen, Mamma darling," said
Natasha.


Her words were incoherent, but they attained the purpose at which she
was aiming.


Natasha set to work to effect a reconciliation, and so far succeeded
that Nicholas received a promise from his mother that Sonya should not
be troubled, while he on his side promised not to undertake anything
without his parents' knowledge.


Firmly resolved, after putting his affairs in order in the regiment,
to retire from the army and return and marry Sonya, Nicholas, serious,
sorrowful, and at variance with his parents, but, as it seemed to him,
passionately in love, left at the beginning of January to rejoin his
regiment.


Sonya was unhappy at the separation from Nicholas and still more so on
account of the hostile tone the countess could not help adopting toward
her.


Natasha, who had borne the first period of separation from her betrothed
lightly and even cheerfully, now grew more agitated and impatient every
day.
 His letters for the most part irritated her.

It hurt her to think that while she lived only in the thought of him, he
was living a real life, seeing new places and new people that interested
him.

Her letters to him, far from giving her any comfort, seemed to her a
wearisome and artificial obligation.
 She could not write, because she
could not conceive the possibility of expressing sincerely in a letter
even a thousandth part of what she expressed by voice, smile, and
glance.


There was still no improvement in the countess' health, but it was
impossible to defer the journey to Moscow any longer.
 Moreover, Prince Andrew
was expected in Moscow, where old Prince Bolkonski was spending the
winter, and Natasha felt sure he had already arrived.






BOOK EIGHT: 1811 - 12





CHAPTER I


After Prince Andrews engagement to Natasha, Pierre without any apparent
cause suddenly felt it impossible to go on living as before.
 Pierre felt that she was right, and
to avoid compromising her went away to Moscow.
 In Moscow he felt at peace, at home, warm and
dirty as in an old dressing gown.


Moscow society, from the old women down to the children, received Pierre
like a long-expected guest whose place was always ready awaiting him.
 His purse was always empty because it was open to
everyone.


Benefit performances, poor pictures, statues, benevolent societies,
gypsy choirs, schools, subscription dinners, sprees, Freemasons,
churches, and books--no one and nothing met with a refusal from him, and
had it not been for two friends who had borrowed large sums from him and
taken him under their protection, he would have given everything away.

There was never a dinner or soiree at the Club without him.
 When there
were quarrels, his kindly smile and well-timed jests reconciled the
antagonists.
 Young ladies, married and
unmarried, liked him because without making love to any of them, he was
equally amiable to all, especially after supper.
"


Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen-in-waiting of whom there were
hundreds good-humoredly ending their days in Moscow.


How horrified he would have been seven years before, when he first
arrived from abroad, had he been told that there was no need for him
to seek or plan anything, that his rut had long been shaped, eternally
predetermined, and that wriggle as he might, he would be what all in
his position were.
 For a long time he could not reconcile himself to the
idea that he was one of those same retired Moscow gentlemen-in-waiting
he had so despised seven years before.


Sometimes he consoled himself with the thought that he was only living
this life temporarily; but then he was shocked by the thought of how
many, like himself, had entered that life and that Club temporarily,
with all their teeth and hair, and had only left it when not a single
tooth or hair remained.


In moments of pride, when he thought of his position it seemed to
him that he was quite different and distinct from those other retired
gentlemen-in-waiting he had formerly despised: they were empty, stupid,
contented fellows, satisfied with their position, "while I am still
discontented and want to do something for mankind.


Pierre no longer suffered moments of despair, hypochondria, and disgust
with life, but the malady that had formerly found expression in such
acute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for a moment.

"What for? Why? What is going on in the world?" he would ask himself in
perplexity several times a day, involuntarily beginning to reflect anew
on the meaning of the phenomena of life; but knowing by experience that
there were no answers to these questions he made haste to turn away
from them, and took up a book, or hurried of to the Club or to Apollon
Nikolaevich's, to exchange the gossip of the town.


"Helene, who has never cared for anything but her own body and is one
of the stupidest women in the world," thought Pierre, "is regarded by
people as the acme of intelligence and refinement, and they pay homage
to her.
 Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as long as he was great,
but now that he has become a wretched comedian the Emperor Francis wants
to offer him his daughter in an illegal marriage.
" So thought Pierre, and the whole of
this general deception which everyone accepts, accustomed as he was to
it, astonished him each time as if it were something new.
 So it appears that it must be so! But I--what is to become of
me?" thought he.
 He had the unfortunate capacity many men, especially
Russians, have of seeing and believing in the possibility of goodness
and truth, but of seeing the evil and falsehood of life too clearly
to be able to take a serious part in it.
 Every sphere of work was
connected, in his eyes, with evil and deception.
 Whatever he tried to
be, whatever he engaged in, the evil and falsehood of it repulsed him
and blocked every path of activity.
 Yet he had to live and to find
occupation.
 It was too dreadful to be under the burden of these
insoluble problems, so he abandoned himself to any distraction in order
to forget them.
 On coming home, while
his valets were still taking off his things, he picked up a book and
began to read.
 From reading he passed to sleeping, from sleeping to
gossip in drawing rooms of the Club, from gossip to carousals and women;
from carousals back to gossip, reading, and wine.
 Drinking became more
and more a physical and also a moral necessity.
 He was only quite at ease when having poured several
glasses of wine mechanically into his large mouth he felt a pleasant
warmth in his body, an amiability toward all his fellows, and a
readiness to respond superficially to every idea without probing it
deeply.
 But under the
influence of wine he said to himself: "It doesn't matter.
 I'll get it
unraveled.
 I have a solution ready, but have no time now--I'll think it
all out later on!" But the later on never came.


In the morning, on an empty stomach, all the old questions appeared as
insoluble and terrible as ever, and Pierre hastily picked up a book, and
if anyone came to see him he was glad.


Sometimes he remembered how he had heard that soldiers in war when
entrenched under the enemy's fire, if they have nothing to do, try hard
to find some occupation the more easily to bear the danger.
 To Pierre
all men seemed like those soldiers, seeking refuge from life: some in
ambition, some in cards, some in framing laws, some in women, some in
toys, some in horses, some in politics, some in sport, some in wine,
and some in governmental affairs.
 "Nothing is trivial, and nothing is
important, it's all the same--only to save oneself from it as best one
can," thought Pierre.
 "Only not to see it, that dreadful it!"





CHAPTER II


At the beginning of winter Prince Nicholas Bolkonski and his daughter
moved to Moscow.
 At that time enthusiasm for the Emperor Alexander's
regime had weakened and a patriotic and anti-French tendency prevailed
there, and this, together with his past and his intellect and his
originality, at once made Prince Nicholas Bolkonski an object of
particular respect to the Moscovites and the center of the Moscow
opposition to the government.


The prince had aged very much that year.
 In spite of this
the old man inspired in all his visitors alike a feeling of respectful
veneration--especially of an evening when he came in to tea in his
old-fashioned coat and powdered wig and, aroused by anyone, told his
abrupt stories of the past, or uttered yet more abrupt and scathing
criticisms of the present.
 For them all, that old-fashioned house with
its gigantic mirrors, pre-Revolution furniture, powdered footmen, and
the stern shrewd old man (himself a relic of the past century) with his
gentle daughter and the pretty Frenchwoman who were reverently devoted
to him presented a majestic and agreeable spectacle.
 But the visitors
did not reflect that besides the couple of hours during which they saw
their host, there were also twenty-two hours in the day during which the
private and intimate life of the house continued.
 Mademoiselle Bourienne, with whom
she had never been able to be quite frank, had now become unpleasant to
her, and for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her.
 Just then Julie, who by the
death of her brothers had become one of the richest heiresses in Moscow,
was in the full whirl of society pleasures.
 On Thursdays Princess Mary remembered with a
mournful smile that she now had no one to write to, since Julie--whose
presence gave her no pleasure was here and they met every week.
 Like
the old emigre who declined to marry the lady with whom he had spent his
evenings for years, she regretted Julie's presence and having no one to
write to.
 In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to talk to, no one to whom
to confide her sorrow, and much sorrow fell to her lot just then.
 The
time for Prince Andrew's return and marriage was approaching, but his
request to her to prepare his father for it had not been carried out; in
fact, it seemed as if matters were quite hopeless, for at every mention
of the young Countess Rostova the old prince (who apart from that was
usually in a bad temper) lost control of himself.
 Another lately added
sorrow arose from the lessons she gave her six year-old nephew.
 To her
consternation she detected in herself in relation to little Nicholas
some symptoms of her father's irritability.
 However often she told
herself that she must not get irritable when teaching her nephew, almost
every time that, pointer in hand, she sat down to show him the French
alphabet, she so longed to pour her own knowledge quickly and easily
into the child--who was already afraid that Auntie might at any moment
get angry--that at his slightest inattention she trembled, became
flustered and heated, raised her voice, and sometimes pulled him by the
arm and put him in the corner.
 Having put him in the corner she would
herself begin to cry over her cruel, evil nature, and little Nicholas,
following her example, would sob, and without permission would leave his
corner, come to her, pull her wet hands from her face, and comfort
her.
 Of late he had exhibited a new trait that tormented Princess
Mary more than anything else; this was his ever-increasing intimacy with
Mademoiselle Bourienne.
 The idea that at the first moment of receiving
the news of his son's intentions had occurred to him in jest--that
if Andrew got married he himself would marry Bourienne--had evidently
pleased him, and latterly he had persistently, and as it seemed to
Princess Mary merely to offend her, shown special endearments to
the companion and expressed his dissatisfaction with his daughter by
demonstrations of love of Bourienne.
 A few minutes later
Mademoiselle Bourienne came into Princess Mary's room smiling and making
cheerful remarks in her agreeable voice.
 Princess Mary hastily wiped
away her tears, went resolutely up to Mademoiselle Bourienne, and
evidently unconscious of what she was doing began shouting in angry
haste at the Frenchwoman, her voice breaking: "It's horrible, vile,
inhuman, to take advantage of the weakness.
" She did not finish.

"Leave my room," she exclaimed, and burst into sobs.
 After dinner, when the footman handed coffee and from
habit began with the princess, the prince suddenly grew furious,
threw his stick at Philip, and instantly gave instructions to have him
conscripted for the army.


"He doesn't obey.
 I said it twice.

"And if you allow yourself," he screamed in a fury, addressing Princess
Mary for the first time, "to forget yourself again before her as you
dared to do yesterday, I will show you who is master in this house.






CHAPTER III


In 1811 there was living in Moscow a French doctor--Metivier--who had
rapidly become the fashion.
 He was enormously tall, handsome, amiable
as Frenchmen are, and was, as all Moscow said, an extraordinarily clever
doctor.


On December 6--St.
 Nicholas' Day and the prince's name day--all Moscow
came to the prince's front door but he gave orders to admit no one
and to invite to dinner only a small number, a list of whom he gave to
Princess Mary.


Metivier, who came in the morning with his felicitations, considered
it proper in his quality of doctor de forcer la consigne, * as he told
Princess Mary, and went in to see the prince.
 Princess Mary well knew this mood of quiet absorbed
querulousness, which generally culminated in a burst of rage, and she
went about all that morning as though facing a cocked and loaded gun and
awaited the inevitable explosion.
 Until the doctor's arrival the morning
had passed off safely.
 After admitting the doctor, Princess Mary sat
down with a book in the drawing room near the door through which she
could hear all that passed in the study.



    * To force the guard.


"You don't understand?" shouted the prince, "but I do! French spy, slave
of Buonaparte, spy, get out of my house! Be off, I tell you.
.
.
"

Metivier, shrugging his shoulders, went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne who
at the sound of shouting had run in from an adjoining room.

Keep calm, I will call again tomorrow," said Metivier; and putting his
fingers to his lips he hastened away.


Through the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry:
"Spies, traitors, traitors everywhere! Not a moment's peace in my own
house!"

After Metivier's departure the old prince called his daughter in, and
the whole weight of his wrath fell on her.
 She was to blame that a spy
had been admitted.
 Had he not told her, yes, told her to make a list,
and not to admit anyone who was not on that list? Then why was that
scoundrel admitted? She was the cause of it all.
 With her, he said, he
could not have a moment's peace and could not die quietly.
 Then, as if
afraid she might find some means of consolation, he returned and trying
to appear calm added: "And don't imagine I have said this in a moment of
anger.
.
.


These guests--the famous Count Rostopchin, Prince Lopukhin with his
nephew, General Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince's, and of the
younger generation Pierre and Boris Drubetskoy--awaited the prince in
the drawing room.


Boris, who had come to Moscow on leave a few days before, had been
anxious to be presented to Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, and had contrived
to ingratiate himself so well that the old prince in his case made an
exception to the rule of not receiving bachelors in his house.


The prince's house did not belong to what is known as fashionable
society, but his little circle--though not much talked about in
town--was one it was more flattering to be received in than any other.

Boris had realized this the week before when the commander in chief
in his presence invited Rostopchin to dinner on St.
"

"Oh, yes, yes!" replied the commander in chief.
 "How is he?.
.
"

The small group that assembled before dinner in the lofty old-fashioned
drawing room with its old furniture resembled the solemn gathering of
a court of justice.
 All were silent or talked in low tones.
 Prince
Nicholas came in serious and taciturn.
 Princess Mary seemed even quieter
and more diffident than usual.
 Count Rostopchin
alone kept the conversation going, now relating the latest town news,
and now the latest political gossip.


Lopukhin and the old general occasionally took part in the conversation.

Prince Bolkonski listened as a presiding judge receives a report, only
now and then, silently or by a brief word, showing that he took heed of
what was being reported to him.


At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news: Napoleon's
seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory, and the Russian Note,
hostile to Napoleon, which had been sent to all the European courts.


"Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel," said Count
Rostopchin, repeating a phrase he had uttered several times before.
 "One
only wonders at the long-suffering or blindness of the crowned heads.

Now the Pope's turn has come and Bonaparte doesn't scruple to depose the
head of the Catholic Church--yet all keep silent! Our sovereign alone
has protested against the seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory,
and even.
.


"Other territories have been offered in exchange for the Duchy of
Oldenburg," said Prince Bolkonski.
 "He shifts the Dukes about as I might
move my serfs from Bald Hills to Bogucharovo or my Ryazan estates.
"

"The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable strength of
character and resignation," remarked Boris, joining in respectfully.
 Prince Bolkonski glanced at the young
man as if about to say something in reply, but changed his mind,
evidently considering him too young.


"I have read our protests about the Oldenburg affair and was surprised
how badly the Note was worded," remarked Count Rostopchin in the casual
tone of a man dealing with a subject quite familiar to him.


Pierre looked at Rostopchin with naive astonishment, not understanding
why he should be disturbed by the bad composition of the Note.


"Does it matter, Count, how the Note is worded," he asked, "so long as
its substance is forcible?"

"My dear fellow, with our five hundred thousand troops it should be easy
to have a good style," returned Count Rostopchin.


"One would have thought quill drivers enough had sprung up," remarked
the old prince.
 "There in Petersburg they are always writing--not notes
only but even new laws.
 My Andrew there has written a whole volume
of laws for Russia.
 Nowadays they are always writing!" and he laughed
unnaturally.
"

"Eh? Yes, I heard something: he said something awkward in His Majesty's
presence.
 At the next
review, they say, the Emperor did not once deign to address him.
"

All were silent.


"Impudent fellows!" said the prince.
 Though these reasons
were very insufficient and obscure, no one made any rejoinder.


After the roast, champagne was served.


He gave her a cold, angry look and offered her his wrinkled,
clean-shaven cheek to kiss.
 The whole expression of his face told her
that he had not forgotten the morning's talk, that his decision remained
in force, and only the presence of visitors hindered his speaking of it
to her now.


When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served, the old
men sat together.


Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on the
impending war.


He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous so long as we
sought alliances with the Germans and thrust ourselves into European
affairs, into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit.
"

He began speaking louder, evidently to be heard by everyone.
 I went to
a party last night, and there out of five ladies three were Roman
Catholics and had the Pope's indulgence for doing woolwork on Sundays.

And they themselves sit there nearly naked, like the signboards at our
Public Baths if I may say so.
"

All were silent.
 The old prince looked at Rostopchin with a smile and
wagged his head approvingly.


"Well, good-by, your excellency, keep well!" said Rostopchin, getting up
with characteristic briskness and holding out his hand to the prince.
.
 His words are music, I never tire of
hearing him!" said the old prince, keeping hold of the hand and offering
his cheek to be kissed.


Following Rostopchin's example the others also rose.
 She did not even notice the special attentions and amiabilities
shown her during dinner by Boris Drubetskoy, who was visiting them for
the third time already.


Princess Mary turned with absent-minded questioning look to Pierre, who
hat in hand and with a smile on his face was the last of the guests to
approach her after the old prince had gone out and they were left alone
in the drawing room.


Pierre was in an agreeable after-dinner mood.


"Have you known that young man long, Princess?" he asked.


"Who?"

"Drubetskoy.
.
.
"

"Do you like him?"

"Yes, he is an agreeable young man.
.
.
.


"Because I have noticed that when a young man comes on leave from
Petersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying an
heiress.
"

"You have observed that?" said Princess Mary.


"Yes," returned Pierre with a smile, "and this young man now manages
matters so that where there is a wealthy heiress there he is too.
 He is very attentive to her.
"

"He visits them?"

"Yes, very often.
 And do you know the new way of courting?" said Pierre
with an amused smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of good humored
raillery for which he so often reproached himself in his diary.


"No," replied Princess Mary.


"To please Moscow girls nowadays one has to be melancholy.
 He is very
melancholy with Mademoiselle Karagina," said Pierre.


"Really?" asked Princess Mary, looking into Pierre's kindly face and
still thinking of her own sorrow.
 "It would be a relief," thought she,
"if I ventured to confide what I am feeling to someone.
 He is kind and generous.
 He would give me advice.
"

"Would you marry him?"

"Oh, my God, Count, there are moments when I would marry anybody!" she
cried suddenly to her own surprise and with tears in her voice.
.


"I don't know what is the matter with me today.
 Don't take any
notice--forget what I have said!"

Pierre's gaiety vanished completely.
 He anxiously questioned the
princess, asked her to speak out fully and confide her grief to him; but
she only repeated that she begged him to forget what she had said, that
she did not remember what she had said, and that she had no trouble
except the one he knew of--that Prince Andrew's marriage threatened to
cause a rupture between father and son.


"Have you any news of the Rostovs?" she asked, to change the subject.
 I
should like them to meet here.
 I only wish I could spare my brother the first moments.
 I hope to be friends with her.
 You have
known them a long time," said Princess Mary.
 "Tell me honestly the whole
truth: what sort of girl is she, and what do you think of her?--The real
truth, because you know Andrew is risking so much doing this against his
father's will that I should like to know.
.
 "I really don't know what sort of girl she is; I can't
analyze her at all.
 She is enchanting, but what makes her so I don't
know.
"

Princess Mary sighed, and the expression on her face said: "Yes, that's
what I expected and feared.
"

"Is she clever?" she asked.


Pierre considered.
 She does not deign to be
clever.
.
 Oh no, she is simply enchanting, and that is all.
"

"I hear they are expected very soon," said Pierre.






CHAPTER V


Boris had not succeeded in making a wealthy match in Petersburg, so with
the same object in view he came to Moscow.
 There he wavered between the
two richest heiresses, Julie and Princess Mary.


Julie on the contrary accepted his attentions readily, though in a
manner peculiar to herself.
 She was by now decidedly plain, but thought herself not
merely as good-looking as before but even far more attractive.
 She
was confirmed in this delusion by the fact that she had become a very
wealthy heiress and also by the fact that the older she grew the less
dangerous she became to men, and the more freely they could associate
with her and avail themselves of her suppers, soirees, and the animated
company that assembled at her house, without incurring any obligation.


That winter the Karagins' house was the most agreeable and hospitable
in Moscow.
 In addition to the formal evening and dinner parties, a large
company, chiefly of men, gathered there every day, supping at midnight
and staying till three in the morning.

But in spite of that she seemed to be disillusioned about everything and
told everyone that she did not believe either in friendship or in
love, or any of the joys of life, and expected peace only "yonder.
" She
adopted the tone of one who has suffered a great disappointment, like a
girl who has either lost the man she loved or been cruelly deceived by
him.
 Only a few of these young
men, among them Boris, entered more deeply into Julie's melancholy, and
with these she had prolonged conversations in private on the vanity
of all worldly things, and to them she showed her albums filled with
mournful sketches, maxims, and verses.


To Boris, Julie was particularly gracious: she regretted his early
disillusionment with life, offered him such consolation of friendship
as she who had herself suffered so much could render, and showed him her
album.
 Boris sketched two trees in the album and wrote: "Rustic trees,
your dark branches shed gloom and melancholy upon me.
"

On another page he drew a tomb, and wrote:

    La mort est secourable et la mort est tranquille.

    Ah! contre les douleurs il n'y a pas d'autre asile.
 *


    * Death gives relief and death is peaceful.



Ah! from suffering there is no other refuge.
 *


      *Poisonous nourishment of a too sensitive soul,
     Thou, without whom happiness would for me be impossible,
     Tender melancholy, ah, come to console me,
     Come to calm the torments of my gloomy retreat,
     And mingle a secret sweetness
     With these tears that I feel to be flowing.



For Boris, Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp.
 Boris read
Poor Liza aloud to her, and more than once interrupted the reading
because of the emotions that choked him.


Anna Mikhaylovna, who often visited the Karagins, while playing cards
with the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie's dowry (she was to
have two estates in Penza and the Nizhegorod forests).
 Anna Mikhaylovna
regarded the refined sadness that united her son to the wealthy Julie
with emotion, and resignation to the Divine will.


"You are always charming and melancholy, my dear Julie," she said to
the daughter.
 "Boris says his soul finds repose at your house.
 "Ah, my dear, I can't tell you how fond I have grown of Julie
latterly," she said to her son.
 "But who could help loving her? She is
an angelic being! Ah, Boris, Boris!"--she paused.
 "And how I pity her
mother," she went on; "today she showed me her accounts and letters from
Penza (they have enormous estates there), and she, poor thing, has no
one to help her, and they do cheat her so!"

Boris smiled almost imperceptibly while listening to his mother.


Julie had long been expecting a proposal from her melancholy adorer and
was ready to accept it; but some secret feeling of repulsion for her,
for her passionate desire to get married, for her artificiality, and
a feeling of horror at renouncing the possibility of real love still
restrained Boris.
 He spent every day and whole
days at the Karagins', and every day on thinking the matter over told
himself that he would propose tomorrow.
 Julie saw Boris' indecision, and
sometimes the thought occurred to her that she was repulsive to him, but
her feminine self-deception immediately supplied her with consolation,
and she told herself that he was only shy from love.
 Her melancholy,
however, began to turn to irritability, and not long before Boris'
departure she formed a definite plan of action.
 Just as Boris' leave of
absence was expiring, Anatole Kuragin made his appearance in Moscow, and
of course in the Karagins' drawing room, and Julie, suddenly abandoning
her melancholy, became cheerful and very attentive to Kuragin.
 I am so fond of Julie that I should be sorry for her.
 He drove to the
Karagins' with the firm intention of proposing.


"Then I should advise you.
.


He checked himself in the middle of the sentence, lowered his eyes to
avoid seeing her unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face, and said:

"I did not come here at all to quarrel with you.
.
"

He glanced at her to make sure that he might go on.
 Her irritability had
suddenly quite vanished, and her anxious, imploring eyes were fixed on
him with greedy expectation.
 "I can always arrange so as not to see her
often," thought Boris.
 "The affair has been begun and must be finished!"
He blushed hotly, raised his eyes to hers, and said:

"You know my feelings for you!"

There was no need to say more: Julie's face shone with triumph and
self-satisfaction; but she forced Boris to say all that is said on such
occasions--that he loved her and had never loved any other woman more
than her.
 She knew that for the Penza estates and Nizhegorod forests she
could demand this, and she received what she demanded.


The affianced couple, no longer alluding to trees that shed gloom and
melancholy upon them, planned the arrangements of a splendid house in
Petersburg, paid calls, and prepared everything for a brilliant wedding.
 The countess was still unwell and unable to travel but it was
impossible to wait for her recovery.
 The Rostovs' Moscow house had not been heated that
winter and, as they had come only for a short time and the countess
was not with them, the count decided to stay with Marya Dmitrievna
Akhrosimova, who had long been pressing her hospitality on them.
 Marya Dmitrievna lived alone.

She had already married off her daughter, and her sons were all in the
service.
 Then she had dinner, a substantial and appetizing meal
at which there were always three or four guests; after dinner she played
a game of boston, and at night she had the newspapers or a new book read
to her while she knitted.
 One might have thought she was angry with
the travelers and would immediately turn them out, had she not at the
same time been giving careful instructions to the servants for the
accommodation of the visitors and their belongings.


"The count's things? Bring them here," she said, pointing to the
portmanteaus and not greeting anyone.
 "The young ladies'? There to the
left.
 Now what are you dawdling for?" she cried to the maids.
 "Get the
samovar ready!.
.
 You've grown plumper and prettier," she remarked,
drawing Natasha (whose cheeks were glowing from the cold) to her by the
hood.
 "You're half frozen,
I'm sure! Bring some rum for tea!.
.
 It was high
time," she said, giving Natasha a significant look.

But we'll speak of that later on," she added, glancing at Sonya with a
look that showed she did not want to speak of it in her presence.
 "Now
listen," she said to the count.
 "The sniveling
Anna Mikhaylovna? That's two.
 He dined with me on
Wednesday.
 I suppose you'll have everything new.
 You know not a day passes
now without some new fashion.
.
.
.
 They'll be safe with me, as safe as in Chancery!
I'll take them where they must go, scold them a bit, and pet them a
bit," said Marya Dmitrievna, touching her goddaughter and favorite,
Natasha, on the cheek with her large hand.


Next morning Marya Dmitrievna took the young ladies to the Iberian
shrine of the Mother of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguet, who was so
afraid of Marya Dmitrievna that she always let her have costumes at a
loss merely to get rid of her.
 Marya Dmitrievna ordered almost the
whole trousseau.
 When they got home she turned everybody out of the room
except Natasha, and then called her pet to her armchair.
 I congratulate you on your betrothed.
 You've
hooked a fine fellow! I am glad for your sake and I've known him since
he was so high.
" She held her hand a couple of feet from the ground.

Natasha blushed happily.
 "I like him and all his family.
 One wants to do it peacefully and lovingly.
 You're a clever girl
and you'll know how to manage.
"

Natasha remained silent, from shyness Marya Dmitrievna supposed, but
really because she disliked anyone interfering in what touched her love
of Prince Andrew, which seemed to her so apart from all human affairs
that no one could understand it.
 She loved and knew Prince Andrew, he
loved her only, and was to come one of these days and take her.
 She
wanted nothing more.


"You see I have known him a long time and am also fond of Mary, your
future sister-in-law.
 'Husbands' sisters bring up blisters,' but this
one wouldn't hurt a fly.
 She has asked me to bring you two together.

Tomorrow you'll go with your father to see her.
 Be very nice and
affectionate to her: you're younger than she.
 The count did not set out cheerfully
on this visit, at heart he felt afraid.
 He well remembered the last
interview he had had with the old prince at the time of the enrollment,
when in reply to an invitation to dinner he had had to listen to an
angry reprimand for not having provided his full quota of men.
 Natasha,
on the other hand, having put on her best gown, was in the highest
spirits.
 "They can't help liking me," she thought.
.
.
"

They drove up to the gloomy old house on the Vozdvizhenka and entered
the vestibule.


"Well, the Lord have mercy on us!" said the count, half in jest, half
in earnest; but Natasha noticed that her father was flurried on entering
the anteroom and inquired timidly and softly whether the prince and
princess were at home.
 Then a
maidservant ran into the hall and hurriedly said something, mentioning
the princess.
 At last an old, cross looking footman came and announced
to the Rostovs that the prince was not receiving, but that the princess
begged them to walk up.
 The first person who came to meet the visitors
was Mademoiselle Bourienne.
 She greeted the father and daughter with
special politeness and showed them to the princess' room.
 The princess,
looking excited and nervous, her face flushed in patches, ran in to meet
the visitors, treading heavily, and vainly trying to appear cordial and
at ease.
 From the first glance Princess Mary did not like Natasha.
 She did
not at all realize that before having seen her future sister-in-law she
was prejudiced against her by involuntary envy of her beauty, youth, and
happiness, as well as by jealousy of her brother's love for her.
 Apart
from this insuperable antipathy to her, Princess Mary was agitated just
then because on the Rostovs' being announced, the old prince had shouted
that he did not wish to see them, that Princess Mary might do so if
she chose, but they were not to be admitted to him.
 She had decided to
receive them, but feared lest the prince might at any moment indulge in
some freak, as he seemed much upset by the Rostovs' visit.


"There, my dear princess, I've brought you my songstress," said the
count, bowing and looking round uneasily as if afraid the old prince
might appear.
 "I am so glad you should get to know one another.
.
"

The count had devised this diplomatic ruse (as he afterwards told his
daughter) to give the future sisters-in-law an opportunity to talk
to one another freely, but another motive was to avoid the danger of
encountering the old prince, of whom he was afraid.
 She blushed for him, grew still
angrier at having blushed, and looked at the princess with a bold and
defiant expression which said that she was not afraid of anybody.
 The
princess told the count that she would be delighted, and only begged him
to stay longer at Anna Semenovna's, and he departed.


Despite the uneasy glances thrown at her by Princess Mary--who wished to
have a tete-a-tete with Natasha--Mademoiselle Bourienne remained in
the room and persistently talked about Moscow amusements and theaters.

Natasha felt offended by the hesitation she had noticed in the anteroom,
by her father's nervousness, and by the unnatural manner of the princess
who--she thought--was making a favor of receiving her, and so everything
displeased her.
 She did not like Princess Mary, whom she thought very
plain, affected, and dry.
 Natasha suddenly shrank into herself and
involuntarily assumed an offhand air which alienated Princess Mary still
more.
 After five minutes of irksome, constrained conversation, they
heard the sound of slippered feet rapidly approaching.


The door opened and the old prince, in a dressing gown and a white
nightcap, came in.
.
.
.
.
 I beg you to excuse me, to excuse me.
.
 I beg
you to excuse me.
.
.


Nor did the latter, having risen and curtsied, know what to do.
 Natasha
and Princess Mary looked at one another in silence, and the longer they
did so without saying what they wanted to say, the greater grew their
antipathy to one another.


When the count returned, Natasha was impolitely pleased and hastened
to get away: at that moment she hated the stiff, elderly princess, who
could place her in such an embarrassing position and had spent half an
hour with her without once mentioning Prince Andrew.

The same thought was meanwhile tormenting Princess Mary.
 When
the count was already leaving the room, Princess Mary went up hurriedly
to Natasha, took her by the hand, and said with a deep sigh:

"Wait, I must.
.
.
.
"

She paused, feeling that she was not telling the truth.


"What have I said and what have I done?" thought she, as soon as she was
out of the room.
 Sonya
stood beside her, kissing her hair.


"Natasha, what is it about?" she asked.
 "What do they matter to you? It
will all pass, Natasha.
"

"But if you only knew how offensive it was.
.
.
.
.
 It wasn't your fault so why should you
mind? Kiss me," said Sonya.
 Oh, why doesn't he come?.
.
"

She came in to dinner with red eyes.
 Marya Dmitrievna, who knew how
the prince had received the Rostovs, pretended not to notice how upset
Natasha was and jested resolutely and loudly at table with the count and
the other guests.






CHAPTER VIII


That evening the Rostovs went to the Opera, for which Marya Dmitrievna
had taken a box.


Natasha did not want to go, but could not refuse Marya Dmitrievna's kind
offer which was intended expressly for her.
 When she came ready dressed
into the ballroom to await her father, and looking in the large mirror
there saw that she was pretty, very pretty, she felt even more sad, but
it was a sweet, tender sadness.


"O God, if he were here now I would not behave as I did then, but
differently.
 I would not be silly and afraid of things, I would simply
embrace him, cling to him, and make him look at me with those searching
inquiring eyes with which he has so often looked at me, and then I would
make him laugh as he used to laugh.
 And his eyes--how I see those eyes!"
thought Natasha.
 "And what do his father and sister matter to me? I
love him alone, him, him, with that face and those eyes, with his smile,
manly and yet childlike.
.
.
.
 I can't bear
this waiting and I shall cry in a minute!" and she turned away from the
glass, making an effort not to cry.
 I can't!"

Natasha at that moment felt so softened and tender that it was not
enough for her to love and know she was beloved, she wanted now, at
once, to embrace the man she loved, to speak and hear from him words of
love such as filled her heart.
 While she sat in the carriage beside her
father, pensively watching the lights of the street lamps flickering on
the frozen window, she felt still sadder and more in love, and forgot
where she was going and with whom.
 Natasha and Sonya, holding up their dresses,
jumped out quickly.
 The count got out helped by the footmen, and,
passing among men and women who were entering and the program sellers,
they all three went along the corridor to the first row of boxes.

Through the closed doors the music was already audible.
.
.
 The music sounded louder and through the
door rows of brightly lit boxes in which ladies sat with bare arms and
shoulders, and noisy stalls brilliant with uniforms, glittered before
their eyes.
 A lady entering the next box shot a glance of feminine envy
at Natasha.
 The curtain had not yet risen and the overture was being
played.


The two remarkably pretty girls, Natasha and Sonya, with Count Rostov
who had not been seen in Moscow for a long time, attracted general
attention.
 Moreover, everybody knew vaguely of Natasha's engagement to
Prince Andrew, and knew that the Rostovs had lived in the country ever
since, and all looked with curiosity at a fiancee who was making one of
the best matches in Russia.
 She
struck those who saw her by her fullness of life and beauty, combined
with her indifference to everything about her.
.
"

"Drubetskoy has proposed?"

"Oh yes, I heard it today," said Shinshin, coming into the Rostovs' box.
 Behind them, wearing a smile and leaning over with
an ear to Julie's mouth, was Boris' handsome smoothly brushed head.
 He
looked at the Rostovs from under his brows and said something, smiling,
to his betrothed.


"They are talking about us, about me and him!" thought Natasha.
 They needn't trouble themselves!
If only they knew how little I am concerned about any of them.
"

Behind them sat Anna Mikhaylovna wearing a green headdress and with a
happy look of resignation to the will of God on her face.
 Their box was
pervaded by that atmosphere of an affianced couple which Natasha knew so
well and liked so much.
 In
the front, in the very center, leaning back against the orchestra rail,
stood Dolokhov in a Persian dress, his curly hair brushed up into a huge
shock.
 He stood in full view of the audience, well aware that he was
attracting everyone's attention, yet as much at ease as though he were
in his own room.
 Around him thronged Moscow's most brilliant young men,
whom he evidently dominated.


The count, laughing, nudged the blushing Sonya and pointed to her former
adorer.


"Do you recognize him?" said he.
 "He was in the Caucasus and ran away from
there.
 Now all the Moscow ladies
are mad about him! It's 'Dolokhov the Persian' that does it! We never
hear a word but Dolokhov is mentioned.
 Dolokhov and Anatole
Kuragin have turned all our ladies' heads.
"

A tall, beautiful woman with a mass of plaited hair and much exposed
plump white shoulders and neck, round which she wore a double string of
large pearls, entered the adjoining box rustling her heavy silk dress
and took a long time settling into her place.


Natasha involuntarily gazed at that neck, those shoulders, and pearls
and coiffure, and admired the beauty of the shoulders and the pearls.

She was the Countess Bezukhova, Pierre's wife, and the count, who knew
everyone in society, leaned over and spoke to her.
 "I'll call, I'll call
to kiss your hand.
 I'm here on business and have brought my girls with
me.
 They say Semenova acts marvelously.
 Count Pierre never used to
forget us.
 Is he here?"

"Yes, he meant to look in," answered Helene, and glanced attentively at
Natasha.


Count Rostov resumed his seat.


"Handsome, isn't she?" he whispered to Natasha.
 "She's a woman one could easily fall in
love with.
"

Just then the last chords of the overture were heard and the conductor
tapped with his stick.
 Some latecomers took their seats in the stalls,
and the curtain rose.


As soon as it rose everyone in the boxes and stalls became silent, and
all the men, old and young, in uniform and evening dress, and all the
women with gems on their bare flesh, turned their whole attention with
eager curiosity to the stage.
 Natasha too began to look at it.
 One very fat girl in a white silk dress sat
apart on a low bench, to the back of which a piece of green cardboard
was glued.
 When they had finished their song
the girl in white went up to the prompter's box and a man with tight
silk trousers over his stout legs, and holding a plume and a dagger,
went up to her and began singing, waving his arms about.


After her life in the country, and in her present serious mood, all this
seemed grotesque and amazing to Natasha.
 She could not follow the opera
nor even listen to the music; she saw only the painted cardboard and the
queerly dressed men and women who moved, spoke, and sang so strangely in
that brilliant light.
 She looked at the faces of the
audience, seeking in them the same sense of ridicule and perplexity she
herself experienced, but they all seemed attentive to what was happening
on the stage, and expressed delight which to Natasha seemed feigned.
 As she looked and thought, the
strangest fancies unexpectedly and disconnectedly passed through her
mind: the idea occurred to her of jumping onto the edge of the box and
singing the air the actress was singing, then she wished to touch with
her fan an old gentleman sitting not far from her, then to lean over to
Helene and tickle her.


At a moment when all was quiet before the commencement of a song, a door
leading to the stalls on the side nearest the Rostovs' box creaked, and
the steps of a belated arrival were heard.
 "There's Kuragin!" whispered
Shinshin.
 This was Anatole Kuragin whom she had seen and
noticed long ago at the ball in Petersburg.
 He moved with a restrained
swagger which would have been ridiculous had he not been so good-looking
and had his handsome face not worn such an expression of good-humored
complacency and gaiety.
 Though the performance was proceeding, he walked
deliberately down the carpeted gangway, his sword and spurs slightly
jingling and his handsome perfumed head held high.
 Having looked at
Natasha he approached his sister, laid his well gloved hand on the edge
of her box, nodded to her, and leaning forward asked a question, with a
motion toward Natasha.
 Then he took his place in the first row of the stalls and sat down
beside Dolokhov, nudging with his elbow in a friendly and offhand way
that Dolokhov whom others treated so fawningly.
 He winked at him gaily,
smiled, and rested his foot against the orchestra screen.


"How like the brother is to the sister," remarked the count.
 "And how
handsome they both are!"

Shinshin, lowering his voice, began to tell the count of some intrigue
of Kuragin's in Moscow, and Natasha tried to overhear it just because he
had said she was "charmante.
"

The first act was over.


Boris came to the Rostovs' box, received their congratulations very
simply, and raising his eyebrows with an absent-minded smile conveyed
to Natasha and Sonya his fiancee's invitation to her wedding, and
went away.
 Natasha with a gay, coquettish smile talked to him, and
congratulated on his approaching wedding that same Boris with whom she
had formerly been in love.
 In the state of intoxication she was in,
everything seemed simple and natural.


Helene's box was filled and surrounded from the stalls by the most
distinguished and intellectual men, who seemed to vie with one another
in their wish to let everyone see that they knew her.


During the whole of that entr'acte Kuragin stood with Dolokhov in front
of the orchestra partition, looking at the Rostovs' box.
 Natasha knew he
was talking about her and this afforded her pleasure.
 His face
looked sad, and he had grown still stouter since Natasha last saw him.
 When he got there he leaned on his
elbows and, smiling, talked to her for a long time.
 She turned and their eyes met.

Almost smiling, he gazed straight into her eyes with such an enraptured
caressing look that it seemed strange to be so near him, to look at him
like that, to be so sure he admired her, and not to be acquainted with
him.


In the second act there was scenery representing tombstones, there was a
round hole in the canvas to represent the moon, shades were raised over
the footlights, and from horns and contrabass came deep notes while many
people appeared from right and left wearing black cloaks and holding
things like daggers in their hands.
 They did not drag her away at once,
but sang with her for a long time and then at last dragged her off, and
behind the scenes something metallic was struck three times and
everyone knelt down and sang a prayer.
 All these things were repeatedly
interrupted by the enthusiastic shouts of the audience.


During this act every time Natasha looked toward the stalls she saw
Anatole Kuragin with an arm thrown across the back of his chair, staring
at her.
 She was pleased to see that he was captivated by her and it did
not occur to her that there was anything wrong in it.


When the second act was over Countess Bezukhova rose, turned to the
Rostovs' box--her whole bosom completely exposed--beckoned the old count
with a gloved finger, and paying no attention to those who had entered
her box began talking to him with an amiable smile.


"Do make me acquainted with your charming daughters," said she.
 She was so pleased
by praise from this brilliant beauty that she blushed with pleasure.
 "How is it you're
not ashamed to bury such pearls in the country?"

Countess Bezukhova quite deserved her reputation of being a fascinating
woman.
 She could say what she did not think--especially what was
flattering--quite simply and naturally.


"Dear count, you must let me look after your daughters! Though I am not
staying here long this time--nor are you--I will try to amuse them.
 "I had
heard about you from my page, Drubetskoy.
 Have you heard he is getting
married? And also from my husband's friend Bolkonski, Prince Andrew
Bolkonski," she went on with special emphasis, implying that she knew of
his relation to Natasha.
 To get better acquainted she asked that one
of the young ladies should come into her box for the rest of the
performance, and Natasha moved over to it.
 The
king waved his right arm and, evidently nervous, sang something badly
and sat down on a crimson throne.
 The maiden who had been first in white
and then in light blue, now wore only a smock, and stood beside the
throne with her hair down.
 Then the
violins played very shrilly and merrily and one of the women with thick
bare legs and thin arms, separating from the others, went behind the
wings, adjusted her bodice, returned to the middle of the stage, and
began jumping and striking one foot rapidly against the other.
 The cymbals and horns in the orchestra
struck up more loudly, and this man with bare legs jumped very high and
waved his feet about very rapidly.
) Everybody in the stalls, boxes,
and galleries began clapping and shouting with all their might, and the
man stopped and began smiling and bowing to all sides.
 Then other men
and women danced with bare legs.
 Then the king again shouted to the
sound of music, and they all began singing.


"Oh, yes," replied Natasha.






CHAPTER X


During the entr'acte a whiff of cold air came into Helene's box, the
door opened, and Anatole entered, stooping and trying not to brush
against anyone.
 Anatole, who was as handsome
at close quarters as at a distance, sat down beside her and told her he
had long wished to have this happiness--ever since the Naryshkins' ball
in fact, at which he had had the well-remembered pleasure of seeing her.

Kuragin was much more sensible and simple with women than among men.

He talked boldly and naturally, and Natasha was strangely and agreeably
struck by the fact that there was nothing formidable in this man about
whom there was so much talk, but that on the contrary his smile was most
naive, cheerful, and good-natured.


"And do you know, Countess," he said, suddenly addressing her as an
old, familiar acquaintance, "we are getting up a costume tournament; you
ought to take part in it! It will be great fun.
 We shall all meet at the
Karagins'! Please come! No! Really, eh?" said he.


While saying this he never removed his smiling eyes from her face, her
neck, and her bare arms.
 Natasha knew for certain that he was enraptured
by her.
 When she was not looking at him she felt that he was looking
at her shoulders, and she involuntarily caught his eye so that he should
look into hers rather than this.
 She did not know how it was
that within five minutes she had come to feel herself terribly near to
this man.
 They spoke of most ordinary
things, yet she felt that they were closer to one another than she had
ever been to any man.
 Natasha kept turning to Helene and to her father,
as if asking what it all meant, but Helene was engaged in conversation
with a general and did not answer her look, and her father's eyes said
nothing but what they always said: "Having a good time? Well, I'm glad
of it!"

During one of these moments of awkward silence when Anatole's prominent
eyes were gazing calmly and fixedly at her, Natasha, to break the
silence, asked him how he liked Moscow.


"At first I did not like it much, because what makes a town pleasant
ce sont les jolies femmes, * isn't that so? But now I like it very much
indeed," he said, looking at her significantly.
 Do come, dear countess, and give me this flower as a pledge!"


    * Are the pretty women.
 But as soon as she had turned away she felt that
he was there, behind, so close behind her.
 She looked
straight into his eyes, and his nearness, self-assurance, and the
good-natured tenderness of his smile vanquished her.
 She smiled just
as he was doing, gazing straight into his eyes.
 And again she felt with
horror that no barrier lay between him and her.
 All that was going on before her now seemed
quite natural, but on the other hand all her previous thoughts of her
betrothed, of Princess Mary, or of life in the country did not once
recur to her mind and were as if belonging to a remote past.


In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving his arm
about, till the boards were withdrawn from under him and he disappeared
down below.

She felt agitated and tormented, and the cause of this was Kuragin whom
she could not help watching.
 As they were leaving the theater Anatole
came up to them, called their carriage, and helped them in.
 She knew that Sonya with her severe and simple views
would either not understand it at all or would be horrified at such a
confession.
 So Natasha tried to solve what was torturing her by herself.


"Am I spoiled for Andrew's love or not?" she asked herself, and with
soothing irony replied: "What a fool I am to ask that! What did happen
to me? Nothing! I have done nothing, I didn't lead him on at all.
 But why 'still?' O God, why isn't he here?"
Natasha quieted herself for a moment, but again some instinct told her
that though all this was true, and though nothing had happened, yet the
former purity of her love for Prince Andrew had perished.
 And again in
imagination she went over her whole conversation with Kuragin, and again
saw the face, gestures, and tender smile of that bold handsome man when
he pressed her arm.
 He indicated to him
Princess Mary and Julie Karagina.

Pierre received him unwillingly at first, but got used to him after a
while, sometimes even accompanied him on his carousals, and gave him
money under the guise of loans.
 He had never missed a carousal at Danilov's
or other Moscow revelers', drank whole nights through, outvying everyone
else, and was at all the balls and parties of the best society.
 There
was talk of his intrigues with some of the ladies, and he flirted with a
few of them at the balls.
 But he did not run after the unmarried girls,
especially the rich heiresses who were most of them plain.
 There was a
special reason for this, as he had got married two years before--a fact
known only to his most intimate friends.


Anatole was always content with his position, with himself, and with
others.
 He was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that it was
impossible for him to live otherwise than as he did and that he had
never in his life done anything base.
 He was incapable of considering
how his actions might affect others or what the consequences of this or
that action of his might be.
 He was convinced that, as a duck is so made
that it must live in water, so God had made him such that he must spend
thirty thousand rubles a year and always occupy a prominent position in
society.
 He believed this so firmly that others, looking at him, were
persuaded of it too and did not refuse him either a leading place
in society or money, which he borrowed from anyone and everyone and
evidently would not repay.


He was not a gambler, at any rate he did not care about winning.
 He was
not vain.
 Still less could
he be accused of ambition.
 He
was not mean, and did not refuse anyone who asked of him.
 All he cared
about was gaiety and women, and as according to his ideas there
was nothing dishonorable in these tastes, and he was incapable of
considering what the gratification of his tastes entailed for others,
he honestly considered himself irreproachable, sincerely despised rogues
and bad people, and with a tranquil conscience carried his head high.
 "All will be forgiven her, for she loved much; and all will
be forgiven him, for he enjoyed much.


Anatole was sincerely fond of Dolokhov for his cleverness and audacity.
 Anatole had no notion and was incapable
of considering what might come of such love-making, as he never had any
notion of the outcome of any of his actions.


"I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner," said Anatole.
 "Eh?"

"You'd better wait till she's married.
.
.
"

"You know, I adore little girls, they lose their heads at once," pursued
Anatole.


"You have been caught once already by a 'little girl,'" said Dolokhov
who knew of Kuragin's marriage.
 Marya Dmitrievna talked to the count about something which they
concealed from Natasha.
 Natasha guessed they were talking about the old
prince and planning something, and this disquieted and offended her.

She was expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twice that day sent a
manservant to the Vozdvizhenka to ascertain whether he had come.
 She suffered more now than during her first days in Moscow.

To her impatience and pining for him were now added the unpleasant
recollection of her interview with Princess Mary and the old prince,
and a fear and anxiety of which she did not understand the cause.
 She could no longer think of him by
herself calmly and continuously as she had done before.
 As soon as she
began to think of him, the recollection of the old prince, of Princess
Mary, of the theater, and of Kuragin mingled with her thoughts.


"I don't like those fashionable churches," she said, evidently priding
herself on her independence of thought.

We have an excellent priest, he conducts the service decently and with
dignity, and the deacon is the same.
 What holiness is there in giving
concerts in the choir? I don't like it, it's just self-indulgence!"

Marya Dmitrievna liked Sundays and knew how to keep them.
 Her whole
house was scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays; neither she nor the
servants worked, and they all wore holiday dress and went to church.
 At
her table there were extra dishes at dinner, and the servants had vodka
and roast goose or suckling pig.
 But in nothing in the house was the
holiday so noticeable as in Marya Dmitrievna's broad, stern face, which
on that day wore an invariable look of solemn festivity.
 She wore her holiday shawl, in which she paid calls, and
announced that she was going to see Prince Nicholas Bolkonski to have an
explanation with him about Natasha.
 Just as she had put on a bodice without sleeves and
only tacked together, and was turning her head to see in the glass how
the back fitted, she heard in the drawing room the animated sounds of
her father's voice and another's--a woman's--that made her flush.


"Oh, my enchantress!" she cried to the blushing Natasha.
 You must come.
"

She nodded to the dressmaker, whom she knew and who had curtsied
respectfully to her, and seated herself in an armchair beside the
looking glass, draping the folds of her velvet dress picturesquely.
 She looked at Natasha's dresses and praised them, as
well as a new dress of her own made of "metallic gauze," which she had
received from Paris, and advised Natasha to have one like it.


"But anything suits you, my charmer!" she remarked.


A smile of pleasure never left Natasha's face.
 She felt happy and as if
she were blossoming under the praise of this dear Countess Bezukhova who
had formerly seemed to her so unapproachable and important and was now
so kind to her.
 Natasha brightened up and felt almost in love with
this woman, who was so beautiful and so kind.
 Helene for her part was
sincerely delighted with Natasha and wished to give her a good time.

Anatole had asked her to bring him and Natasha together, and she was
calling on the Rostovs for that purpose.


Though at one time, in Petersburg, she had been annoyed with Natasha for
drawing Boris away, she did not think of that now, and in her own way
heartily wished Natasha well.


"My brother dined with me yesterday--we nearly died of laughter--he ate
nothing and kept sighing for you, my charmer! He is madly, quite madly,
in love with you, my dear.
"

Natasha blushed scarlet when she heard this.


"How she blushes, how she blushes, my pretty!" said Helene.
 "You must
certainly come.
 Even if you are engaged, I am sure your fiance
would wish you to go into society rather than be bored to death.
"

"So she knows I am engaged, and she and her husband Pierre--that good
Pierre--have talked and laughed about this.
 So it's all right.
 "And she is such a grande dame, so kind, and
evidently likes me so much.


Marya Dmitrievna came back to dinner taciturn and serious, having
evidently suffered a defeat at the old prince's.
 She was still too
agitated by the encounter to be able to talk of the affair calmly.
 In
answer to the count's inquiries she replied that things were all right
and that she would tell about it next day.






CHAPTER XIII


Count Rostov took the girls to Countess Bezukhova's.
 There were a good
many people there, but nearly all strangers to Natasha.
 Count Rostov was
displeased to see that the company consisted almost entirely of men and
women known for the freedom of their conduct.
 Mademoiselle George was
standing in a corner of the drawing room surrounded by young men.
 There
were several Frenchmen present, among them Metivier who from the time
Helene reached Moscow had been an intimate in her house.
 The count
decided not to sit down to cards or let his girls out of his sight and
to get away as soon as Mademoiselle George's performance was over.


Anatole was at the door, evidently on the lookout for the Rostovs.
 Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle George went
out of the room to change her costume.
 In the drawing room people began
arranging the chairs and taking their seats.
 Anatole moved a chair for
Natasha and was about to sit down beside her, but the count, who never
lost sight of her, took the seat himself.
 Anatole sat down behind her.
 Enthusiastic whispering was audible.
 In some places she raised her voice, in others she whispered,
lifting her head triumphantly; sometimes she paused and uttered hoarse
sounds, rolling her eyes.


"Adorable! divine! delicious!" was heard from every side.


Natasha looked at the fat actress, but neither saw nor heard nor
understood anything of what went on before her.
 She only felt herself
again completely borne away into this strange senseless world--so remote
from her old world--a world in which it was impossible to know what
was good or bad, reasonable or senseless.


"I don't think so when I look at you!" said Anatole, following Natasha.
.
.


After giving several recitations, Mademoiselle George left, and Countess
Bezukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom.
 Anatole asked Natasha for a
valse and as they danced he pressed her waist and hand and told her she
was bewitching and that he loved her.
 During the ecossaise, which she
also danced with him, Anatole said nothing when they happened to be by
themselves, but merely gazed at her.
 Natasha lifted her frightened eyes
to him, but there was such confident tenderness in his affectionate look
and smile that she could not, whilst looking at him, say what she had to
say.
 She lowered her eyes.


"Don't say such things to me.
.
.
 She glanced at him.


Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had said.


"Don't speak to me of that! What can I do?" said he.
 "I tell you I
am madly, madly, in love with you! Is it my fault that you are
enchanting?.
.
 She understood hardly
anything that went on that evening.
 They danced the ecossaise and the
Grossvater.

Wherever she went and whomever she was speaking to, she felt his eyes
upon her.
 Later on she recalled how she had asked her father to let her
go to the dressing room to rearrange her dress, that Helene had followed
her and spoken laughingly of her brother's love, and that she again met
Anatole in the little sitting room.
.
?" and, blocking her path, he
brought his face close to hers.


His large, glittering, masculine eyes were so close to hers that she saw
nothing but them.
 "Natalie?"

"I don't understand.


Burning lips were pressed to hers, and at the same instant she felt
herself released, and Helene's footsteps and the rustle of her dress
were heard in the room.


"One word, just one, for God's sake!" cried Anatole.


She paused.
 She so wanted a word from him that would explain to her what
had happened and to which she could find no answer.
 The Rostovs went away
without staying for supper.


After reaching home Natasha did not sleep all night.
 She was tormented
by the insoluble question whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew.
 But she also loved Anatole, of that there was no doubt.
 "Else how
could all this have happened?" thought she.
 "If, after that, I could
return his smile when saying good-by, if I was able to let it come to
that, it means that I loved him from the first.
 What am I
to do if I love him and the other one too?" she asked herself, unable to
find an answer to these terrible questions.
 Everyone got up and began to
move about and talk, dressmakers came again.
 Marya Dmitrievna appeared,
and they were called to breakfast.
 Natasha kept looking uneasily at
everybody with wide-open eyes, as if wishing to intercept every glance
directed toward her, and tried to appear the same as usual.


"Well, friends, I have now thought the whole matter over and this is
my advice," she began.
 "Yesterday, as you know, I went to see Prince
Bolkonski.
.
.
.
 He took it into his head to
begin shouting, but I am not one to be shouted down.


"He? He's crazy.
.
 he did not want to listen.
 "My advice to you is finish your business and go back home
to Otradnoe.
.
.
 and wait there.
 If your
betrothed comes here now--there will be no avoiding a quarrel; but alone
with the old man he will talk things over and then come on to you.
 And I am sorry I went to see him and took her,"
said the old count.


"No, why be sorry? Being here, you had to pay your respects.
 But if he
won't--that's his affair," said Marya Dmitrievna, looking for something
in her reticule.
 "Besides, the trousseau is ready, so there is nothing
to wait for; and what is not ready I'll send after you.
 So go, with God's blessing!"

Having found what she was looking for in the reticule she handed it to
Natasha.
 It was a letter from Princess Mary.
"

"But she doesn't like me," said Natasha.


"Don't talk nonsense!" cried Marya Dmitrievna.


"I shan't believe anyone, I know she doesn't like me," replied Natasha
boldly as she took the letter, and her face expressed a cold and angry
resolution that caused Marya Dmitrievna to look at her more intently and
to frown.


Princess Mary wrote that she was in despair at the misunderstanding that
had occurred between them.
 Whatever her father's feelings might be, she
begged Natasha to believe that she could not help loving her as the one
chosen by her brother, for whose happiness she was ready to sacrifice
everything.


"Do not think, however," she wrote, "that my father is ill-disposed
toward you.
"
Princess Mary went on to ask Natasha to fix a time when she could see
her again.


After reading the letter Natasha sat down at the writing table to answer
it.
 "Must I break off with him? Must I really? That's awful.
.


After dinner Natasha went to her room and again took up Princess Mary's
letter.
 "Can it be that it is all over?" she thought.
 She vividly
pictured herself as Prince Andrew's wife, and the scenes of happiness
with him she had so often repeated in her imagination, and at the
same time, aglow with excitement, recalled every detail of yesterday's
interview with Anatole.


"Why could that not be as well?" she sometimes asked herself in complete
bewilderment.
 But with that one nothing is spoiled.
 "A man told me to give you this-" and she handed Natasha a letter.


"Only, for Christ's sake.
.
.
 Yes, she loved him, or
else how could that have happened which had happened? And how could she
have a love letter from him in her hand?

With trembling hands Natasha held that passionate love letter which
Dolokhov had composed for Anatole, and as she read it she found in it an
echo of all that she herself imagined she was feeling.
 Then he went
on to say that he knew her parents would not give her to him--for this
there were secret reasons he could reveal only to her--but that if
she loved him she need only say the word yes, and no human power could
hinder their bliss.


That evening Marya Dmitrievna was going to the Akharovs' and proposed to
take the girls with her.
 Open on the
table, beside her lay Anatole's letter.


As she read she glanced at the sleeping Natasha, trying to find in her
face an explanation of what she was reading, but did not find it.
 Clutching her breast to keep herself
from choking, Sonya, pale and trembling with fear and agitation, sat
down in an armchair and burst into tears.


"How was it I noticed nothing? How could it go so far? Can she have
left off loving Prince Andrew? And how could she let Kuragin go to
such lengths? He is a deceiver and a villain, that's plain! What will
Nicholas, dear noble Nicholas, do when he hears of it? So this is
the meaning of her excited, resolute, unnatural look the day before
yesterday, yesterday, and today," thought Sonya.
 She could not do such a thing!"

Sonya wiped away her tears and went up to Natasha, again scanning her
face.


"Ah, you're back?"

And with the decision and tenderness that often come at the moment
of awakening, she embraced her friend, but noticing Sonya's look of
embarrassment, her own face expressed confusion and suspicion.
 "I can't hide it from you
any longer.
 You know, we love one another! Sonya, darling, he writes.
.
.

Sonya.
.
"

Sonya stared open-eyed at Natasha, unable to believe her ears.


"Ah, Sonya, if you only knew how happy I am!" cried Natasha.
.
"

"But, Natasha, can that be all over?"

Natasha looked at Sonya with wide-open eyes as if she could not grasp
the question.


"Well, then, are you refusing Prince Andrew?" said Sonya.


"Oh, you don't understand anything! Don't talk nonsense, just listen!"
said Natasha, with momentary vexation.
 How is it
you have loved a man for a whole year and suddenly.
.
 Why, you have only
seen him three times! Natasha, I don't believe you, you're joking! In
three days to forget everything and so.
.
.
"

"Three days?" said Natasha.
 It seems to me that I have never loved anyone before.
 You can't
understand it.
.
 Sonya, wait a bit, sit here," and Natasha embraced and
kissed her.

As soon as I saw him I felt he was my master and I his slave, and that
I could not help loving him.
 Yes, his slave! Whatever he orders I shall
do.
 What can I do? What can I do, Sonya?"
cried Natasha with a happy yet frightened expression.
 "I can't leave it like
this.
 This secret correspondence.
.
.
 How could you let him go so far?"
she went on, with a horror and disgust she could hardly conceal.


"I told you that I have no will," Natasha replied.
.


"What do you mean? For God's sake.
.
.
.
"

When she saw Natasha's fright, Sonya shed tears of shame and pity for
her friend.


"But what has happened between you?" she asked.
"

"But why this secrecy? Why doesn't he come to the house?" asked Sonya.
 Evidently this question
presented itself to her mind for the first time and she did not know how
to answer it.


"I don't know what the reasons are.
 But there must be reasons!"

Sonya sighed and shook her head incredulously.


"If there were reasons.
.
.
" she began.


But Natasha, guessing her doubts, interrupted her in alarm.
"

"But if he is dishonorable?"

"He! dishonorable? If you only knew!" exclaimed Natasha.


"But I can't live without him!" cried Natasha.


"Natasha, I don't understand you.
 And what are you saying! Think of your
father and of Nicholas.
"

"I don't want anyone, I don't love anyone but him.
 How dare you say he
is dishonorable? Don't you know that I love him?" screamed Natasha.
 Sonya burst into sobs and ran from the
room.


Natasha went to the table and without a moment's reflection wrote that
answer to Princess Mary which she had been unable to write all
the morning.
 In this letter she said briefly that all their
misunderstandings were at an end; that availing herself of the
magnanimity of Prince Andrew who when he went abroad had given her her
freedom, she begged Princess Mary to forget everything and forgive her
if she had been to blame toward her, but that she could not be his wife.

At that moment this all seemed quite easy, simple, and clear to Natasha.


On the day the count left, Sonya and Natasha were invited to a big
dinner party at the Karagins', and Marya Dmitrievna took them there.
 At
that party Natasha again met Anatole, and Sonya noticed that she spoke
to him, trying not to be overheard, and that all through dinner she was
more agitated than ever.
"

"Well, what happened? What did he say? Natasha, how glad I am you're not
angry with me! Tell me everything--the whole truth.
 What did he say?"

Natasha became thoughtful.


"Oh, Sonya, if you knew him as I do! He said.
.
.
"

Sonya sighed sorrowfully.


"But you haven't refused Bolkonski?" said she.
.
.
 You'll see what a man
he is! Now don't think badly of me or of him.
 I don't think badly of
anyone: I love and pity everybody.
 The
more emotional and ingratiating the expression of Natasha's face became,
the more serious and stern grew Sonya's.


"Natasha," said she, "you asked me not to speak to you, and I haven't
spoken, but now you yourself have begun.
 I don't trust him, Natasha.
 Why
this secrecy?"

"Again, again!" interrupted Natasha.


Anger again showed in Natasha's face.


"And I'll go to my ruin, I will, as soon as possible! It's not your
business! It won't be you, but I, who'll suffer.
 Leave me alone, leave
me alone! I hate you!"

"Natasha!" moaned Sonya, aghast.


"I hate you, I hate you! You're my enemy forever!" And Natasha ran out
of the room.


Natasha did not speak to Sonya again and avoided her.


The day before the count was to return, Sonya noticed that Natasha sat
by the drawingroom window all the morning as if expecting something and
that she made a sign to an officer who drove past, whom Sonya took to be
Anatole.


Sonya began watching her friend still more attentively and noticed that
at dinner and all that evening Natasha was in a strange and unnatural
state.
 She answered questions at random, began sentences she did not
finish, and laughed at everything.


After tea Sonya noticed a housemaid at Natasha's door timidly waiting
to let her pass.
 She let the girl go in, and then listening at the door
learned that another letter had been delivered.
 Natasha did not let
her in.
 But perhaps she really has already refused Bolkonski--she
sent a letter to Princess Mary yesterday.
 And Uncle is away.
.
.
" To tell
Marya Dmitrievna who had such faith in Natasha seemed to Sonya terrible.

"Well, anyway," thought Sonya as she stood in the dark passage, "now or
never I must prove that I remember the family's goodness to me and that
I love Nicholas.






CHAPTER XVI


Anatole had lately moved to Dolokhov's.

Natasha had promised to come out to Kuragin at the back porch at ten
that evening.


In his large study, the walls of which were hung to the ceiling with
Persian rugs, bearskins, and weapons, sat Dolokhov in a traveling cloak
and high boots, at an open desk on which lay abacus and some bundles of
paper money.


"Well," he said, "Khvostikov must have two thousand.
"

"Give it to him, then," said Anatole.


"Makarka" (their name for Makarin) "will go through fire and water for
you for nothing.
 So here are our accounts all settled," said Dolokhov,
showing him the memorandum.
 "Is that right?"

"Yes, of course," returned Anatole, evidently not listening to Dolokhov
and looking straight before him with a smile that did not leave his
face.
 There's still time!"

"Fool," retorted Anatole.
 "Don't talk nonsense! If you only knew.
.
 it's
the devil knows what!"

"No, really, give it up!" said Dolokhov.
 It's
no joke, this plot you've hatched.
"

"What, teasing again? Go to the devil! Eh?" said Anatole, making a
grimace.
 "Really it's no time for your stupid jokes," and he left the
room.


Dolokhov smiled contemptuously and condescendingly when Anatole had gone
out.
 "I'm not joking, I'm talking
sense.
 Come here, come here!"

Anatole returned and looked at Dolokhov, trying to give him his
attention and evidently submitting to him involuntarily.
"

"Well, thank you for it.
 Well,
you'll carry her off--all right! Will they let it stop at that? It
will come out that you're already married.
.
 "Didn't I explain to you that I have come to this
conclusion: if this marriage is invalid," he went on, crooking one
finger, "then I have nothing to answer for; but if it is valid, no
matter! Abroad no one will know anything about it.
 Isn't that so? And
don't talk to me, don't, don't.
"

"Seriously, you'd better drop it! You'll only get yourself into a mess!"

"Go to the devil!" cried Anatole and, clutching his hair, left the room,
but returned at once and dropped into an armchair in front of Dolokhov
with his feet turned under him.
 "It's the very devil! What? Feel how it
beats!" He took Dolokhov's hand and put it on his heart.
 "What a foot,
my dear fellow! What a glance! A goddess!" he added in French.
 "What?"

Dolokhov with a cold smile and a gleam in his handsome insolent eyes
looked at him--evidently wishing to get some more amusement out of him.


"Well and when the money's gone, what then?"

"What then? Eh?" repeated Anatole, sincerely perplexed by a thought
of the future.
 "What then?.
 But why talk
nonsense!" He glanced at his watch.


"Now then! Nearly ready? You're dawdling!" he shouted to the servants.


Dolokhov put away the money, called a footman whom he ordered to bring
something for them to eat and drink before the journey, and went into
the room where Khvostikov and Makarin were sitting.


Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leaning on his elbow and smiling
pensively, while his handsome lips muttered tenderly to himself.


"Come and eat something.


"I don't want to," answered Anatole continuing to smile.


"Come! Balaga is here.
"

Anatole rose and went into the dining room.
 More than once he had enabled Dolokhov to escape when
pursued.
 More than once he had driven them through the town with gypsies
and "ladykins" as he called the cocottes.
 He had ruined more than one horse in their
service.
 They often called Balaga into their orgies and
made him drink and dance at the gypsies', and more than one thousand
rubles of their money had passed through his hands.
 In their service he
risked his skin and his life twenty times a year, and in their service
had lost more horses than the money he had from them would buy.
 He liked to hear those wild, tipsy
shouts behind him: "Get on! Get on!" when it was impossible to go any
faster.
 He liked giving a painful lash on the neck to some peasant
who, more dead than alive, was already hurrying out of his way.
 "Real
gentlemen!" he considered them.
 With others Balaga bargained,
charging twenty-five rubles for a two hours' drive, and rarely drove
himself, generally letting his young men do so.
 But with "his gentlemen"
he always drove himself and never demanded anything for his work.
 Only
a couple of times a year--when he knew from their valets that they had
money in hand--he would turn up of a morning quite sober and with a deep
bow would ask them to help him.
 The gentlemen always made him sit down.


Balaga was a fair-haired, short, and snub-nosed peasant of about
twenty-seven; red-faced, with a particularly red thick neck, glittering
little eyes, and a small beard.
 He wore a fine, dark-blue, silk-lined
cloth coat over a sheepskin.
.
.
.
 What horses
have you come with? Eh?"

"As your messenger ordered, your special beasts," replied Balaga.


"Well, listen, Balaga! Drive all three to death but get me there in
three hours.
 Eh?"

"When they are dead, what shall I drive?" said Balaga with a wink.


"Why joke?" said the driver, laughing.
 "As if I'd grudge my gentlemen
anything! As fast as ever the horses can gallop, so fast we'll go!"

"Ah!" said Anatole.
 "Well, sit down.
"

"Yes, sit down!" said Dolokhov.


"I'll stand, Theodore Ivanych.


"And when are we to start, your excellency?"

"Well.
.
" Anatole looked at his watch.
 Mind,
Balaga! You'll get there in time? Eh?"

"That depends on our luck in starting, else why shouldn't we be there
in time?" replied Balaga.
 "Didn't we get you to Tver in seven hours? I
think you remember that, your excellency?"

"Do you know, one Christmas I drove from Tver," said Anatole, smilingly
at the recollection and turning to Makarin who gazed rapturously at him
with wide-open eyes.
 "Will you believe it, Makarka, it took one's breath
away, the rate we flew.
 Eh?"

"Those were horses!" Balaga continued the tale.
 "That time I'd harnessed
two young side horses with the bay in the shafts," he went on, turning
to Dolokhov.
 "Will you believe it, Theodore Ivanych, those animals flew
forty miles? I couldn't hold them in, my hands grew numb in the sharp
frost so that I threw down the reins--'Catch hold yourself, your
excellency!' says I, and I just tumbled on the bottom of the sleigh and
sprawled there.


"Well, good-by, Theodore.
 Thank you for everything and farewell!" said
Anatole.
 "Well, comrades and friends.
.
.
" he considered for a moment
".
.


Though they were all going with him, Anatole evidently wished to make
something touching and solemn out of this address to his comrades.
 He
spoke slowly in a loud voice and throwing out his chest slightly swayed
one leg.
 Eh? And now, when
shall we meet again? I am going abroad.
 We have had a good time--now
farewell, lads! To our health! Hurrah!.
.
" he cried, and emptying his
glass flung it on the floor.


"To your health!" said Balaga who also emptied his glass, and wiped his
mouth with his handkerchief.


"Ah, Prince, how sorry I am to part from you!

"Let's go.
 Let's go!" cried Anatole.


Balaga was about to leave the room.

That's the way.
"

They shut the door and all sat down.


"Now, quick march, lads!" said Anatole, rising.


Joseph, his valet, handed him his sabretache and saber, and they all
went out into the vestibule.
 "Hey, Ignatka! Go to
Matrena Matrevna and ask her for the sable cloak.
 I have heard what
elopements are like," continued Dolokhov with a wink.


"Here, I don't grudge it--take it!" she said, evidently afraid of her
master and yet regretful of her cloak.


"That's the way," said Dolokhov, "and then so!" and he turned the collar
up round her head, leaving only a little of the face uncovered.
 "And
then so, do you see?" and he pushed Anatole's head forward to meet the
gap left by the collar, through which Matrena's brilliant smile was
seen.
 "Ah, my revels here
are over.
 Remember me to Steshka.
 Balaga took his seat in the front one and holding
his elbows high arranged the reins deliberately.
 Anatole and Dolokhov
got in with him.
 Makarin, Khvostikov, and a valet seated themselves in
the other sleigh.


"Well, are you ready?" asked Balaga.


"Go!" he cried, twisting the reins round his hands, and the troyka tore
down the Nikitski Boulevard.


"Tproo! Get out of the way! Hi!.
.
.
 Tproo!.
.
.
" The shouting of Balaga
and of the sturdy young fellow seated on the box was all that could
be heard.


After taking a turn along the Podnovinski Boulevard, Balaga began to
rein in, and turning back drew up at the crossing of the old Konyusheny
Street.


The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and Anatole
and Dolokhov went along the pavement.
 When they reached the gate
Dolokhov whistled.


Dolokhov stayed by the gate.
 Anatole followed the maid into the
courtyard, turned the corner, and ran up into the porch.


He was met by Gabriel, Marya Dmitrievna's gigantic footman.


"Kindly step in, my orders are to bring you in.
"

"Kuragin! Come back!" shouted Dolokhov.
 "Betrayed! Back!"

Dolokhov, after Anatole entered, had remained at the wicket gate and was
struggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it.
 With a last
desperate effort Dolokhov pushed the porter aside, and when Anatole ran
back seized him by the arm, pulled him through the wicket, and ran back
with him to the troyka.
 "I won't hear a word.
"

Pushing back Natasha who looked at her with astonished but tearless
eyes, she locked her in; and having given orders to the yard porter to
admit the persons who would be coming that evening, but not to let them
out again, and having told the footman to bring them up to her, she
seated herself in the drawing room to await the abductors.


When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run
away again, she rose frowning, and clasping her hands behind her paced
through the rooms a long time considering what she should do.
 Toward
midnight she went to Natasha's room fingering the key in her pocket.
.
.
.
 In my house.
.
.
 horrid girl, hussy! I'm only sorry for her
father!" thought she, trying to restrain her wrath.
" She entered the room with resolute steps.
 She was in
just the same position in which Marya Dmitrievna had left her.
 "Arranging meetings
with lovers in my house! It's no use pretending: you listen when I speak
to you!" And Marya Dmitrievna touched her arm.
 "Listen when I speak!
You've disgraced yourself like the lowest of hussies.
 I'd treat you
differently, but I'm sorry for your father, so I will conceal it.
"

Natasha did not change her position, but her whole body heaved with
noiseless, convulsive sobs which choked her.


"It's lucky for him that he escaped me; but I'll find him!" she said in
her rough voice.


She put her large hand under Natasha's face and turned it toward her.

Both Marya Dmitrievna and Sonya were amazed when they saw how Natasha
looked.


"Let me be!.
.
.
.
 I shall die!" she muttered,
wrenching herself from Marya Dmitrievna's hands with a vicious effort
and sinking down again into her former position.


"Natalie!" said Marya Dmitrievna.
 "I wish for your good.
 Lie still,
stay like that then, I won't touch you.
 I won't tell you how
guilty you are.
 But when your father comes back
tomorrow what am I to tell him? Eh?"

Again Natasha's body shook with sobs.


"Suppose he finds out, and your brother, and your betrothed?"

"I have no betrothed: I have refused him!" cried Natasha.


"That's all the same," continued Marya Dmitrievna.
.


"But what did you want?" cried Marya Dmitrievna, growing angry again.
.
.
.
 do you think they wouldn't have found him?
Your father, or brother, or your betrothed? And he's a scoundrel, a
wretch--that's a fact!"

"He is better than any of you!" exclaimed Natasha getting up.
 "If you
hadn't interfered.
.
.
 Oh, my God! What is it all? What is it? Sonya,
why?.
.
.
 Go away!"

And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with which people
bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned.
 Marya
Dmitrievna was to speak again but Natasha cried out:

"Go away! Go away! You all hate and despise me!" and she threw herself
back on the sofa.


Marya Dmitrievna went on admonishing her for some time, enjoining on her
that it must all be kept from her father and assuring her that nobody
would know anything about it if only Natasha herself would undertake
to forget it all and not let anyone see that something had happened.

Natasha did not reply, nor did she sob any longer, but she grew cold
and had a shivering fit.


But Natasha was not asleep; with pale face and fixed wide-open eyes she
looked straight before her.
 All that night she did not sleep or weep and
did not speak to Sonya who got up and went to her several times.


Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow in time for
lunch as he had promised.
 He was in very good spirits; the affair with
the purchaser was going on satisfactorily, and there was nothing to keep
him any longer in Moscow, away from the countess whom he missed.
 Marya
Dmitrievna met him and told him that Natasha had been very unwell the
day before and that they had sent for the doctor, but that she was
better now.
 Natasha had not left her room that morning.
 She was evidently expecting news of him and
that he would come or would write to her.


After a moment's silence Natasha answered: "Yes, ill.
 Soon after the Rostovs came
to Moscow the effect Natasha had on him made him hasten to carry out
his intention.
 He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexeevich's widow, who
had long since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased
husband's.
 Pierre had
been avoiding Natasha because it seemed to him that his feeling for her
was stronger than a married man's should be for his friend's fiancee.


"What can have happened? And what can they want with me?" thought he
as he dressed to go to Marya Dmitrievna's.
 "If only Prince Andrew would
hurry up and come and marry her!" thought he on his way to the house.
 Pierre raised his head.
 What wouldn't I give to be like
him!" he thought enviously.


When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natasha sitting at the
window, with a thin, pale, and spiteful face.
 She glanced round at him,
frowned, and left the room with an expression of cold dignity.


"What has happened?" asked Pierre, entering Marya Dmitrievna's room.


"Fine doings!" answered Dmitrievna.


Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open-mouthed to what was told
him, scarcely able to believe his own ears.
 That Prince Andrew's
deeply loved affianced wife--the same Natasha Rostova who used to be so
charming--should give up Bolkonski for that fool Anatole who was already
secretly married (as Pierre knew), and should be so in love with him as
to agree to run away with him, was something Pierre could not conceive
and could not imagine.
 "They are all alike!" he
said to himself, reflecting that he was not the only man unfortunate
enough to be tied to a bad woman.
 But still he pitied Prince Andrew to
the point of tears and sympathized with his wounded pride, and the more
he pitied his friend the more did he think with contempt and even with
disgust of that Natasha who had just passed him in the ballroom with
such a look of cold dignity.
 He did not know that Natasha's soul was
overflowing with despair, shame, and humiliation, and that it was not
her fault that her face happened to assume an expression of calm dignity
and severity.
"

After hearing the details of Anatole's marriage from Pierre, and giving
vent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse, Marya Dmitrievna
told Pierre why she had sent for him.
 She was afraid that the count or
Bolkonski, who might arrive at any moment, if they knew of this affair
(which she hoped to hide from them) might challenge Anatole to a duel,
and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name to
leave Moscow and not dare to let her set eyes on him again.
 Pierre--only
now realizing the danger to the old count, Nicholas, and Prince
Andrew--promised to do as she wished.
 Having briefly and exactly
explained her wishes to him, she let him go to the drawing room.
 "And I will go and tell her it is no use expecting him! And
stay to dinner if you care to!" she called after Pierre.
 That morning
Natasha had told him that she had rejected Bolkonski.
.
.
.
.
"

Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change the
subject, but the count returned to his troubles.
"

"Yes, you are a great friend of Bolkonski's, no doubt she wants to send
him a message," said the count.


When Marya Dmitrievna told Natasha that Anatole was married, Natasha
did not wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed by Pierre
himself.
 She did not smile or nod, but only gazed fixedly at
him, and her look asked only one thing: was he a friend, or like the
others an enemy in regard to Anatole? As for Pierre, he evidently did
not exist for her.
 "Let him tell you whether I have told the truth.
"

Natasha looked from one to the other as a hunted and wounded animal
looks at the approaching dogs and sportsmen.


"Natalya Ilynichna," Pierre began, dropping his eyes with a feeling of
pity for her and loathing for the thing he had to do, "whether it is
true or not should make no difference to you, because.
.
.
"

Pierre gave his word of honor.


"Is he still here?" she asked, quickly.
"

She was evidently unable to speak and made a sign with her hands that
they should leave her alone.
 The members who were assembling for dinner were sitting about
in groups; they greeted Pierre and spoke of the town news.
 The footman
having greeted him, knowing his habits and his acquaintances, told him
there was a place left for him in the small dining room and that Prince
Michael Zakharych was in the library, but Paul Timofeevich had not yet
arrived.
 He asked
everyone about Anatole.
 One man told him he had not come yet, and
another that he was coming to dinner.
 He paced through the ballroom, waited till everyone had come, and
as Anatole had not turned up did not stay for dinner but drove home.


Anatole, for whom Pierre was looking, dined that day with Dolokhov,
consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunate affair.
 It seemed to
him essential to see Natasha.
 When Pierre returned home
after vainly hunting all over Moscow, his valet informed him that Prince
Anatole was with the countess.
 The countess' drawing room was full of
guests.


Pierre without greeting his wife whom he had not seen since his
return--at that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever--entered
the drawing room and seeing Anatole went up to him.
.


"Where you are, there is vice and evil!" said Pierre to his wife.


Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively, ready to
follow Pierre.
 Pierre, taking him by the arm, pulled him toward himself
and was leading him from the room.


"If you allow yourself in my drawing room.
.
" whispered Helene, but
Pierre did not reply and went out of the room.


Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressed Anatole
without looking at him.
"

Pierre's face, already pale, became distorted by fury.


"When I tell you that I must talk to you!.
.


"Come now, this is stupid.


He took a heavy paperweight and lifted it threateningly, but at once put
it back in its place.


"Did you promise to marry her?"

"I.
.
 I never promised, because.


Anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his pocket
and drew out his pocketbook.


Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and, pushing aside a table
that stood in his way, threw himself on the sofa.


"I shan't be violent, don't be afraid!" said Pierre in answer to a
frightened gesture of Anatole's.
 "Secondly," he continued after a short
pause, again rising and again pacing the room, "tomorrow you must get
out of Moscow.
"

"But how can I?.
.
.
"

"Thirdly," Pierre continued without listening to him, "you must never
breathe a word of what has passed between you and Countess Rostova.
.
" Pierre paced the room several times in silence.
 They are armed against you by the same experience
of debauchery; but to promise a maid to marry her.
.
.
 to deceive, to
kidnap.
.
.
.
.


"I don't know about that, eh?" said Anatole, growing more confident as
Pierre mastered his wrath.
 "I don't know that and don't want to," he
said, not looking at Pierre and with a slight tremor of his lower jaw,
"but you have used such words to me--'mean' and so on--which as a man of
honor I can't allow anyone to use.


"Though it was tete-a-tete," Anatole continued, "still I can't.
.
.
"

"Is it satisfaction you want?" said Pierre ironically.


"You could at least take back your words.
 "And if
you require money for your journey.
.
 The expression of that base and cringing smile, which
Pierre knew so well in his wife, revolted him.


"Oh, vile and heartless brood!" he exclaimed, and left the room.


Next day Anatole left for Petersburg.


Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossip about
the attempted abduction of Rostova.
 It seemed to
Pierre that it was his duty to conceal the whole affair and re-establish
Natasha's reputation.


Old Prince Bolkonski heard all the rumors current in the town from
Mademoiselle Bourienne and had read the note to Princess Mary in which
Natasha had broken off her engagement.


Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to see him next
morning.
 Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almost the same state
as Natasha and was therefore surprised on entering the drawing room
to hear him in the study talking in a loud animated voice about some
intrigue going on in Petersburg.
 The old prince's voice and another now
and then interrupted him.
 Princess Mary came out to meet Pierre.
 She
sighed, looking toward the door of the room where Prince Andrew was,
evidently intending to express her sympathy with his sorrow, but Pierre
saw by her face that she was glad both at what had happened and at the
way her brother had taken the news of Natasha's faithlessness.


"He says he expected it," she remarked.
 "I know his pride will not let
him express his feelings, but still he has taken it better, far better,
than I expected.
 Evidently it had to be.
.
.
"

"But is it possible that all is really ended?" asked Pierre.


Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment.
 She did not understand
how he could ask such a question.
 Pierre went into the study.
 Prince
Andrew, greatly changed and plainly in better health, but with a fresh
horizontal wrinkle between his brows, stood in civilian dress facing
his father and Prince Meshcherski, warmly disputing and vigorously
gesticulating.
 His face quivered and immediately
assumed a vindictive expression.
 "Yes, I am well," he said in
answer to Pierre's question, and smiled.


To Pierre that smile said plainly: "I am well, but my health is now of
no use to anyone.
 Dessalles, whom he had brought from abroad to be his son's
tutor, Prince Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation about
Speranski which was still going on between the two old men.


"If there were treason, or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon,
they would have been made public," he said with warmth and haste.

When Prince Meshcherski had left, Prince Andrew took Pierre's arm and
asked him into the room that had been assigned him.
 Prince
Andrew went to one and took out a small casket, from which he drew a
packet wrapped in paper.
 He
stood up and coughed.


"Forgive me for troubling you.
.
"

Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natasha, and his
broad face expressed pity and sympathy.
 This expression irritated Prince
Andrew, and in a determined, ringing, and unpleasant tone he continued:

"I have received a refusal from Countess Rostova and have heard reports
of your brother-in-law having sought her hand, or something of that
kind.


"Here are her letters and her portrait," said he.
 if you see her.


"Then she is here still?" said Prince Andrew.
 "And Prince Kuragin?" he
added quickly.


"He left long ago.
 She has been at death's door.
"

"I much regret her illness," said Prince Andrew; and he smiled like his
father, coldly, maliciously, and unpleasantly.


"He could not marry, for he was married already," said Pierre.


"And where is your brother-in-law now, if I may ask?" he said.


"He has gone to Peters.
.
.
 But I don't know," said Pierre.


"Well, it doesn't matter," said Prince Andrew.
 "Tell Countess Rostova
that she was and is perfectly free and that I wish her all that is
good.
"

Pierre took the packet.
 Prince Andrew, as if trying to remember whether
he had something more to say, or waiting to see if Pierre would say
anything, looked fixedly at him.


"I say, do you remember our discussion in Petersburg?" asked Pierre,
"about.
.
"

"Yes," returned Prince Andrew hastily.
 "I said that a fallen woman
should be forgiven, but I didn't say I could forgive her.
"

"But can this be compared.


Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried sharply: "Yes, ask her hand
again, be magnanimous, and so on?.
.
.
 Yes, that would be very noble, but
I am unable to follow in that gentleman's footsteps.
 If you wish to be
my friend never speak to me of that.
.
.
 of all that! Well, good-by.
 So
you'll give her the packet?"

Pierre left the room and went to the old prince and Princess Mary.


The old man seemed livelier than usual.


At dinner the talk turned on the war, the approach of which was becoming
evident.
 Prince Andrew talked incessantly, arguing now with his father,
now with the Swiss tutor Dessalles, and showing an unnatural animation,
the cause of which Pierre so well understood.






CHAPTER XXII


That same evening Pierre went to the Rostovs' to fulfill the commission
entrusted to him.
 Natasha was in bed, the count at the Club, and Pierre,
after giving the letters to Sonya, went to Marya Dmitrievna who was
interested to know how Prince Andrew had taken the news.
 Ten minutes
later Sonya came to Marya Dmitrievna.


"Natasha insists on seeing Count Peter Kirilovich," said she.


Marya Dmitrievna only shrugged her shoulders.
 When he appeared at the door she grew flurried, evidently undecided
whether to go to meet him or to wait till he came up.


Pierre hastened to her.
 He thought she would give him her hand as
usual; but she, stepping up to him, stopped, breathing heavily, her arms
hanging lifelessly just in the pose she used to stand in when she
went to the middle of the ballroom to sing, but with quite a different
expression of face.


"Peter Kirilovich," she began rapidly, "Prince Bolkonski was your
friend--is your friend," she corrected herself.
 (It seemed to her that
everything that had once been must now be different.
.
.
"

Pierre sniffed as he looked at her, but did not speak.
 Till then he had
reproached her in his heart and tried to despise her, but he now felt so
sorry for her that there was no room in his soul for reproach.


"He is here now: tell him.
.
.
 to for.
.
 forgive me!" She stopped and
breathed still more quickly, but did not shed tears.
.
 I will tell him," answered Pierre; "but.
.
.
 "No, that can never be.

I'm only tormented by the wrong I have done him.
 Tell him only that I
beg him to forgive, forgive, forgive me for everything.
.
.
.

"But.
.
.
.
"

"Know what?" Natasha's eyes asked.
.
 "But I don't know, don't know at
all.
.
.
.
 He felt the tears trickle under his spectacles and
hoped they would not be noticed.


"We won't speak of it any more, my dear," said Pierre, and his gentle,
cordial tone suddenly seemed very strange to Natasha.


"We won't speak of it, my dear--I'll tell him everything; but one thing
I beg of you, consider me your friend and if you want help, advice, or
simply to open your heart to someone--not now, but when your mind is
clearer think of me!" He took her hand and kissed it.
.


"Don't speak to me like that.


He knew he had something more to say to her.


"Stop, stop! You have your whole life before you," said he to her.


"Before me? No! All is over for me," she replied with shame and
self-abasement.


 "All over?" he repeated.
 "If I were not myself, but the handsomest,
cleverest, and best man in the world, and were free, I would this moment
ask on my knees for your hand and your love!"

For the first time for many days Natasha wept tears of gratitude and
tenderness, and glancing at Pierre she went out of the room.


Pierre too when she had gone almost ran into the anteroom, restraining
tears of tenderness and joy that choked him, and without finding the
sleeves of his fur cloak threw it on and got into his sleigh.


"Where to now, your excellency?" asked the coachman.


"Home!" said Pierre, and despite twenty-two degrees of frost Fahrenheit
he threw open the bearskin cloak from his broad chest and inhaled the
air with joy.


It was clear and frosty.
 Only looking up at the sky
did Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliating were all mundane
things compared with the heights to which his soul had just been raised.

At the entrance to the Arbat Square an immense expanse of dark starry
sky presented itself to his eyes.
 Almost in the center of it, above the
Prechistenka Boulevard, surrounded and sprinkled on all sides by stars
but distinguished from them all by its nearness to the earth, its white
light, and its long uplifted tail, shone the enormous and brilliant
comet of 1812--the comet which was said to portend all kinds of woes
and the end of the world.
 It
seemed to Pierre that this comet fully responded to what was passing in
his own softened and uplifted soul, now blossoming into a new life.






BOOK NINE: 1812





CHAPTER I


From the close of the year 1811 intensified arming and concentrating of
the forces of Western Europe began, and in 1812 these forces--millions
of men, reckoning those transporting and feeding the army--moved from
the west eastwards to the Russian frontier, toward which since 1811
Russian forces had been similarly drawn.
 On the twelfth of June, 1812,
the forces of Western Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war
began, that is, an event took place opposed to human reason and to human
nature.
 Millions of men perpetrated against one another such innumerable
crimes, frauds, treacheries, thefts, forgeries, issues of false money,
burglaries, incendiarisms, and murders as in whole centuries are not
recorded in the annals of all the law courts of the world, but which
those who committed them did not at the time regard as being crimes.


What produced this extraordinary occurrence? What were its causes? The
historians tell us with naive assurance that its causes were the wrongs
inflicted on the Duke of Oldenburg, the nonobservance of the Continental
System, the ambition of Napoleon, the firmness of Alexander, the
mistakes of the diplomatists, and so on.


Consequently, it would only have been necessary for Metternich,
Rumyantsev, or Talleyrand, between a levee and an evening party, to have
taken proper pains and written a more adroit note, or for Napoleon to
have written to Alexander: "My respected Brother, I consent to restore
the duchy to the Duke of Oldenburg"--and there would have been no war.


We can understand that the matter seemed like that to contemporaries.
 Helena).
 It naturally
seemed to members of the English Parliament that the cause of the war
was Napoleon's ambition; to the Duke of Oldenburg, that the cause of the
war was the violence done to him; to businessmen that the cause of the
war was the Continental System which was ruining Europe; to the generals
and old soldiers that the chief reason for the war was the necessity of
giving them employment; to the legitimists of that day that it was the
need of re-establishing les bons principes, and to the diplomatists of
that time that it all resulted from the fact that the alliance between
Russia and Austria in 1809 had not been sufficiently well concealed
from Napoleon, and from the awkward wording of Memorandum No.
 178.
 It
is natural that these and a countless and infinite quantity of other
reasons, the number depending on the endless diversity of points
of view, presented themselves to the men of that day; but to us, to
posterity who view the thing that happened in all its magnitude and
perceive its plain and terrible meaning, these causes seem insufficient.

To us it is incomprehensible that millions of Christian men killed and
tortured each other either because Napoleon was ambitious or Alexander
was firm, or because England's policy was astute or the Duke of
Oldenburg wronged.
 We cannot grasp what connection such circumstances
have with the actual fact of slaughter and violence: why because the
Duke was wronged, thousands of men from the other side of Europe killed
and ruined the people of Smolensk and Moscow and were killed by them.


To us, their descendants, who are not historians and are not carried
away by the process of research and can therefore regard the event
with unclouded common sense, an incalculable number of causes present
themselves.
 The deeper we delve in search of these causes the more of
them we find; and each separate cause or whole series of causes appears
to us equally valid in itself and equally false by its insignificance
compared to the magnitude of the events, and by its impotence--apart
from the cooperation of all the other coincident causes--to occasion the
event.
 Nor could there have been
a war had there been no English intrigues and no Duke of Oldenburg, and
had Alexander not felt insulted, and had there not been an autocratic
government in Russia, or a Revolution in France and a subsequent
dictatorship and Empire, or all the things that produced the French
Revolution, and so on.
 Without each of these causes nothing could have
happened.
 Millions of men, renouncing their human
feelings and reason, had to go from west to east to slay their fellows,
just as some centuries previously hordes of men had come from the east
to the west, slaying their fellows.
 This could not be
otherwise, for in order that the will of Napoleon and Alexander (on whom
the event seemed to depend) should be carried out, the concurrence of
innumerable circumstances was needed without any one of which the event
could not have taken place.
 It was necessary that millions of men in
whose hands lay the real power--the soldiers who fired, or transported
provisions and guns--should consent to carry out the will of these weak
individuals, and should have been induced to do so by an infinite number
of diverse and complex causes.


We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation of irrational
events (that is to say, events the reasonableness of which we do
not understand).
 The more we try to explain such events in history
reasonably, the more unreasonable and incomprehensible do they become to
us.


Man lives consciously for himself, but is an unconscious instrument in
the attainment of the historic, universal, aims of humanity.


"The king's heart is in the hands of the Lord.
"

A king is history's slave.


History, that is, the unconscious, general, hive life of mankind, uses
every moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes.


Though Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was more convinced than ever that
it depended on him, verser (ou ne pas verser) le sang de ses peuples
*--as Alexander expressed it in the last letter he wrote him--he had
never been so much in the grip of inevitable laws, which compelled him,
while thinking that he was acting on his own volition, to perform
for the hive life--that is to say, for history--whatever had to be
performed.



    * "To shed (or not to shed) the blood of his peoples.
"


The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men, and
by the law of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in and
co-ordinated to produce that movement and war: reproaches for the
nonobservance of the Continental System, the Duke of Oldenburg's
wrongs, the movement of troops into Prussia--undertaken (as it seemed
to Napoleon) only for the purpose of securing an armed peace, the
French Emperor's love and habit of war coinciding with his people's
inclinations, allurement by the grandeur of the preparations, and the
expenditure on those preparations and the need of obtaining advantages
to compensate for that expenditure, the intoxicating honors he received
in Dresden, the diplomatic negotiations which, in the opinion of
contemporaries, were carried on with a sincere desire to attain peace,
but which only wounded the self-love of both sides, and millions of
other causes that adapted themselves to the event that was happening or
coincided with it.
 And the botanist
who finds that the apple falls because the cellular tissue decays and so
forth is equally right with the child who stands under the tree and says
the apple fell because he wanted to eat it and prayed for it.


Every act of theirs, which appears to them an act of their own will, is
in an historical sense involuntary and is related to the whole course of
history and predestined from eternity.






CHAPTER II


On the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden, where he had spent
three weeks surrounded by a court that included princes, dukes, kings,
and even an emperor.
 Though the diplomatists still firmly
believed in the possibility of peace and worked zealously to that end,
and though the Emperor Napoleon himself wrote a letter to Alexander,
calling him Monsieur mon frere, and sincerely assured him that he did
not want war and would always love and honor him--yet he set off to
join his army, and at every station gave fresh orders to accelerate the
movement of his troops from west to east.
 He went in a traveling coach
with six horses, surrounded by pages, aides-de-camp, and an escort,
along the road to Posen, Thorn, Danzig, and Konigsberg.
 At each of these
towns thousands of people met him with excitement and enthusiasm.
 On the tenth of June, * coming up with the
army, he spent the night in apartments prepared for him on the estate of
a Polish count in the Vilkavisski forest.



Next day, overtaking the army, he went in a carriage to the Niemen, and,
changing into a Polish uniform, he drove to the riverbank in order to
select a place for the crossing.


Early in the morning of the twelfth of June he came out of his tent,
which was pitched that day on the steep left bank of the Niemen, and
looked through a spyglass at the streams of his troops pouring out of
the Vilkavisski forest and flowing over the three bridges thrown across
the river.


"Now we'll go into action.
.
.
.
.
 There he is!.
.
.
 Vive l'Empereur! So these
are the steppes of Asia! It's a nasty country all the same.
 Au revoir,
Beauche; I'll keep the best palace in Moscow for you! Au revoir.
.
.
 Did you see the Emperor? Vive l'Empereur!.
.
 preur!--If
they make me Governor of India, Gerard, I'll make you Minister of
Kashmir--that's settled.
 Vive l'Empereur! Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah! The
Cossacks--those rascals--see how they run! Vive l'Empereur! There he
is, do you see him? I've seen him twice, as I see you now.
 The little
corporal.
.
 Vive
l'Empereur!" came the voices of men, old and young, of most diverse
characters and social positions.
 On the faces of all was one common
expression of joy at the commencement of the long-expected campaign and
of rapture and devotion to the man in the gray coat who was standing on
the hill.


On the thirteenth of June a rather small, thoroughbred Arab horse was
brought to Napoleon.
 On reaching the broad river Viliya, he stopped
near a regiment of Polish Uhlans stationed by the river.


"Vivat!" shouted the Poles, ecstatically, breaking their ranks and
pressing against one another to see him.
 At a mute sign from him, a telescope was handed
him which he rested on the back of a happy page who had run up to him,
and he gazed at the opposite bank.
 Then he became absorbed in a map laid
out on the logs.
 Without lifting his head he said something, and two of
his aides-de-camp galloped off to the Polish Uhlans.


"What? What did he say?" was heard in the ranks of the Polish Uhlans
when one of the aides-de-camp rode up to them.


The order was to find a ford and to cross the river.
 The colonel of the
Polish Uhlans, a handsome old man, flushed and, fumbling in his speech
from excitement, asked the aide-de-camp whether he would be permitted
to swim the river with his Uhlans instead of seeking a ford.
 In evident
fear of refusal, like a boy asking for permission to get on a horse, he
begged to be allowed to swim across the river before the Emperor's
eyes.
 The aide-de-camp replied that probably the Emperor would not be
displeased at this excess of zeal.
 Hundreds of Uhlans galloped in after
him.
 He called for
his horse and rode to his quarters.


Some forty Uhlans were drowned in the river, though boats were sent to
their assistance.
 The majority struggled back to the bank from which
they had started.
 And as soon as they had
got out, in their soaked and streaming clothes, they shouted "Vivat!"
and looked ecstatically at the spot where Napoleon had been but where he
no longer was and at that moment considered themselves happy.


Quos vult perdere dementat.
 There was no general plan of action.
 Each of the three
armies had its own commander in chief, but there was no supreme
commander of all the forces, and the Emperor did not assume that
responsibility himself.


The longer the Emperor remained in Vilna the less did everybody--tired
of waiting--prepare for the war.
 This idea was eagerly received.

The Emperor gave his consent.
 The lady who was thought to be most pleasing to the
Emperor was invited to act as hostess.
 Count Bennigsen, being a
landowner in the Vilna province, offered his country house for the fete,
and the thirteenth of June was fixed for a ball, dinner, regatta, and
fireworks at Zakret, Count Bennigsen's country seat.


The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross the Niemen, and
his vanguard, driving off the Cossacks, crossed the Russian frontier,
Alexander spent the evening at the entertainment given by his
aides-de-camp at Bennigsen's country house.

Countess Bezukhova was present among other Russian ladies who had
followed the sovereign from Petersburg to Vilna and eclipsed the refined
Polish ladies by her massive, so called Russian type of beauty.


Boris Drubetskoy, having left his wife in Moscow and being for the
present en garcon (as he phrased it), was also there and, though not an
aide-de-camp, had subscribed a large sum toward the expenses.


At midnight dancing was still going on.
 Helene, not having a suitable
partner, herself offered to dance the mazurka with Boris.
 They were the
third couple.
 The Emperor was not dancing, he stood in the
doorway, stopping now one pair and now another with gracious words which
he alone knew how to utter.


As the mazurka began, Boris saw that Adjutant General Balashev, one of
those in closest attendance on the Emperor, went up to him and contrary
to court etiquette stood near him while he was talking to a Polish
lady.
 Hardly had Balashev begun to speak before a look of
amazement appeared on the Emperor's face.
 He took Balashev by the arm
and crossed the room with him, unconsciously clearing a path seven
yards wide as the people on both sides made way for him.

Arakcheev looked at the Emperor from under his brow and, sniffing with
his red nose, stepped forward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperor
to address him.
)

But the Emperor and Balashev passed out into the illuminated garden
without noticing Arakcheev who, holding his sword and glancing
wrathfully around, followed some twenty paces behind them.
 In the figure in which he had to choose
two ladies, he whispered to Helene that he meant to choose Countess
Potocka who, he thought, had gone out onto the veranda, and glided over
the parquet to the door opening into the garden, where, seeing Balashev
and the Emperor returning to the veranda, he stood still.
 Boris, fluttering as if he had not had time to
withdraw, respectfully pressed close to the doorpost with bowed head.


The Emperor, with the agitation of one who has been personally
affronted, was finishing with these words:

"To enter Russia without declaring war! I will not make peace as long as
a single armed enemy remains in my country!" It seemed to Boris that it
gave the Emperor pleasure to utter these words.
 He was satisfied with
the form in which he had expressed his thoughts, but displeased that
Boris had overheard it.


"Let no one know of it!" the Emperor added with a frown.


Boris understood that this was meant for him and, closing his eyes,
slightly bowed his head.


Boris was thus the first to learn the news that the French army had
crossed the Niemen and, thanks to this, was able to show certain
important personages that much that was concealed from others was
usually known to him, and by this means he rose higher in their
estimation.



The unexpected news of the French having crossed the Niemen was
particularly startling after a month of unfulfilled expectations, and at
a ball.


Next day the following letter was sent to Napoleon:


Monsieur mon frere,

Yesterday I learned that, despite the loyalty with which I have kept
my engagements with Your Majesty, your troops have crossed the Russian
frontier, and I have this moment received from Petersburg a note, in
which Count Lauriston informs me, as a reason for this aggression, that
Your Majesty has considered yourself to be in a state of war with me
from the time Prince Kuragin asked for his passports.
 If Your Majesty does not intend to shed the blood of our
peoples for such a misunderstanding, and consents to withdraw your
troops from Russian territory, I will regard what has passed as not
having occurred and an understanding between us will be possible.
 In
the contrary case, Your Majesty, I shall see myself forced to repel an
attack that nothing on my part has provoked.
 It still depends on Your
Majesty to preserve humanity from the calamity of another war.
 I am,
etc.






CHAPTER IV


At two in the morning of the fourteenth of June, the Emperor, having
sent for Balashev and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered him to
take it and hand it personally to the French Emperor.
 When dispatching
Balashev, the Emperor repeated to him the words that he would not make
peace so long as a single armed enemy remained on Russian soil and told
him to transmit those words to Napoleon.
 Alexander did not insert them
in his letter to Napoleon, because with his characteristic tact he felt
it would be injudicious to use them at a moment when a last attempt at
reconciliation was being made, but he definitely instructed Balashev to
repeat them personally to Napoleon.
 Balashev did
not do so at once, but continued to advance along the road at a walking
pace.
 The
noncommissioned officer began talking with his comrades about regimental
matters without looking at the Russian general.


After living at the seat of the highest authority and power, after
conversing with the Emperor less than three hours before, and in general
being accustomed to the respect due to his rank in the service, Balashev
found it very strange here on Russian soil to encounter this hostile,
and still more this disrespectful, application of brute force to
himself.


The sun was only just appearing from behind the clouds, the air was
fresh and dewy.
 A herd of cattle was being driven along the road from
the village, and over the fields the larks rose trilling, one after
another, like bubbles rising in water.


A French colonel of hussars, who had evidently just left his bed, came
riding from the village on a handsome sleek gray horse, accompanied
by two hussars.
 The officer, the soldiers, and their horses all looked
smart and well kept.


The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn, but was polite and
evidently understood Balashev's importance.
 The colonel said that the commander of the division was a mile
and a quarter away and would receive Balashev and conduct him to his
destination.


The sun had by now risen and shone gaily on the bright verdure.


They had hardly ridden up a hill, past a tavern, before they saw a group
of horsemen coming toward them.
 In front of the group, on a black horse
with trappings that glittered in the sun, rode a tall man with plumes
in his hat and black hair curling down to his shoulders.
 He was so sure that he really
was the King of Naples that when, on the eve of his departure from that
city, while walking through the streets with his wife, some Italians
called out to him: "Viva il re!" * he turned to his wife with a pensive
smile and said: "Poor fellows, they don't know that I am leaving them
tomorrow!"


    * "Long live the king.
"


But though he firmly believed himself to be King of Naples and pitied
the grief felt by the subjects he was abandoning, latterly, after he
had been ordered to return to military service--and especially since his
last interview with Napoleon in Danzig, when his august brother-in-law
had told him: "I made you King that you should reign in my way, but not
in yours!"--he had cheerfully taken up his familiar business, and--like
a well-fed but not overfat horse that feels himself in harness and grows
skittish between the shafts--he dressed up in clothes as variegated
and expensive as possible, and gaily and contentedly galloped along the
roads of Poland, without himself knowing why or whither.
 The colonel respectfully informed His
Majesty of Balashev's mission, whose name he could not pronounce.
 "Charmed to
make your acquaintance, General!" he added, with a gesture of kingly
condescension.
 He laid his hand on the
withers of Balashev's horse and said:

"Well, General, it all looks like war," as if regretting a circumstance
of which he was unable to judge.
.
" said Balashev, using the words
Your Majesty at every opportunity, with the affectation unavoidable in
frequently addressing one to whom the title was still a novelty.
 He dismounted, took Balashev's arm, and moving a few steps away
from his suite, which waited respectfully, began to pace up and down
with him, trying to speak significantly.
 He referred to the fact that
the Emperor Napoleon had resented the demand that he should withdraw his
troops from Prussia, especially when that demand became generally known
and the dignity of France was thereby offended.



    * "Royalty has its obligations.
"


Balashev replied that there was "nothing offensive in the demand,
because.
.


"Then you don't consider the Emperor Alexander the aggressor?" he asked
unexpectedly, with a kindly and foolish smile.


Balashev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator of the
war.


"Oh, my dear general!" Murat again interrupted him, "with all my heart I
wish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them, and that the war
begun by no wish of mine may finish as quickly as possible!" said he,
in the tone of a servant who wants to remain good friends with another
despite a quarrel between their masters.


And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of his
health, and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had spent
with him in Naples.
 Then suddenly, as if remembering his royal dignity,
Murat solemnly drew himself up, assumed the pose in which he had stood
at his coronation, and, waving his right arm, said:

"I won't detain you longer, General.
 But instead of that, at the next
village the sentinels of Davout's infantry corps detained him as
the pickets of the vanguard had done, and an adjutant of the corps
commander, who was fetched, conducted him into the village to Marshal
Davout.






CHAPTER V


Davout was to Napoleon what Arakcheev was to Alexander--though not a
coward like Arakcheev, he was as precise, as cruel, and as unable to
express his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty.


In the organism of states such men are necessary, as wolves are
necessary in the organism of nature, and they always exist, always
appear and hold their own, however incongruous their presence and their
proximity to the head of the government may be.
 This inevitability alone
can explain how the cruel Arakcheev, who tore out a grenadier's mustache
with his own hands, whose weak nerves rendered him unable to face
danger, and who was neither an educated man nor a courtier, was able to
maintain his powerful position with Alexander, whose own character was
chivalrous, noble, and gentle.


Balashev found Davout seated on a barrel in the shed of a peasant's hut,
writing--he was auditing accounts.
 Better quarters could have been
found him, but Marshal Davout was one of those men who purposely put
themselves in most depressing conditions to have a justification for
being gloomy.
 For the same reason they are always hard at work and in a
hurry.
 "How can I think of the bright side of life when, as you see, I
am sitting on a barrel and working in a dirty shed?" the expression of
his face seemed to say.
 The chief pleasure and necessity of such men,
when they encounter anyone who shows animation, is to flaunt their own
dreary, persistent activity.
 Davout allowed himself that pleasure when
Balashev was brought in.
 He became still more absorbed in his task when
the Russian general entered, and after glancing over his spectacles at
Balashev's face, which was animated by the beauty of the morning and
by his talk with Murat, he did not rise or even stir, but scowled still
more and sneered malevolently.


When he noticed in Balashev's face the disagreeable impression this
reception produced, Davout raised his head and coldly asked what he
wanted.


Thinking he could have been received in such a manner only because
Davout did not know that he was adjutant general to the Emperor
Alexander and even his envoy to Napoleon, Balashev hastened to inform
him of his rank and mission.
 Contrary to his expectation, Davout, after
hearing him, became still surlier and ruder.
 "Give it to me.
"

Balashev replied that he had been ordered to hand it personally to the
Emperor.


"Your Emperor's orders are obeyed in your army, but here," said Davout,
"you must do as you're told.
"

And, as if to make the Russian general still more conscious of his
dependence on brute force, Davout sent an adjutant to call the officer
on duty.
 Davout took the packet and read the inscription.
.
.


A minute later the marshal's adjutant, de Castres, came in and conducted
Balashev to the quarters assigned him.


That day he dined with the marshal, at the same board on the barrels.


After four days of solitude, ennui, and consciousness of his impotence
and insignificance--particularly acute by contrast with the sphere of
power in which he had so lately moved--and after several marches with
the marshal's baggage and the French army, which occupied the
whole district, Balashev was brought to Vilna--now occupied by the
French--through the very gate by which he had left it four days
previously.
 Napoleon received Balashev in the very
house in Vilna from which Alexander had dispatched him on his mission.


The Comte de Turenne showed him into a big reception room where many
generals, gentlemen-in-waiting, and Polish magnates--several of whom
Balashev had seen at the court of the Emperor of Russia--were waiting.
 He stood a minute or two, waiting.
 He heard hurried
footsteps beyond the door, both halves of it were opened rapidly; all
was silent and then from the study the sound was heard of other steps,
firm and resolute--they were those of Napoleon.
 His short hair had evidently just been brushed, but one
lock hung down in the middle of his broad forehead.
 His full face, rather young-looking, with its
prominent chin, wore a gracious and majestic expression of imperial
welcome.


He entered briskly, with a jerk at every step and his head slightly
thrown back.
 His whole short corpulent figure with broad thick
shoulders, and chest and stomach involuntarily protruding, had that
imposing and stately appearance one sees in men of forty who live in
comfort.


He nodded in answer to Balashav's low and respectful bow, and coming up
to him at once began speaking like a man who values every moment of his
time and does not condescend to prepare what he has to say but is sure
he will always say the right thing and say it well.


"Good day, General!" said he.
 "I have received the letter you brought
from the Emperor Alexander and am very glad to see you.
" He glanced with
his large eyes into Balashav's face and immediately looked past him.


It was plain that Balashev's personality did not interest him at all.

Evidently only what took place within his own mind interested him.

Nothing outside himself had any significance for him, because everything
in the world, it seemed to him, depended entirely on his will.


"I do not, and did not, desire war," he continued, "but it has been
forced on me.


When Napoleon, having finished speaking, looked inquiringly at the
Russian envoy, Balashev began a speech he had prepared long before:
"Sire! The Emperor, my master.
.
.
 "You are flurried--compose yourself!" Napoleon
seemed to say, as with a scarcely perceptible smile he looked at
Balashev's uniform and sword.


Balashev recovered himself and began to speak.


After saying all he had been instructed to say, Balashev added that
the Emperor Alexander wished for peace, but would not enter into
negotiations except on condition that.
.
 He could not utter them, though he
wished to do so.
"

Napoleon noticed Balashev's embarrassment when uttering these last
words; his face twitched and the calf of his left leg began to quiver
rhythmically.
 During the speech that
followed, Balashev, who more than once lowered his eyes, involuntarily
noticed the quivering of Napoleon's left leg which increased the more
Napoleon raised his voice.


"I desire peace, no less than the Emperor Alexander," he began.


"The Niemen?" repeated Napoleon.


"You say the demand now is that I am to withdraw beyond the Niemen
before commencing negotiations, but in just the same way two months ago
the demand was that I should withdraw beyond the Vistula and the Oder,
and yet you are willing to negotiate.
 This quivering of his left leg was a thing Napoleon was
conscious of.


"Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistula and Oder may be made to a
Prince of Baden, but not to me!" Napoleon almost screamed, quite to his
own surprise.
 But he had begun talking,
and the more he talked the less could he control his words.


The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself and
insult Alexander--just what he had least desired at the commencement of
the interview.


"Peace has been concluded.
.
.
" he began.
 Yes," he went on, "I promised and would
have given the Emperor Alexander Moldavia and Wallachia, and now he
won't have those splendid provinces.
 Yet he might have united them to
his empire and in a single reign would have extended Russia from the
Gulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube.
 "All that, he would have
owed to my friendship.
 Oh, what a splendid reign!" he repeated several
times, then paused, drew from his pocket a gold snuffbox, lifted it to
his nose, and greedily sniffed at it.
 "But no, he has preferred to surround himself with
my enemies, and with whom? With Steins, Armfeldts, Bennigsens, and
Wintzingerodes! Stein, a traitor expelled from his own country;
Armfeldt, a rake and an intriguer; Wintzingerode, a fugitive French
subject; Bennigsen, rather more of a soldier than the others, but all
the same an incompetent who was unable to do anything in 1807 and who
should awaken terrible memories in the Emperor Alexander's mind.
.
.

Bagration alone is a military man.
.
.
.
 And what role is your young monarch
playing in that monstrous crowd? They compromise him and throw on him
the responsibility for all that happens.


"The campaign began only a week ago, and you haven't even been able to
defend Vilna.
 Your army is grumbling.
"

"On the contrary, Your Majesty," said Balashev, hardly able to remember
what had been said to him and following these verbal fireworks with
difficulty, "the troops are burning with eagerness.
.
"

"I know everything!" Napoleon interrupted him.
 I
know the number of your battalions as exactly as I know my own.
 You have
not two hundred thousand men, and I have three times that number.
 I give
you my word of honor," said Napoleon, forgetting that his word of honor
could carry no weight--"I give you my word of honor that I have five
hundred and thirty thousand men this side of the Vistula.
 Their king was insane and they changed him for
another--Bernadotte, who promptly went mad--for no Swede would ally
himself with Russia unless he were mad.


Balashev knew how to reply to each of Napoleon's remarks, and would
have done so; he continually made the gesture of a man wishing to say
something, but Napoleon always interrupted him.
 To the alleged insanity
of the Swedes, Balashev wished to reply that when Russia is on her side
Sweden is practically an island: but Napoleon gave an angry exclamation
to drown his voice.
 Balashev began to feel uncomfortable: as envoy he feared
to demean his dignity and felt the necessity of replying; but, as a man,
he shrank before the transport of groundless wrath that had evidently
seized Napoleon.
 He knew that none of the words now uttered by Napoleon
had any significance, and that Napoleon himself would be ashamed of them
when he came to his senses.


"But what do I care about your allies?" said Napoleon.
 And there will be two hundred thousand of them.
 "Yes, I
will throw you back beyond the Dvina and beyond the Dnieper, and will
re-erect against you that barrier which it was criminal and blind of
Europe to allow to be destroyed.

That is what you have gained by alienating me!" And he walked silently
several times up and down the room, his fat shoulders twitching.


He put his snuffbox into his waistcoat pocket, took it out again, lifted
it several times to his nose, and stopped in front of Balashev.
 Napoleon was
silent, still looking derisively at him and evidently not listening to
him.
 Balashev said that in Russia the best results were expected from
the war.
 Napoleon nodded condescendingly, as if to say, "I know it's
your duty to say that, but you don't believe it yourself.
 The door
opened, a gentleman-in-waiting, bending respectfully, handed the Emperor
his hat and gloves; another brought him a pocket handkerchief.
 I will detain you no longer, General; you
shall receive my letter to the Emperor.


Bessieres, Caulaincourt, and Berthier were present at that dinner.


Napoleon met Balashev cheerfully and amiably.


The Emperor was in very good spirits after his ride through Vilna, where
crowds of people had rapturously greeted and followed him.


At dinner, having placed Balashev beside him, Napoleon not only treated
him amiably but behaved as if Balashev were one of his own courtiers,
one of those who sympathized with his plans and ought to rejoice at
his success.
 In the course of conversation he mentioned Moscow and
questioned Balashev about the Russian capital, not merely as an
interested traveler asks about a new city he intends to visit, but as
if convinced that Balashev, as a Russian, must be flattered by his
curiosity.


"How many inhabitants are there in Moscow? How many houses? Is it true
that Moscow is called 'Holy Moscow'? How many churches are there in
Moscow?" he asked.


"But a large number of monasteries and churches is always a sign of the
backwardness of a people," said Napoleon, turning to Caulaincourt for
appreciation of this remark.


Balashev respectfully ventured to disagree with the French Emperor.


"Every country has its own character," said he.
"

This reply of Balashev's, which hinted at the recent defeats of the
French in Spain, was much appreciated when he related it at Alexander's
court, but it was not much appreciated at Napoleon's dinner, where it
passed unnoticed.


After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon's study, which four
days previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander.
 Napoleon sat
down, toying with his Sevres coffee cup, and motioned Balashev to a
chair beside him.
 It seemed to him that he was surrounded
by men who adored him: and he felt convinced that, after his dinner,
Balashev too was his friend and worshiper.


"They tell me this is the room the Emperor Alexander occupied? Strange,
isn't it, General?" he said, evidently not doubting that this remark
would be agreeable to his hearer since it went to prove his, Napoleon's,
superiority to Alexander.


Balashev made no reply and bowed his head in silence.


"Yes.

That I do not.
.
.
 understand.
 Has he not thought that I may do the same?"
and he turned inquiringly to Balashev, and evidently this thought turned
him back on to the track of his morning's anger, which was still fresh
in him.
 "I'll drive all his Wurttemberg, Baden, and
Weimar relations out of Germany.
.
.
.
 Yes.
 Let him
prepare an asylum for them in Russia!"

Balashev bowed his head with an air indicating that he would like to
make his bow and leave, and only listened because he could not help
hearing what was said to him.
 Napoleon did not notice this expression;
he treated Balashev not as an envoy from his enemy, but as a man
now fully devoted to him and who must rejoice at his former master's
humiliation.


"And why has the Emperor Alexander taken command of the armies? What is
the good of that? War is my profession, but his business is to reign
and not to command armies! Why has he taken on himself such a
responsibility?"

Again Napoleon brought out his snuffbox, paced several times up and down
the room in silence, and then, suddenly and unexpectedly, went up to
Balashev and with a slight smile, as confidently, quickly, and simply
as if he were doing something not merely important but pleasing to
Balashev, he raised his hand to the forty-year-old Russian general's
face and, taking him by the ear, pulled it gently, smiling with his lips
only.
 "Are the horses
ready for the general?" he added, with a slight inclination of his head
in reply to Balashev's bow.

Every detail of the interview was communicated to the Russian monarch,
and the war began.






CHAPTER VIII


After his interview with Pierre in Moscow, Prince Andrew went to
Petersburg, on business as he told his family, but really to meet
Anatole Kuragin whom he felt it necessary to encounter.
 On reaching
Petersburg he inquired for Kuragin but the latter had already left the
city.
 Pierre had warned his brother-in-law that Prince Andrew was on
his track.
 Anatole Kuragin promptly obtained an appointment from
the Minister of War and went to join the army in Moldavia.
 While in
Petersburg Prince Andrew met Kutuzov, his former commander who was
always well disposed toward him, and Kutuzov suggested that he should
accompany him to the army in Moldavia, to which the old general had
been appointed commander in chief.


Prince Andrew did not think it proper to write and challenge Kuragin.
 Not only could he no longer think the
thoughts that had first come to him as he lay gazing at the sky on the
field of Austerlitz and had later enlarged upon with Pierre, and which
had filled his solitude at Bogucharovo and then in Switzerland and Rome,
but he even dreaded to recall them and the bright and boundless horizons
they had revealed.


Of the activities that presented themselves to him, army service was the
simplest and most familiar.
 As a general on duty on Kutuzov's staff,
he applied himself to business with zeal and perseverance and surprised
Kutuzov by his willingness and accuracy in work.
 And the consciousness that the insult was not yet
avenged, that his rancor was still unspent, weighed on his heart and
poisoned the artificial tranquillity which he managed to obtain in
Turkey by means of restless, plodding, and rather vainglorious and
ambitious activity.


In the year 1812, when news of the war with Napoleon reached
Bucharest--where Kutuzov had been living for two months, passing his
days and nights with a Wallachian woman--Prince Andrew asked Kutuzov
to transfer him to the Western Army.
 During the last three
years there had been so many changes in his life, he had thought, felt,
and seen so much (having traveled both in the east and the west), that
on reaching Bald Hills it struck him as strange and unexpected to find
the way of life there unchanged and still the same in every detail.

He entered through the gates with their stone pillars and drove up
the avenue leading to the house as if he were entering an enchanted,
sleeping castle.
 Princess Mary was still the same timid, plain maiden
getting on in years, uselessly and joylessly passing the best years of
her life in fear and constant suffering.
 She had merely become
more self-confident, Prince Andrew thought.
 Dessalles, the tutor he had
brought from Switzerland, was wearing a coat of Russian cut and
talking broken Russian to the servants, but was still the same narrowly
intelligent, conscientious, and pedantic preceptor.
 The old prince
had changed in appearance only by the loss of a tooth, which left a
noticeable gap on one side of his mouth; in character he was the same as
ever, only showing still more irritability and skepticism as to what was
happening in the world.
 Little Nicholas alone had changed.
 He had grown,
become rosier, had curly dark hair, and, when merry and laughing, quite
unconsciously lifted the upper lip of his pretty little mouth just
as the little princess used to do.
 But though externally
all remained as of old, the inner relations of all these people had
changed since Prince Andrew had seen them last.
 The household was
divided into two alien and hostile camps, who changed their habits for
his sake and only met because he was there.
 To the one camp belonged
the old prince, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and the architect; to the other
Princess Mary, Dessalles, little Nicholas, and all the old nurses and
maids.


The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of Princess
Mary: that she purposely worried and irritated him, and that by
indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little Prince Nicholas.
 "Why does Prince Andrew, who sees this,
say nothing to me about his sister? Does he think me a scoundrel, or an
old fool who, without any reason, keeps his own daughter at a distance
and attaches this Frenchwoman to himself? He doesn't understand, so I
must explain it, and he must hear me out," thought the old prince.

And he began explaining why he could not put up with his daughter's
unreasonable character.


"If you ask me," said Prince Andrew, without looking up (he was
censuring his father for the first time in his life), "I did not wish to
speak about it, but as you ask me I will give you my frank opinion.
 I know how she loves and respects you.
 Since
you ask me," continued Prince Andrew, becoming irritable--as he was
always liable to do of late--"I can only say that if there are any
misunderstandings they are caused by that worthless woman, who is not
fit to be my sister's companion.
"

The old man at first stared fixedly at his son, and an unnatural smile
disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew could
not get accustomed.
"

"Ah, he has passed judgment.
.
.
 What meant still more to him was that
he sought and did not find in himself the former tenderness for his son
which he had hoped to reawaken by caressing the boy and taking him on
his knee.


"So you've decided to go, Andrew?" asked his sister.
"

"Why do you say that?" replied Princess Mary.
.
.
 Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing the room.


"Ah, my God! my God! When one thinks who and what--what trash--can cause
people misery!" he said with a malignity that alarmed Princess Mary.


She understood that when speaking of "trash" he referred not only to
Mademoiselle Bourienne, the cause of her misery, but also to the man who
had ruined his own happiness.


"Andrew! One thing I beg, I entreat of you!" she said, touching his
elbow and looking at him with eyes that shone through her tears.
 "Don't imagine that sorrow is the
work of men.
 Men are His tools.
 And then you will know the happiness of forgiving.
"

"If I were a woman I would do so, Mary.
 That is a woman's virtue.
 But
a man should not and cannot forgive and forget," he replied, and though
till that moment he had not been thinking of Kuragin, all his unexpended
anger suddenly swelled up in his heart.


"If Mary is already persuading me forgive, it means that I ought long
ago to have punished him," he thought.
 And giving her no further reply,
he began thinking of the glad vindictive moment when he would meet
Kuragin who he knew was now in the army.


Princess Mary begged him to stay one day more, saying that she knew how
unhappy her father would be if Andrew left without being reconciled to
him, but Prince Andrew replied that he would probably soon be back again
from the army and would certainly write to his father, but that the
longer he stayed now the more embittered their differences would become.


"Good-by, Andrew! Remember that misfortunes come from God, and men are
never to blame," were the last words he heard from his sister when he
took leave of her.


"Then it must be so!" thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of the
avenue from the house at Bald Hills.
 "She, poor innocent creature, is
left to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits.
 The old
man feels he is guilty, but cannot change himself.
 Why? I myself don't know.
 I want
to meet that man whom I despise, so as to give him a chance to kill and
laugh at me!"

These conditions of life had been the same before, but then they were
all connected, while now they had all tumbled to pieces.






CHAPTER IX


Prince Andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at the end of
June.
 Everyone was dissatisfied with the general course
of affairs in the Russian army, but no one anticipated any danger of
invasion of the Russian provinces, and no one thought the war would
extend farther than the western, the Polish, provinces.


Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly, to whom he had been assigned, on
the bank of the Drissa.
 As there was not a single town or large
village in the vicinity of the camp, the immense number of generals and
courtiers accompanying the army were living in the best houses of the
villages on both sides of the river, over a radius of six miles.
 Barclay
de Tolly was quartered nearly three miles from the Emperor.
 Anatole Kuragin, whom
Prince Andrew had hoped to find with the army, was not there.
 He had
gone to Petersburg, but Prince Andrew was glad to hear this.
 During the first four
days, while no duties were required of him, Prince Andrew rode round the
whole fortified camp and, by the aid of his own knowledge and by
talks with experts, tried to form a definite opinion about it.
 But the
question whether the camp was advantageous or disadvantageous remained
for him undecided.
 Already from his military experience and what he had
seen in the Austrian campaign, he had come to the conclusion that in
war the most deeply considered plans have no significance and that all
depends on the way unexpected movements of the enemy--that cannot be
foreseen--are met, and on how and by whom the whole matter is handled.

To clear up this last point for himself, Prince Andrew, utilizing his
position and acquaintances, tried to fathom the character of the control
of the army and of the men and parties engaged in it, and he deduced for
himself the following of the state of affairs.


While the Emperor had still been at Vilna, the forces had been divided
into three armies.
 In the
orders issued it was stated, not that the Emperor would take command,
but only that he would be with the army.
 The Emperor, moreover, had
with him not a commander in chief's staff but the imperial headquarters
staff.
 In attendance on him was the head of the imperial staff,
Quartermaster General Prince Volkonski, as well as generals, imperial
aides-de-camp, diplomatic officials, and a large number of foreigners,
but not the army staff.
 Besides these, there were in attendance on the
Emperor without any definite appointments: Arakcheev, the ex-Minister
of War; Count Bennigsen, the senior general in rank; the Grand Duke
Tsarevich Constantine Pavlovich; Count Rumyantsev, the Chancellor;
Stein, a former Prussian minister; Armfeldt, a Swedish general; Pfuel,
the chief author of the plan of campaign; Paulucci, an adjutant general
and Sardinian emigre; Wolzogen--and many others.
 Though these men had
no military appointment in the army, their position gave them influence,
and often a corps commander, or even the commander in chief, did not
know in what capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen, the Grand Duke,
Arakcheev, or Prince Volkonski, or was given this or that advice and did
not know whether a certain order received in the form of advice emanated
from the man who gave it or from the Emperor and whether it had to be
executed or not.
 But this was only the external condition; the essential
significance of the presence of the Emperor and of all these people,
from a courtier's point of view (and in an Emperor's vicinity all became
courtiers), was clear to everyone.
 The Grand Duke
was there because it suited him to be.
 The ex-Minister Stein was there
because his advice was useful and the Emperor Alexander held him in high
esteem personally.
 Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a general
full of self-confidence, a quality that always influenced Alexander.
 The
adjutants general were there because they always accompanied the
Emperor, and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawn up
the plan of campaign against Napoleon and, having induced Alexander to
believe in the efficacy of that plan, was directing the whole business
of the war.
 With Pfuel was Wolzogen, who expressed Pfuel's thoughts in
a more comprehensible way than Pfuel himself (who was a harsh, bookish
theorist, self-confident to the point of despising everyone else) was
able to do.


Among the opinions and voices in this immense, restless, brilliant,
and proud sphere, Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply defined
subdivisions of tendencies and parties:

The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents--military theorists
who believed in a science of war with immutable laws--laws of oblique
movements, outflankings, and so forth.
 Besides being advocates of bold
action, this section also represented nationalism, which made them still
more one-sided in the dispute.
 They were Russians: Bagration, Ermolov
(who was beginning to come to the front), and others.

The members of this party, chiefly civilians and to whom Arakcheev
belonged, thought and said what men who have no convictions but wish
to seem to have some generally say.
 They said that undoubtedly war,
particularly against such a genius as Bonaparte (they called him
Bonaparte now), needs most deeply devised plans and profound scientific
knowledge and in that respect Pfuel was a genius, but at the same time
it had to be acknowledged that the theorists are often one sided, and
therefore one should not trust them absolutely, but should also listen
to what Pfuel's opponents and practical men of experience in warfare had
to say, and then choose a middle course.
 Though, by this course, neither one aim
nor the other could be attained, yet it seemed best to the adherents of
this third party.
 The men of this party had both the quality
and the defect of frankness in their opinions.
 They feared Napoleon,
recognized his strength and their own weakness, and frankly said so.
 "Be he what he may" (they always began like that), "he is an
honest, practical man and we have nobody better.
 Give him real power,
for war cannot be conducted successfully without unity of command, and
he will show what he can do, as he did in Finland.
 If our army is well
organized and strong and has withdrawn to Drissa without suffering
any defeats, we owe this entirely to Barclay.
"

The sixth party, the Bennigsenites, said, on the contrary, that at any
rate there was no one more active and experienced than Bennigsen: "and
twist about as you may, you will have to come to Bennigsen eventually.

Let the others make mistakes now!" said they, arguing that our
retirement to Drissa was a most shameful reverse and an unbroken series
of blunders.
 "The more mistakes that are made the better.
 It will at any
rate be understood all the sooner that things cannot go on like this.

What is wanted is not some Barclay or other, but a man like Bennigsen,
who made his mark in 1807, and to whom Napoleon himself did justice--a
man whose authority would be willingly recognized, and Bennigsen is the
only such man.
"

The seventh party consisted of the sort of people who are always to
be found, especially around young sovereigns, and of whom there were
particularly many round Alexander--generals and imperial aides-de-camp
passionately devoted to the Emperor, not merely as a monarch but as a
man, adoring him sincerely and disinterestedly, as Rostov had done
in 1805, and who saw in him not only all the virtues but all human
capabilities as well.
 In the troubled waters of
conflicting and intersecting intrigues that eddied about the Emperor's
headquarters, it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable at
other times.
 A man who simply wished to retain his lucrative post would
today agree with Pfuel, tomorrow with his opponent, and the day after,
merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor, would declare
that he had no opinion at all on the matter.
 Another who wished to
gain some advantage would attract the Emperor's attention by loudly
advocating the very thing the Emperor had hinted at the day before,
and would dispute and shout at the council, beating his breast and
challenging those who did not agree with him to duels, thereby proving
that he was prepared to sacrifice himself for the common good.
 A third,
in the absence of opponents, between two councils would simply solicit
a special gratuity for his faithful services, well knowing that at that
moment people would be too busy to refuse him.
 A fourth while seemingly
overwhelmed with work would often come accidentally under the Emperor's
eye.
 Amid the
uncertainties of the position, with the menace of serious danger giving
a peculiarly threatening character to everything, amid this vortex of
intrigue, egotism, conflict of views and feelings, and the diversity
of race among these people--this eighth and largest party of those
preoccupied with personal interests imparted great confusion and
obscurity to the common task.


From among all these parties, just at the time Prince Andrew reached
the army, another, a ninth party, was being formed and was beginning
to raise its voice.
 This was the party of the elders, reasonable men
experienced and capable in state affairs, who, without sharing any of
those conflicting opinions, were able to take a detached view of what
was going on at the staff at headquarters and to consider means of
escape from this muddle, indecision, intricacy, and weakness.


Just at the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa,
Shishkov, the Secretary of State and one of the chief representatives of
this party, wrote a letter to the Emperor which Arakcheev and Balashev
agreed to sign.


That arousing of the people by their sovereign and his call to them to
defend their country--the very incitement which was the chief cause of
Russia's triumph in so far as it was produced by the Tsar's personal
presence in Moscow--was suggested to the Emperor, and accepted by him,
as a pretext for quitting the army.


News was received at the Emperor's quarters that very day of a fresh
movement by Napoleon which might endanger the army--news subsequently
found to be false.
 And that morning Colonel Michaud had ridden round the
Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had pointed out to him that
this fortified camp constructed by Pfuel, and till then considered
a chef-d'oeuvre of tactical science which would ensure Napoleon's
destruction, was an absurdity, threatening the destruction of the
Russian army.


Chernyshev was sitting at a window in the first room with a French novel
in his hand.
 This room had probably been a music room; there was still
an organ in it on which some rugs were piled, and in one corner stood
the folding bedstead of Bennigsen's adjutant.
 This adjutant was also
there and sat dozing on the rolled-up bedding, evidently exhausted by
work or by feasting.
 Two doors led from the room, one straight on into
what had been the drawing room, and another, on the right, to the study.

Through the first door came the sound of voices conversing in German
and occasionally in French.
 To this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish General
Armfeldt, Adjutant General Wolzogen, Wintzingerode (whom Napoleon had
referred to as a renegade French subject), Michaud, Toll, Count Stein
who was not a military man at all, and Pfuel himself, who, as Prince
Andrew had heard, was the mainspring of the whole affair.
 Prince Andrew
had an opportunity of getting a good look at him, for Pfuel arrived soon
after himself and, in passing through to the drawing room, stopped a
minute to speak to Chernyshev.


At first sight, Pfuel, in his ill-made uniform of a Russian general,
which fitted him badly like a fancy costume, seemed familiar to Prince
Andrew, though he saw him now for the first time.
 Prince Andrew had never yet seen a German
theorist in whom all the characteristics of those others were united to
such an extent.
 His face was
much wrinkled and his eyes deep set.
 His hair had evidently been hastily
brushed smooth in front of the temples, but stuck up behind in quaint
little tufts.
 He entered the room, looking restlessly and angrily
around, as if afraid of everything in that large apartment.
 Awkwardly
holding up his sword, he addressed Chernyshev and asked in German where
the Emperor was.
 One could see that he wished to pass through the rooms
as quickly as possible, finish with the bows and greetings, and sit down
to business in front of a map, where he would feel at home.
 He nodded
hurriedly in reply to Chernyshev, and smiled ironically on hearing that
the sovereign was inspecting the fortifications that he, Pfuel, had
planned in accord with his theory.
 He muttered something to himself
abruptly and in a bass voice, as self-assured Germans do--it might
have been "stupid fellow".
 Prince Andrew did not catch
what he said and would have passed on, but Chernyshev introduced him to
Pfuel, remarking that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey where the
war had terminated so fortunately.


Pfuel, always inclined to be irritably sarcastic, was particularly
disturbed that day, evidently by the fact that they had dared to inspect
and criticize his camp in his absence.
 From this short interview with
Pfuel, Prince Andrew, thanks to his Austerlitz experiences, was able to
form a clear conception of the man.
 A Frenchman is self-assured because he
regards himself personally, both in mind and body, as irresistibly
attractive to men and women.
 An Englishman is self-assured, as being a
citizen of the best-organized state in the world, and therefore as an
Englishman always knows what he should do and knows that all he does as
an Englishman is undoubtedly correct.
 An Italian is self-assured because
he is excitable and easily forgets himself and other people.
 A Russian
is self-assured just because he knows nothing and does not want to know
anything, since he does not believe that anything can be known.


Pfuel was evidently of that sort.
 He had a science--the theory of
oblique movements deduced by him from the history of Frederick the
Great's wars, and all he came across in the history of more recent
warfare seemed to him absurd and barbarous--monstrous collisions in
which so many blunders were committed by both sides that these wars
could not be called wars, they did not accord with the theory, and
therefore could not serve as material for science.


In 1806 Pfuel had been one of those responsible, for the plan of
campaign that ended in Jena and Auerstadt, but he did not see the least
proof of the fallibility of his theory in the disasters of that war.
 On
the contrary, the deviations made from his theory were, in his opinion,
the sole cause of the whole disaster, and with characteristically
gleeful sarcasm he would remark, "There, I said the whole affair would
go to the devil!" Pfuel was one of those theoreticians who so love
their theory that they lose sight of the theory's object--its practical
application.
 His love of theory made him hate everything practical, and
he would not listen to it.
 The unbrushed tufts
of hair sticking up behind and the hastily brushed hair on his temples
expressed this most eloquently.


He passed into the next room, and the deep, querulous sounds of his
voice were at once heard from there.
 The Emperor was following him, and Bennigsen had hastened on
to make some preparations and to be ready to receive the sovereign.

Chernyshev and Prince Andrew went out into the porch, where the Emperor,
who looked fatigued, was dismounting.
 Marquis Paulucci was talking to
him with particular warmth and the Emperor, with his head bent to the
left, was listening with a dissatisfied air.
 The Emperor moved forward
evidently wishing to end the conversation, but the flushed and excited
Italian, oblivious of decorum, followed him and continued to speak.
.
"

The Emperor went into the study.
 What had happened was that news (which afterwards proved to be
false) had been received during the night of a movement by the French to
outflank the Drissa camp.
 The reason for this was
inexplicable (unless he wished to show that he, too, could have an
opinion), but he urged that at this point the army should unite and
there await the enemy.
 It was plain that Armfeldt had thought out that
plan long ago and now expounded it not so much to answer the questions
put--which, in fact, his plan did not answer--as to avail himself of the
opportunity to air it.
 Young Count Toll objected to the Swedish general's views
more warmly than anyone else, and in the course of the dispute drew from
his side pocket a well-filled notebook, which he asked permission to
read to them.
 In these voluminous notes Toll suggested another scheme,
totally different from Armfeldt's or Pfuel's plan of campaign.
 In answer
to Toll, Paulucci suggested an advance and an attack, which, he urged,
could alone extricate us from the present uncertainty and from the trap
(as he called the Drissa camp) in which we were situated.
 So when
Prince Volkonski, who was in the chair, called on him to give his
opinion, he merely said:

"Why ask me? General Armfeldt has proposed a splendid position with an
exposed rear, or why not this Italian gentleman's attack--very fine, or
a retreat, also good! Why ask me?" said he.
 "What
is the difficulty? Nonsense, childishness!"

He went up to the map and speaking rapidly began proving that no
eventuality could alter the efficiency of the Drissa camp, that
everything had been foreseen, and that if the enemy were really going to
outflank it, the enemy would inevitably be destroyed.
 He kept laughing sarcastically, he
demonstrated, and at last contemptuously ceased to demonstrate, like
a mathematician who ceases to prove in various ways the accuracy of
a problem that has already been proved.
 Wolzogen took his place and
continued to explain his views in French, every now and then turning to
Pfuel and saying, "Is it not so, your excellency?" But Pfuel, like a man
heated in a fight who strikes those on his own side, shouted angrily at
his own supporter, Wolzogen:

"Well, of course, what more is there to explain?"

Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wolzogen simultaneously in French.
 Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence.


Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel, angry,
determined, and absurdly self-confident as he was.
 He was
ridiculous, and unpleasantly sarcastic, but yet he inspired involuntary
respect by his boundless devotion to an idea.

Everything was assumed to be possible for Napoleon, they expected him
from every side, and invoked his terrible name to shatter each other's
proposals.
 Pfuel alone seemed to consider Napoleon a barbarian like
everyone else who opposed his theory.
 But besides this feeling of
respect, Pfuel evoked pity in Prince Andrew.
 From the tone in which
the courtiers addressed him and the way Paulucci had allowed himself to
speak of him to the Emperor, but above all from a certain desperation
in Pfuel's own expressions, it was clear that the others knew, and Pfuel
himself felt, that his fall was at hand.
 And despite his self-confidence
and grumpy German sarcasm he was pitiable, with his hair smoothly
brushed on the temples and sticking up in tufts behind.
 Though he
concealed the fact under a show of irritation and contempt, he was
evidently in despair that the sole remaining chance of verifying his
theory by a huge experiment and proving its soundness to the whole world
was slipping away from him.
 Prince Andrew, listening to this
polyglot talk and to these surmises, plans, refutations, and shouts,
felt nothing but amazement at what they were saying.
 Sometimes--when there is not a coward
at the front to shout, 'We are cut off!' and start running, but a brave
and jolly lad who shouts, 'Hurrah!'--a detachment of five thousand
is worth thirty thousand, as at Schon Grabern, while at times fifty
thousand run from eight thousand, as at Austerlitz.
 What science can
there be in a matter in which, as in all practical matters, nothing
can be defined and everything depends on innumerable conditions, the
significance of which is determined at a particular moment which arrives
no one knows when? Armfeldt says our army is cut in half, and Paulucci
says we have got the French army between two fires; Michaud says that
the worthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in having the river behind it,
and Pfuel says that is what constitutes its strength; Toll proposes
one plan, Armfeldt another, and they are all good and all bad, and the
advantages of any suggestions can be seen only at the moment of trial.
 Bagration was the best, Napoleon himself admitted that.
 And of
Bonaparte himself! I remember his limited, self-satisfied face on the
field of Austerlitz.
 Not only does a good army commander not need any
special qualities, on the contrary he needs the absence of the highest
and best human attributes--love, poetry, tenderness, and philosophic
inquiring doubt.
 He should be limited, firmly convinced that what he
is doing is very important (otherwise he will not have sufficient
patience), and only then will he be a brave leader.
 God forbid that he
should be humane, should love, or pity, or think of what is just
and unjust.
 It is understandable that a theory of their 'genius' was
invented for them long ago because they have power! The success of a
military action depends not on them, but on the man in the ranks who
shouts, 'We are lost!' or who shouts, 'Hurrah!' And only in the ranks
can one serve with assurance of being useful.
"

So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to the talking, and he roused
himself only when Paulucci called him and everyone was leaving.


At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where he would
like to serve, and Prince Andrew lost his standing in court circles
forever by not asking to remain attached to the sovereign's person, but
for permission to serve in the army.
 On receiving this letter, Nicholas did not
even make any attempt to get leave of absence or to retire from the
army, but wrote to his parents that he was sorry Natasha was ill and her
engagement broken off, and that he would do all he could to meet their
wishes.
 To Sonya he wrote separately.
 But now, at the commencement of the
campaign, I should feel dishonored, not only in my comrades' eyes but
in my own, if I preferred my own happiness to my love and duty to the
Fatherland.
 Believe me, directly
the war is over, if I am still alive and still loved by you, I will
throw up everything and fly to you, to press you forever to my ardent
breast.
 The
autumn in Otradnoe with the hunting, and the winter with the Christmas
holidays and Sonya's love, had opened out to him a vista of tranquil
rural joys and peace such as he had never known before, and which now
allured him.
.
.
 But now the campaign was beginning, and he had
to remain with his regiment.
 And since it had to be so, Nicholas Rostov,
as was natural to him, felt contented with the life he led in the
regiment and was able to find pleasure in that life.


On his return from his furlough Nicholas, having been joyfully welcomed
by his comrades, was sent to obtain remounts and brought back from the
Ukraine excellent horses which pleased him and earned him commendation
from his commanders.
 During his absence he had been promoted captain,
and when the regiment was put on war footing with an increase in
numbers, he was again allotted his old squadron.


The campaign began, the regiment was moved into Poland on double pay,
new officers arrived, new men and horses, and above all everybody was
infected with the merrily excited mood that goes with the commencement
of a war, and Rostov, conscious of his advantageous position in the
regiment, devoted himself entirely to the pleasures and interests of
military service, though he knew that sooner or later he would have to
relinquish them.


The troops retired from Vilna for various complicated reasons of state,
political and strategic.
 Each step of the retreat was accompanied by
a complicated interplay of interests, arguments, and passions at
headquarters.
 For the Pavlograd hussars, however, the whole of this
retreat during the finest period of summer and with sufficient supplies
was a very simple and agreeable business.


It was only at headquarters that there was depression, uneasiness, and
intriguing; in the body of the army they did not ask themselves where
they were going or why.
 From Sventsyani they retired farther and farther to Drissa,
and thence again beyond Drissa, drawing near to the frontier of Russia
proper.


On the thirteenth of July the Pavlograds took part in a serious action
for the first time.


On the twelfth of July, on the eve of that action, there was a heavy
storm of rain and hail.
 In general, the summer of 1812 was remarkable
for its storms.
 The rain was descending in torrents, and Rostov, with a young
officer named Ilyin, his protege, was sitting in a hastily constructed
shelter.
 Have you heard of Raevski's
exploit?"

And the officer gave them details of the Saltanov battle, which he had
heard at the staff.


Rostov, smoking his pipe and turning his head about as the water
trickled down his neck, listened inattentively, with an occasional
glance at Ilyin, who was pressing close to him.
 This officer, a lad
of sixteen who had recently joined the regiment, was now in the same
relation to Nicholas that Nicholas had been to Denisov seven years
before.
 Ilyin tried to imitate Rostov in everything and adored him as a
girl might have done.
 He recounted how
Raevski had led his two sons onto the dam under terrific fire and had
charged with them beside him.
 Rostov heard the story and not only said
nothing to encourage Zdrzhinski's enthusiasm but, on the contrary,
looked like a man ashamed of what he was hearing, though with no
intention of contradicting it.
 Rostov looked at him
in silence.
 And even those who did see it
would not have been much stimulated by it, for what had they to do with
Raevski's tender paternal feelings when their own skins were in danger?
And besides, the fate of the Fatherland did not depend on whether
they took the Saltanov dam or not, as we are told was the case at
Thermopylae.
 But he did not express his
thoughts, for in such matters, too, he had gained experience.
 He knew
that this tale redounded to the glory of our arms and so one had to
pretend not to doubt it.
 "My stockings and shirt.
.
 The rain
seems less heavy.
 We can at least get
dry there, and Mary Hendrikhovna's there.
"

Mary Hendrikhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a pretty young
German woman he had married in Poland.


Rostov threw his cloak over his shoulders, shouted to Lavrushka to
follow with the things, and--now slipping in the mud, now splashing
right through it--set off with Ilyin in the lessening rain and the
darkness that was occasionally rent by distant lightning.






CHAPTER XIII


In the tavern, before which stood the doctor's covered cart, there were
already some five officers.

Rostov and Ilyin, on entering the room, were welcomed with merry shouts
and laughter.


"Dear me, how jolly we are!" said Rostov laughing.
"

"Don't mess Mary Hendrikhovna's dress!" cried other voices.


Rostov and Ilyin hastened to find a corner where they could change into
dry clothes without offending Mary Hendrikhovna's modesty.
 One offered her a
clean handkerchief to wipe her charming hands, another spread a jacket
under her little feet to keep them from the damp, another hung his coat
over the window to keep out the draft, and yet another waved the flies
off her husband's face, lest he should wake up.


"Leave him alone," said Mary Hendrikhovna, smiling timidly and happily.

"He is sleeping well as it is, after a sleepless night.
"

"Oh, no, Mary Hendrikhovna," replied the officer, "one must look after
the doctor.
 Perhaps he'll take pity on me someday, when it comes to
cutting off a leg or an arm for me.
"

There were only three tumblers, the water was so muddy that one could
not make out whether the tea was strong or weak, and the samovar held
only six tumblers of water, but this made it all the pleasanter to
take turns in order of seniority to receive one's tumbler from Mary
Hendrikhovna's plump little hands with their short and not overclean
nails.
 All the officers appeared to be, and really were, in love with
her that evening.
 Even those playing cards behind the partition soon
left their game and came over to the samovar, yielding to the general
mood of courting Mary Hendrikhovna.
 She, seeing herself surrounded by
such brilliant and polite young men, beamed with satisfaction, try as
she might to hide it, and perturbed as she evidently was each time her
husband moved in his sleep behind her.


There was only one spoon, sugar was more plentiful than anything
else, but it took too long to dissolve, so it was decided that Mary
Hendrikhovna should stir the sugar for everyone in turn.
"

Mary Hendrikhovna assented and began looking for the spoon which someone
meanwhile had pounced on.


"Use your finger, Mary Hendrikhovna, it will be still nicer," said
Rostov.


Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought it to
Mary Hendrikhovna, asking her to stir it with her finger.


"This is my cup," said he.
 "Only dip your finger in it and I'll drink it
all up.
 At Rostov's suggestion it
was agreed that whoever became "King" should have the right to kiss Mary
Hendrikhovna's hand, and that the "Booby" should go to refill and reheat
the samovar for the doctor when the latter awoke.


"Well, but supposing Mary Hendrikhovna is 'King'?" asked Ilyin.
 He had been awake for
some time, listening to what was being said, and evidently found nothing
entertaining or amusing in what was going on.
 His face was sad and
depressed.
 As soon as he
had left the room all the officers burst into loud laughter and Mary
Hendrikhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears and thereby became
still more attractive to them.
 Returning from the yard, the doctor
told his wife (who had ceased to smile so happily, and looked at him in
alarm, awaiting her sentence) that the rain had ceased and they must go
to sleep in their covered cart, or everything in it would be stolen.


"But I'll send an orderly.
.
.
 Two of them!" said Rostov.


Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife, the officers grew
still merrier, and some of them could not refrain from laughter, for
which they hurriedly sought plausible pretexts.
 When he had gone, taking
his wife with him, and had settled down with her in their covered cart,
the officers lay down in the tavern, covering themselves with their
wet cloaks, but they did not sleep for a long time; now they exchanged
remarks, recalling the doctor's uneasiness and his wife's delight, now
they ran out into the porch and reported what was taking place in the
covered trap.
 Several times Rostov, covering his head, tried to go
to sleep, but some remark would arouse him and conversation would be
resumed, to the accompaniment of unreasoning, merry, childlike laughter.






CHAPTER XIV


It was nearly three o'clock but no one was yet asleep, when the
quartermaster appeared with an order to move on to the little town
of Ostrovna.
 Day was
breaking, the rain had ceased, and the clouds were dispersing.
 It felt
damp and cold, especially in clothes that were still moist.
 As they left
the tavern in the twilight of the dawn, Rostov and Ilyin both glanced
under the wet and glistening leather hood of the doctor's cart, from
under the apron of which his feet were sticking out, and in the middle
of which his wife's nightcap was visible and her sleepy breathing
audible.


"She really is a dear little thing," said Rostov to Ilyin, who was
following him.


"A charming woman!" said Ilyin, with all the gravity of a boy of
sixteen.


Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road.
 The command
was heard to "mount" and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted.
 It was growing lighter and lighter.
 Rostov,
always closely followed by Ilyin, rode along the side of the road
between two rows of birch trees.


When campaigning, Rostov allowed himself the indulgence of riding not
a regimental but a Cossack horse.
 A judge of horses and a sportsman,
he had lately procured himself a large, fine, mettlesome, Donets horse,
dun-colored, with light mane and tail, and when he rode it no one could
outgallop him.
 To ride this horse was a pleasure to him, and he thought
of the horse, of the morning, of the doctor's wife, but not once of the
impending danger.


Formerly, when going into action, Rostov had felt afraid; now he had
not the least feeling of fear.
 He was fearless, not because he had grown
used to being under fire (one cannot grow used to danger), but because
he had learned how to manage his thoughts when in danger.
 He had grown
accustomed when going into action to think about anything but what would
seem most likely to interest him--the impending danger.
 Now he rode beside Ilyin under the birch trees,
occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that met his hand, sometimes
touching his horse's side with his foot, or, without turning round,
handing a pipe he had finished to an hussar riding behind him, with as
calm and careless an air as though he were merely out for a ride.
 He
glanced with pity at the excited face of Ilyin, who talked much and in
great agitation.
 He knew from experience the tormenting expectation of
terror and death the cornet was suffering and knew that only time could
help him.


As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath the clouds,
the wind fell, as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer morning
after the storm; drops still continued to fall, but vertically now, and
all was still.
 The whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappeared
behind a long narrow cloud that hung above it.
 A few minutes later it
reappeared brighter still from behind the top of the cloud, tearing its
edge.
 Everything grew bright and glittered.


The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery--which
had also quickened their pace--rode down a hill, and passing through an
empty and deserted village again ascended.
 The horses began to lather
and the men to flush.


"Halt! Dress your ranks!" the order of the regimental commander was
heard ahead.
 "Forward by the left.
 Walk, march!" came the order from in
front.


And the hussars, passing along the line of troops on the left flank of
our position, halted behind our Uhlans who were in the front line.
 To
the right stood our infantry in a dense column: they were the reserve.
 In front, beyond a hollow dale, could be seen the enemy's
columns and guns.
 Our advanced line, already in action, could be heard
briskly exchanging shots with the enemy in the dale.


At these sounds, long unheard, Rostov's spirits rose, as at the strains
of the merriest music.
 Trap-ta-ta-tap! cracked the shots, now together,
now several quickly one after another.


The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour.
 A cannonade
began.
 Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the squadron,
halted, spoke to the commander of the regiment, and rode up the hill to
the guns.


After Ostermann had gone, a command rang out to the Uhlans.


"Form column! Prepare to charge!"

The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the cavalry
to pass.
 The Uhlans started, the streamers on their spears fluttering,
and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below to
the left.


As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill, the hussars were ordered up
the hill to support the battery.
 As they took the places vacated by the
Uhlans, bullets came from the front, whining and whistling, but fell
spent without taking effect.


The sounds, which he had not heard for so long, had an even more
pleasurable and exhilarating effect on Rostov than the previous sounds
of firing.
 They swooped down close to the French dragoons, something
confused happened there amid the smoke, and five minutes later our
Uhlans were galloping back, not to the place they had occupied but more
to the left, and among the orange-colored Uhlans on chestnut horses and
behind them, in a large group, blue French dragoons on gray horses could
be seen.






CHAPTER XV


Rostov, with his keen sportsman's eye, was one of the first to catch
sight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans.
 He felt
instinctively that if the hussars struck at the French dragoons now, the
latter could not withstand them, but if a charge was to be made it must
be done now, at that very moment, or it would be too late.
 A captain, standing beside him, was gazing like himself with
eyes fixed on the cavalry below them.


"Andrew Sevastyanych!" said Rostov.
 "You know, we could crush them.
.
"

"A fine thing too!" replied the captain, "and really.
.
.
 He acted as he
did when hunting, without reflecting or considering.
 He saw the dragoons
near and that they were galloping in disorder; he knew they could not
withstand an attack--knew there was only that moment and that if he let
it slip it would not return.
 He touched his horse, gave the word of command,
and immediately, hearing behind him the tramp of the horses of his
deployed squadron, rode at full trot downhill toward the dragoons.
 The dragoons were now close at hand.
 With the same
feeling with which he had galloped across the path of a wolf, Rostov
gave rein to his Donets horse and galloped to intersect the path of the
dragoons' disordered lines.
 Nearly all the French dragoons were
galloping back.
 Rostov, picking out one on a gray horse, dashed after
him.
 On the way he came upon a bush, his gallant horse cleared it, and
almost before he had righted himself in his saddle he saw that he would
immediately overtake the enemy he had selected.
 The
officer fell, not so much from the blow--which had but slightly cut his
arm above the elbow--as from the shock to his horse and from fright.
 The French dragoon officer was hopping with one foot on
the ground, the other being caught in the stirrup.
 His pale and mud-stained face--fair and
young, with a dimple in the chin and light-blue eyes--was not an enemy's
face at all suited to a battlefield, but a most ordinary, homelike face.

Before Rostov had decided what to do with him, the officer cried, "I
surrender!" He hurriedly but vainly tried to get his foot out of the
stirrup and did not remove his frightened blue eyes from Rostov's face.

Some hussars who galloped up disengaged his foot and helped him into the
saddle.
 On all sides, the hussars were busy with the dragoons; one was
wounded, but though his face was bleeding, he would not give up his
horse; another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round him;
a third was being helped by an hussar to mount his horse.
 Rostov galloped back with the rest, aware of
an unpleasant feeling of depression in his heart.
 Something vague and
confused, which he could not at all account for, had come over him with
the capture of that officer and the blow he had dealt him.
 George's Cross.
 When sent for by Count
Ostermann, Rostov, remembering that he had charged without orders,
felt sure his commander was sending for him to punish him for breach of
discipline.
 "But what
on earth is worrying me?" he asked himself as he rode back from the
general.
 "Ilyin? No, he's safe.
 Have I disgraced myself in any way? No,
that's not it.
" Something else, resembling remorse, tormented him.
 "Yes,
oh yes, that French officer with the dimple.
 He was sitting in
his foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse and looked anxiously about
him; The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a wound.
 He
glanced at Rostov with a feigned smile and waved his hand in greeting.

He drank reluctantly, tried to remain alone, and kept turning something
over in his mind.
 George's Cross and even given him
a reputation for bravery, and there was something he could not at all
understand.
 "So
that's all there is in what is called heroism! And did I do it for my
country's sake? And how was he to blame, with his dimple and blue eyes?
And how frightened he was! He thought that I should kill him.
 Why should
I kill him? My hand trembled.
 And they have given me a St.
 George's
Cross.
.
.
 I can't make it out at all.
"

But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could reach
no clear solution of what puzzled him so, the wheel of fortune in the
service, as often happens, turned in his favor.
 After the affair at
Ostrovna he was brought into notice, received command of an hussar
battalion, and when a brave officer was needed he was chosen.






CHAPTER XVI


On receiving news of Natasha's illness, the countess, though not quite
well yet and still weak, went to Moscow with Petya and the rest of the
household, and the whole family moved from Marya Dmitrievna's house to
their own and settled down in town.
 She could not eat
or sleep, grew visibly thinner, coughed, and, as the doctors made them
feel, was in danger.
 They could not think of anything but how to help
her.
 This simple
thought could not occur to the doctors (as it cannot occur to a wizard
that he is unable to work his charms) because the business of their
lives was to cure, and they received money for it and had spent the best
years of their lives on that business.
 But, above all, that thought
was kept out of their minds by the fact that they saw they were
really useful, as in fact they were to the whole Rostov family.
 Their
usefulness did not depend on making the patient swallow substances for
the most part harmful (the harm was scarcely perceptible, as they
were given in small doses), but they were useful, necessary, and
indispensable because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and
of those who loved her--and that is why there are, and always will be,
pseudo-healers, wise women, homeopaths, and allopaths.
 They satisfied
that eternal human need for hope of relief, for sympathy, and that
something should be done, which is felt by those who are suffering.
 They
satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child, when it
wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt.
 A child knocks itself
and runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the aching
spot rubbed or kissed, and it feels better when this is done.
 The child
cannot believe that the strongest and wisest of its people have no
remedy for its pain, and the hope of relief and the expression of its
mother's sympathy while she rubs the bump comforts it.
 The doctors were
of use to Natasha because they kissed and rubbed her bump, assuring her
that it would soon pass if only the coachman went to the chemist's in
the Arbat and got a powder and some pills in a pretty box for a ruble
and seventy kopeks, and if she took those powders in boiled water at
intervals of precisely two hours, neither more nor less.


What would Sonya and the count and countess have done, how would they
have looked, if nothing had been done, if there had not been those pills
to give by the clock, the warm drinks, the chicken cutlets, and all the
other details of life ordered by the doctors, the carrying out of which
supplied an occupation and consolation to the family circle? How would
the count have borne his dearly loved daughter's illness had he not
known that it was costing him a thousand rubles, and that he would not
grudge thousands more to benefit her, or had he not known that if her
illness continued he would not grudge yet other thousands and would take
her abroad for consultations there, and had he not been able to explain
the details of how Metivier and Feller had not understood the symptoms,
but Frise had, and Mudrov had diagnosed them even better? What would the
countess have done had she not been able sometimes to scold the invalid
for not strictly obeying the doctor's orders?

"You'll never get well like that," she would say, forgetting her grief
in her vexation, "if you won't obey the doctor and take your medicine at
the right time! You mustn't trifle with it, you know, or it may turn to
pneumonia," she would go on, deriving much comfort from the utterance of
that foreign word, incomprehensible to others as well as to herself.


What would Sonya have done without the glad consciousness that she had
not undressed during the first three nights, in order to be ready to
carry out all the doctor's injunctions with precision, and that she
still kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper time when the
slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box had to be administered?
Even to Natasha herself it was pleasant to see that so many sacrifices
were being made for her sake, and to know that she had to take medicine
at certain hours, though she declared that no medicine would cure her
and that it was all nonsense.


The doctor came every day, felt her pulse, looked at her tongue, and
regardless of her grief-stricken face joked with her.
.
 And
the countess, trying to conceal the action from herself and from him,
slipped a gold coin into his hand and always returned to the patient
with a more tranquil mind.


The symptoms of Natasha's illness were that she ate little, slept
little, coughed, and was always low-spirited.


In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders out
of the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was fond of
such things made a large collection, and in spite of being deprived of
the country life to which she was accustomed, youth prevailed.
 Natasha's
grief began to be overlaid by the impressions of daily life, it ceased
to press so painfully on her heart, it gradually faded into the past,
and she began to recover physically.
 She could not
sing.
 As soon as she began to laugh, or tried to sing by herself, tears
choked her: tears of remorse, tears at the recollection of those pure
times which could never return, tears of vexation that she should so
uselessly have ruined her young life which might have been so happy.
 Without any need of self-restraint, no wish to
coquet ever entered her head.
 Something stood
sentinel within her and forbade her every joy.
 Besides, she had lost all
the old interests of her carefree girlish life that had been so full
of hope.
 What would she not have given to bring back even a
single day of that time! But it was gone forever.
 Her presentiment at
the time had not deceived her--that that state of freedom and readiness
for any enjoyment would not return again.


It comforted her to reflect that she was not better as she had formerly
imagined, but worse, much worse, than anybody else in the world.
 She knew that, and asked herself, "What next?"
But there was nothing to come.
 There was no joy in life, yet life was
passing.
 She hardly ever left the house and of those who came
to see them was glad to see only one person, Pierre.
 Natasha unconsciously
felt this delicacy and so found great pleasure in his society.
 But
she was not even grateful to him for it; nothing good on Pierre's part
seemed to her to be an effort, it seemed so natural for him to be kind
to everyone that there was no merit in his kindness.
 Sometimes Natasha
noticed embarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence,
especially when he wanted to do something to please her, or feared that
something they spoke of would awaken memories distressing to her.
 She
noticed this and attributed it to his general kindness and shyness,
which she imagined must be the same toward everyone as it was to her.

After those involuntary words--that if he were free he would have asked
on his knees for her hand and her love--uttered at a moment when she was
so strongly agitated, Pierre never spoke to Natasha of his feelings;
and it seemed plain to her that those words, which had then so comforted
her, were spoken as all sorts of meaningless words are spoken to comfort
a crying child.


Before the end of the fast of St.
 Peter, Agrafena Ivanovna Belova, a
country neighbor of the Rostovs, came to Moscow to pay her devotions at
the shrines of the Moscow saints.


The countess was pleased with Natasha's zeal; after the poor results of
the medical treatment, in the depths of her heart she hoped that prayer
might help her daughter more than medicines and, though not without
fear and concealing it from the doctor, she agreed to Natasha's wish and
entrusted her to Belova.
 She was
afraid of being late for Matins.
 Hastily washing, and meekly putting on
her shabbiest dress and an old mantilla, Natasha, shivering in the fresh
air, went out into the deserted streets lit by the clear light of dawn.

By Agrafena Ivanovna's advice Natasha prepared herself not in their
own parish, but at a church where, according to the devout Agrafena
Ivanovna, the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life.
 There were
never many people in the church; Natasha always stood beside Belova in
the customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin, let into the
screen before the choir on the left side, and a feeling, new to her, of
humility before something great and incomprehensible, seized her when
at that unusual morning hour, gazing at the dark face of the Virgin
illuminated by the candles burning before it and by the morning light
falling from the window, she listened to the words of the service which
she tried to follow with understanding.
 When she understood them her
personal feeling became interwoven in the prayers with shades of its
own.
 On her way home at an
early hour when she met no one but bricklayers going to work or men
sweeping the street, and everybody within the houses was still asleep,
Natasha experienced a feeling new to her, a sense of the possibility
of correcting her faults, the possibility of a new, clean life, and of
happiness.


But the happy day came, and on that memorable Sunday, when, dressed in
white muslin, she returned home after communion, for the first time for
many months she felt calm and not oppressed by the thought of the life
that lay before her.


The doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continue the
powders he had prescribed a fortnight previously.


"She must certainly go on taking them morning and evening," said
he, evidently sincerely satisfied with his success.
 "Only, please be
particular about it.


"Be quite easy," he continued playfully, as he adroitly took the gold
coin in his palm.
 "She will soon be singing and frolicking about.
 The
last medicine has done her a very great deal of good.






CHAPTER XVIII


At the beginning of July more and more disquieting reports about the war
began to spread in Moscow; people spoke of an appeal by the Emperor to
the people, and of his coming himself from the army to Moscow.
 And as
up to the eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had been received,
exaggerated reports became current about them and about the position of
Russia.


On the eleventh of July, which was Saturday, the manifesto was received
but was not yet in print, and Pierre, who was at the Rostovs', promised
to come to dinner next day, Sunday, and bring a copy of the manifesto
and appeal, which he would obtain from Count Rostopchin.


That Sunday, the Rostovs went to Mass at the Razumovskis' private chapel
as usual.
 Even at ten o'clock, when the Rostovs
got out of their carriage at the chapel, the sultry air, the shouts of
hawkers, the light and gay summer clothes of the crowd, the dusty leaves
of the trees on the boulevard, the sounds of the band and the white
trousers of a battalion marching to parade, the rattling of wheels on
the cobblestones, and the brilliant, hot sunshine were all full of that
summer languor, that content and discontent with the present, which
is most strongly felt on a bright, hot day in town.
 All the Moscow
notabilities, all the Rostovs' acquaintances, were at the Razumovskis'
chapel, for, as if expecting something to happen, many wealthy families
who usually left town for their country estates had not gone away that
summer.
.
"

"She's much thinner, but all the same she's pretty!"

She heard, or thought she heard, the names of Kuragin and Bolkonski.

On the contrary it tormented her more than anything else of late, and
particularly so on this bright, hot summer day in town.
 "It's Sunday
again--another week past," she thought, recalling that she had been here
the Sunday before, "and always the same life that is no life, and the
same surroundings in which it used to be so easy to live.
 I'm pretty,
I'm young, and I know that now I am good.


A comely, fresh-looking old man was conducting the service with that
mild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on the
souls of the worshipers.
 The gates of the sanctuary screen were closed,
the curtain was slowly drawn, and from behind it a soft mysterious voice
pronounced some words.


"In peace let us pray unto the Lord.


"For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of our souls.
"

"For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us," prayed
Natasha.


When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over his
breast and said, "Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to Christ
the Lord!"

"Commit ourselves to God," Natasha inwardly repeated.
 "Lord God, I
submit myself to Thy will!" she thought.

Everybody followed his example and they looked at one another in
surprise.


"Lord God of might, God of our salvation!" began the priest in that
voice, clear, not grandiloquent but mild, in which only the Slav clergy
read and which acts so irresistibly on a Russian heart.


"Lord God of might, God of our salvation! Look this day in mercy and
blessing on Thy humble people, and graciously hear us, spare us, and
have mercy upon us! This foe confounding Thy land, desiring to lay
waste the whole world, rises against us; these lawless men are gathered
together to overthrow Thy kingdom, to destroy Thy dear Jerusalem, Thy
beloved Russia; to defile Thy temples, to overthrow Thine altars, and to
desecrate our holy shrines.
 How long, O Lord, how long shall the wicked
triumph? How long shall they wield unlawful power?

"Lord God! Hear us when we pray to Thee; strengthen with Thy might
our most gracious sovereign lord, the Emperor Alexander Pavlovich; be
mindful of his uprightness and meekness, reward him according to his
righteousness, and let it preserve us, Thy chosen Israel! Bless his
counsels, his undertakings, and his work; strengthen his kingdom by
Thine almighty hand, and give him victory over his enemy, even as Thou
gavest Moses the victory over Amalek, Gideon over Midian, and David over
Goliath.
 Preserve his army, put a bow of brass in the hands of those who
have armed themselves in Thy Name, and gird their loins with strength
for the fight.
 Take up the spear and shield and arise to help us;
confound and put to shame those who have devised evil against us, may
they be before the faces of Thy faithful warriors as dust before the
wind, and may Thy mighty Angel confound them and put them to flight; may
they be ensnared when they know it not, and may the plots they have laid
in secret be turned against them; let them fall before Thy servants'
feet and be laid low by our hosts! Lord, Thou art able to save both
great and small; Thou art God, and man cannot prevail against Thee!

"God of our fathers! Remember Thy bounteous mercy and loving-kindness
which are from of old; turn not Thy face from us, but be gracious to our
unworthiness, and in Thy great goodness and Thy many mercies regard not
our transgressions and iniquities! Create in us a clean heart and renew
a right spirit within us, strengthen us all in Thy faith, fortify our
hope, inspire us with true love one for another, arm us with unity of
spirit in the righteous defense of the heritage Thou gavest to us and
to our fathers, and let not the scepter of the wicked be exalted against
the destiny of those Thou hast sanctified.


"O Lord our God, in whom we believe and in whom we put our trust, let us
not be confounded in our hope of Thy mercy, and give us a token of Thy
blessing, that those who hate us and our Orthodox faith may see it and
be put to shame and perish, and may all the nations know that Thou art
the Lord and we are Thy people.
 Show Thy mercy upon us this day, O Lord,
and grant us Thy salvation; make the hearts of Thy servants to rejoice
in Thy mercy; smite down our enemies and destroy them swiftly beneath
the feet of Thy faithful servants! For Thou art the defense, the succor,
and the victory of them that put their trust in Thee, and to Thee be all
glory, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, now and forever, world without
end.
 Amen.
"

In Natasha's receptive condition of soul this prayer affected her
strongly.
 She listened to every word about the victory of Moses over
Amalek, of Gideon over Midian, and of David over Goliath, and about
the destruction of "Thy Jerusalem," and she prayed to God with the
tenderness and emotion with which her heart was overflowing, but without
fully understanding what she was asking of God in that prayer.
 But she could not pray that her enemies might be trampled under
foot when but a few minutes before she had been wishing she had more
of them that she might pray for them.
 And it seemed to her
that God heard her prayer.
 When he listened to, or
himself took part in, trivial conversations, when he read or heard of
human baseness or folly, he was not horrified as formerly, and did
not ask himself why men struggled so about these things when all is so
transient and incomprehensible--but he remembered her as he had last
seen her, and all his doubts vanished--not because she had answered
the questions that had haunted him, but because his conception of her
transferred him instantly to another, a brighter, realm of spiritual
activity in which no one could be justified or guilty--a realm of
beauty and love which it was worth living for.
 N.
" And his soul felt calm and peaceful.
 But latterly, when more and more disquieting reports came
from the seat of war and Natasha's health began to improve and she
no longer aroused in him the former feeling of careful pity, an
ever-increasing restlessness, which he could not explain, took
possession of him.
 He felt that the condition he was in could not
continue long, that a catastrophe was coming which would change his
whole life, and he impatiently sought everywhere for signs of that
approaching catastrophe.
 John.


In chapter 13, verse 18, of the Apocalypse, it is said:


Here is wisdom.
 Let him that hath understanding count the number of
the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred
threescore and six.


And in the fifth verse of the same chapter:


And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and
blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two
months.



The French alphabet, written out with the same numerical values as the
Hebrew, in which the first nine letters denote units and the others
tens, will have the following significance:

      a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   k
      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
       l    m    n    o    p    q    r    s
      20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90
             t    u    v    w    x    y
            100  110  120  130  140  150
                        z
                       160


Writing the words L'Empereur Napoleon in numbers, it appears that the
sum of them is 666, and that Napoleon was therefore the beast foretold
in the Apocalypse.
 He wrote the words L'Empereur
Alexandre, La nation russe and added up their numbers, but the sums
were either more or less than 666.
 Then he changed the spelling,
substituting a z for the s and adding de and the article le, still
without obtaining the desired result.
 Then it occurred to him: if the
answer to the question were contained in his name, his nationality would
also be given in the answer.
 So he wrote Le russe Besuhof and adding
up the numbers got 671.
 By omitting the e, though incorrectly, Pierre got the
answer he sought.
 L'russe Besuhof made 666.

How, or by what means, he was connected with the great event foretold in
the Apocalypse he did not know, but he did not doubt that connection for
a moment.



On the eve of the Sunday when the special prayer was read, Pierre had
promised the Rostovs to bring them, from Count Rostopchin whom he knew
well, both the appeal to the people and the news from the army.
 In the
morning, when he went to call at Rostopchin's he met there a courier
fresh from the army, an acquaintance of his own, who often danced at
Moscow balls.


"Do, please, for heaven's sake, relieve me of something!" said the
courier.
 "I have a sackful of letters to parents.
"

Among these letters was one from Nicholas Rostov to his father.
 Pierre
took that letter, and Rostopchin also gave him the Emperor's appeal to
Moscow, which had just been printed, the last army orders, and his own
most recent bulletin.
 Glancing through the army orders, Pierre found in
one of them, in the lists of killed, wounded, and rewarded, the name of
Nicholas Rostov, awarded a St.
 George's Cross of the Fourth Class for
courage shown in the Ostrovna affair, and in the same order the name
of Prince Andrew Bolkonski, appointed to the command of a regiment of
Chasseurs.
 Though he did not want to remind the Rostovs of Bolkonski,
Pierre could not refrain from making them happy by the news of their
son's having received a decoration, so he sent that printed army order
and Nicholas' letter to the Rostovs, keeping the appeal, the bulletin,
and the other orders to take with him when he went to dinner.


He had long been thinking of entering the army and would have done so
had he not been hindered, first, by his membership of the Society of
Freemasons to which he was bound by oath and which preached perpetual
peace and the abolition of war, and secondly, by the fact that when he
saw the great mass of Muscovites who had donned uniform and were talking
patriotism, he somehow felt ashamed to take the step.
 But the chief
reason for not carrying out his intention to enter the army lay in the
vague idea that he was L'russe Besuhof who had the number of the beast,
666; that his part in the great affair of setting a limit to the
power of the beast that spoke great and blasphemous things had been
predestined from eternity, and that therefore he ought not to undertake
anything, but wait for what was bound to come to pass.






CHAPTER XX


A few intimate friends were dining with the Rostovs that day, as usual
on Sundays.


He had grown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had he
not been so tall, so broad of limb, and so strong that he carried his
bulk with evident ease.


He went up the stairs, puffing and muttering something.
 His coachman did
not even ask whether he was to wait.
 The Rostovs' footman rushed
eagerly forward to help him off with his cloak and take his hat and
stick.
 Pierre, from club habit, always left both hat and stick in the
anteroom.
 Even before he saw
her, while taking off his cloak, he heard her.
 She was practicing solfa
exercises in the music room.
 He
opened the door softly and saw her, in the lilac dress she had worn at
church, walking about the room singing.
 She had her back to him when he
opened the door, but when, turning quickly, she saw his broad, surprised
face, she blushed and came rapidly up to him.


"I want to try to sing again," she said, adding as if by way of excuse,
"it is, at least, something to do.
"

"That's capital!"

"How glad I am you've come! I am so happy today," she said, with the old
animation Pierre had not seen in her for along time.
"

"Oh yes, I sent that announcement.


Natasha stopped him.


"Count, is it wrong of me to sing?" she said blushing, and fixing her
eyes inquiringly on him.


"No.
.
.
 Why should it be? On the contrary.
.
 I believe in you completely.
.
.
.
"
She spoke rapidly and did not notice how Pierre flushed at her words.
 What do you think?"--she
was speaking hurriedly, evidently afraid her strength might fail
her--"Will he ever forgive me? Will he not always have a bitter feeling
toward me? What do you think? What do you think?"

"I think.
.
.
.
.
"

By association of ideas, Pierre was at once carried back to the day
when, trying to comfort her, he had said that if he were not himself but
the best man in the world and free, he would ask on his knees for her
hand; and the same feeling of pity, tenderness, and love took possession
of him and the same words rose to his lips.


"Yes, you.
.
.
.
.
" she said, uttering the word you
rapturously--"that's a different thing.
.
.
"

Tears suddenly rose in her eyes, she turned away, lifted her music
before her eyes, began singing again, and again began walking up and
down the room.


Just then Petya came running in from the drawing room.
 He was preparing to enter the university, but he and
his friend Obolenski had lately, in secret, agreed to join the hussars.

He had asked Pierre to find out whether he would be accepted in the
hussars.


Pierre walked up and down the drawing room, not listening to what Petya
was saying.


Petya pulled him by the arm to attract his attention.


"Well, what about my plan? Peter Kirilych, for heaven's sake! You are my
only hope," said Petya.
"

"Well, mon cher, have you got the manifesto?" asked the old count.
 "The
countess has been to Mass at the Razumovskis' and heard the new prayer.

She says it's very fine.
"

"Yes, I've got it," said Pierre.
 "The Emperor is to be here tomorrow.
.
.

there's to be an Extraordinary Meeting of the nobility, and they are
talking of a levy of ten men per thousand.
 Oh yes, let me congratulate
you!"

"Yes, yes, thank God! Well, and what news from the army?"

"We are again retreating.


"O Lord, O Lord!" exclaimed the count.
 "Where is the manifesto?"

"The Emperor's appeal? Oh yes!"

Pierre began feeling in his pockets for the papers, but could not find
them.
 Still slapping his pockets, he kissed the hand of the countess
who entered the room and glanced uneasily around, evidently expecting
Natasha, who had left off singing but had not yet come into the drawing
room.


"On my word, I don't know what I've done with it," he said.


"There he is, always losing everything!" remarked the countess.


Natasha entered with a softened and agitated expression of face and
sat down looking silently at Pierre.
 As soon as she entered, Pierre's
features, which had been gloomy, suddenly lighted up, and while still
searching for the papers he glanced at her several times.


"No, really! I'll drive home, I must have left them there.
.
.
"

"But you'll be late for dinner.
"

But Sonya, who had gone to look for the papers in the anteroom, had
found them in Pierre's hat, where he had carefully tucked them under the
lining.
 Pierre was about to begin reading.


At dinner, at which champagne was drunk to the health of the new
chevalier of St.
 George, Shinshin told them the town news, of the
illness of the old Georgian princess, of Metivier's disappearance from
Moscow, and of how some German fellow had been brought to Rostopchin
and accused of being a French "spyer" (so Count Rostopchin had told the
story), and how Rostopchin let him go and assured the people that he was
"not a spire at all, but only an old German ruin.
.
 "I've told the countess
she should not speak French so much.
 It's not the time for it now.
 "Prince Golitsyn has engaged a
master to teach him Russian.
 It is becoming dangerous to speak French in
the streets.
"

"And how about you, Count Peter Kirilych? If they call up the militia,
you too will have to mount a horse," remarked the old count, addressing
Pierre.
 He looked at the count.


"Oh yes, the war," he said.
 "No! What sort of warrior should I make? And
yet everything is so strange, so strange! I can't make it out.
"

After dinner the count settled himself comfortably in an easy chair and
with a serious face asked Sonya, who was considered an excellent reader,
to read the appeal.



"To Moscow, our ancient Capital!

"The enemy has entered the borders of Russia with immense forces.
 He
comes to despoil our beloved country.
 The count listened
with closed eyes, heaving abrupt sighs at certain passages.


Natasha sat erect, gazing with a searching look now at her father and
now at Pierre.
 The countess
shook her head disapprovingly and angrily at every solemn expression
in the manifesto.
 In all these words she saw only that the danger
threatening her son would not soon be over.
 Shinshin, with a sarcastic
smile on his lips, was evidently preparing to make fun of anything that
gave him the opportunity: Sonya's reading, any remark of the count's, or
even the manifesto itself should no better pretext present itself.


After reading about the dangers that threatened Russia, the hopes the
Emperor placed on Moscow and especially on its illustrious nobility,
Sonya, with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to the attention that was
being paid to her, read the last words:


"We ourselves will not delay to appear among our people in that Capital
and in other parts of our realm for consultation, and for the direction
of all our levies, both those now barring the enemy's path and those
freshly formed to defeat him wherever he may appear.


"There! Here's a patriot for you!" said Shinshin.


"Not a patriot at all, but simply.
.
" Natasha replied in an injured
tone.
 "Everything seems funny to you, but this isn't at all a joke.
.
.
.
"

"A joke indeed!" put in the count.
 "Let him but say the word and we'll
all go.
.
.
 We're not Germans!"

"But did you notice, it says, 'for consultation'?" said Pierre.
.
.
 that's all.
.
.


"That comes of your talking!" said she.


But the count had already recovered from his excitement.


"Come, come!" said he.
 "Here's a fine warrior! No! Nonsense! You must
study.
.
" Petya
stopped short, flushed till he perspired, but still got out the words,
"when our Fatherland is in danger.
.
.
"

"But you said yourself that we would sacrifice everything.
"

"Petya! Be quiet, I tell you!" cried the count, with a glance at his
wife, who had turned pale and was staring fixedly at her son.


"And I tell you--Peter Kirilych here will also tell you.
 Your mother's milk has hardly dried on your lips
and you want to go into the army! There, there, I tell you," and the
count moved to go out of the room, taking the papers, probably to reread
them in his study before having a nap.


Pierre was agitated and undecided.
 Natasha's unwontedly brilliant eyes,
continually glancing at him with a more than cordial look, had reduced
him to this condition.


"No, I think I'll go home.
"

"Home? Why, you meant to spend the evening with us.
.
.
 You don't
often come nowadays as it is, and this girl of mine," said the count
good-naturedly, pointing to Natasha, "only brightens up when you're
here.
.
 I really must go home.
.
.
 business.
.
.
" said
Pierre hurriedly.


"Why are you going? Why are you upset?" asked Natasha, and she looked
challengingly into Pierre's eyes.


"Because I love you!" was what he wanted to say, but he did not say it,
and only blushed till the tears came, and lowered his eyes.
.
.
 because.
.
.
 No, simply
I have business.
.
.
 He tried
to smile but could not: his smile expressed suffering, and he silently
kissed her hand and went out.


Pierre made up his mind not to go to the Rostovs' any more.
 When he came in to tea,
silent, morose, and with tear-stained face, everybody pretended not to
notice anything.


Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow, and several of the Rostovs'
domestic serfs begged permission to go to have a look at him.
 Petya decided to go straight to where the Emperor was and
to explain frankly to some gentleman-in-waiting (he imagined the Emperor
to be always surrounded by gentlemen-in-waiting) that he, Count Rostov,
in spite of his youth wished to serve his country; that youth could be
no hindrance to loyalty, and that he was ready to.
.

But the farther he went and the more his attention was diverted by the
ever-increasing crowds moving toward the Kremlin, the less he remembered
to walk with the sedateness and deliberation of a man.
 Beside Petya stood a peasant woman, a
footman, two tradesmen, and a discharged soldier.
 After standing some
time in the gateway, Petya tried to move forward in front of the others
without waiting for all the carriages to pass, and he began resolutely
working his way with his elbows, but the woman just in front of him, who
was the first against whom he directed his efforts, angrily shouted at
him:

"What are you shoving for, young lordling? Don't you see we're all
standing still? Then why push?"

"Anybody can shove," said the footman, and also began working his elbows
to such effect that he pushed Petya into a very filthy corner of the
gateway.


He felt that he no longer looked presentable, and feared that if he were
now to approach the gentlemen-in-waiting in that plight he would not be
admitted to the Emperor.
 But it was impossible to smarten oneself up
or move to another place, because of the crowd.
 When the carriages had all passed in, the crowd,
carrying Petya with it, streamed forward into the Kremlin Square which
was already full of people.
 As soon as Petya found
himself in the square he clearly heard the sound of bells and the joyous
voices of the crowd that filled the whole Kremlin.


For a while the crowd was less dense, but suddenly all heads were bared,
and everyone rushed forward in one direction.
 Petya was being pressed so
that he could scarcely breathe, and everybody shouted, "Hurrah! hurrah!
hurrah!" Petya stood on tiptoe and pushed and pinched, but could see
nothing except the people about him.


All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusiasm.
 A
tradesman's wife standing beside Petya sobbed, and the tears ran down
her cheeks.


"Hurrah!" was heard on all sides.


For a moment the crowd stood still, but then it made another rush
forward.
 "No, I can't petition
him myself--that would be too bold.
" But in spite of this he continued
to struggle desperately forward, and from between the backs of those
in front he caught glimpses of an open space with a strip of red cloth
spread out on it; but just then the crowd swayed back--the police
in front were pushing back those who had pressed too close to the
procession: the Emperor was passing from the palace to the Cathedral of
the Assumption--and Petya unexpectedly received such a blow on his side
and ribs and was squeezed so hard that suddenly everything grew dim
before his eyes and he lost consciousness.
 "What are you up
to? Gently!.
.
 They've crushed him, crushed him!"

The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the Assumption.
 The crowd spread
out again more evenly, and the clerk led Petya--pale and breathless--to
the Tsar-cannon.
 Several people were sorry for Petya, and suddenly a
crowd turned toward him and pressed round him.
 Those who stood nearest
him attended to him, unbuttoned his coat, seated him on the raised
platform of the cannon, and reproached those others (whoever they might
be) who had crushed him.
 Petya no longer thought of presenting his
petition.
 If he could only see the Emperor he would be happy!

While the service was proceeding in the Cathedral of the Assumption--it
was a combined service of prayer on the occasion of the Emperor's
arrival and of thanksgiving for the conclusion of peace with the
Turks--the crowd outside spread out and hawkers appeared, selling kvas,
gingerbread, and poppyseed sweets (of which Petya was particularly
fond), and ordinary conversation could again be heard.
 A tradesman's
wife was showing a rent in her shawl and telling how much the shawl had
cost; another was saying that all silk goods had now got dear.
 The clerk several times used
the word "plenary" (of the service), a word Petya did not understand.

Two young citizens were joking with some serf girls who were cracking
nuts.
 Petya too would
have run there, but the clerk who had taken the young gentleman under
his protection stopped him.
 "Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted the crowd again.


The crowd ran after the Emperor, followed him to the palace, and began
to disperse.
 It was already late, and Petya had not eaten anything and
was drenched with perspiration, yet he did not go home but stood with
that diminishing, but still considerable, crowd before the palace while
the Emperor dined--looking in at the palace windows, expecting he knew
not what, and envying alike the notables he saw arriving at the entrance
to dine with the Emperor and the court footmen who served at table,
glimpses of whom could be seen through the windows.
"

The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munching a biscuit, rose
and went out onto the balcony.
.


A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in his hand broke
off, fell on the balcony parapet, and then to the ground.
 A coachman in
a jerkin, who stood nearest, sprang forward and snatched it up.
 Several
people in the crowd rushed at the coachman.
 He did not know why,
but he had to have a biscuit from the Tsar's hand and he felt that he
must not give way.


Happy as Petya was, he felt sad at having to go home knowing that all
the enjoyment of that day was over.
 He did not go straight home from
the Kremlin, but called on his friend Obolenski, who was fifteen and was
also entering the regiment.
 On returning home Petya announced resolutely
and firmly that if he was not allowed to enter the service he would
run away.
 And next day, Count Ilya Rostov--though he had not yet quite
yielded--went to inquire how he could arrange for Petya to serve where
there would be least danger.






CHAPTER XXII


Two days later, on the fifteenth of July, an immense number of carriages
were standing outside the Sloboda Palace.


The great halls were full.
 In the first were the nobility and gentry in
their uniforms, in the second bearded merchants in full-skirted coats
of blue cloth and wearing medals.
 In the noblemen's hall there was
an incessant movement and buzz of voices.
 The chief magnates sat on
high-backed chairs at a large table under the portrait of the Emperor,
but most of the gentry were strolling about the room.


All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day at the Club or in their own
houses, were in uniform--some in that of Catherine's day, others in that
of Emperor Paul, others again in the new uniforms of Alexander's time or
the ordinary uniform of the nobility, and the general characteristic
of being in uniform imparted something strange and fantastic to these
diverse and familiar personalities, both old and young.
 On all these faces, as on the faces
of the crowd Petya had seen in the Square, there was a striking
contradiction: the general expectation of a solemn event, and at the
same time the everyday interests in a boston card party, Peter the cook,
Zinaida Dmitrievna's health, and so on.
 He was agitated;
this extraordinary gathering not only of nobles but also of the
merchant-class--les etats generaux (States-General)--evoked in him
a whole series of ideas he had long laid aside but which were deeply
graven in his soul: thoughts of the Contrat social and the French
Revolution.
 And imagining that in this direction
something important which he had long awaited was drawing near, he
strolled about watching and listening to conversations, but nowhere
finding any confirmation of the ideas that occupied him.
.
.
 and so on; but as soon as the war was touched on, or
what the nobility had been convened for, the talk became undecided and
indefinite.
 Then all preferred listening to speaking.


A middle-aged man, handsome and virile, in the uniform of a retired
naval officer, was speaking in one of the rooms, and a small crowd was
pressing round him.
 He too approached that group and
listened with a kindly smile and nods of approval, as he always did,
to what the speaker was saying.
 The retired naval man was speaking very
boldly, as was evident from the expression on the faces of the listeners
and from the fact that some people Pierre knew as the meekest and
quietest of men walked away disapprovingly or expressed disagreement
with him.
 Pierre pushed his way into the middle of the group, listened,
and convinced himself that the man was indeed a liberal, but of views
quite different from his own.
 The naval officer spoke in a particularly
sonorous, musical, and aristocratic baritone voice, pleasantly
swallowing his r's and generally slurring his consonants: the voice of
a man calling out to his servant, "Heah! Bwing me my pipe!" It was
indicative of dissipation and the exercise of authority.


"What if the Smolensk people have offahd to waise militia for the
Empewah? Ah we to take Smolensk as our patte'n? If the noble awistocwacy
of the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit, it can show its loyalty to our
sov'weign the Empewah in other ways.
 Have we fo'gotten the waising of
the militia in the yeah 'seven? All that did was to enwich the pwiests'
sons and thieves and wobbahs.
.
.
"

Count Ilya Rostov smiled blandly and nodded approval.


"And was our militia of any use to the Empia? Not at all! It only wuined
our farming! Bettah have another conscwiption.
.
 o' ou' men will wetu'n
neithah soldiers no' peasants, and we'll get only depwavity fwom them.

The nobility don't gwudge theah lives--evewy one of us will go and bwing
in more wecwuits, and the sov'weign" (that was the way he referred to
the Emperor) "need only say the word and we'll all die fo' him!" added
the orator with animation.

We have been summoned to reply to the appeal with which our sovereign
the Emperor has honored us.
"

Pierre suddenly saw an outlet for his excitement.
 He hardened his heart
against the senator who was introducing this set and narrow attitude
into the deliberations of the nobility.


"Excuse me, your excellency," he began.
 (He was well acquainted with
the senator, but thought it necessary on this occasion to address him
formally.
" (he hesitated:
he wished to say, "Mon tres honorable preopinant"--"My very honorable
opponent") "with the gentleman.
.
 whom I have not the honor of knowing,
I suppose that the nobility have been summoned not merely to express
their sympathy and enthusiasm but also to consider the means by which
we can assist our Fatherland! I imagine," he went on, warming to his
subject, "that the Emperor himself would not be satisfied to find in us
merely owners of serfs whom we are willing to devote to his service,
and chair a canon * we are ready to make of ourselves--and not to obtain
from us any co-co-counsel.
"


    * "Food for cannon.
 Only Count Rostov was pleased
with them as he had been pleased with those of the naval officer, the
senator, and in general with whatever speech he had last heard.


"I think that before discussing these questions," Pierre continued, "we
should ask the Emperor--most respectfully ask His Majesty--to let us
know the number of our troops and the position in which our army and our
forces now are, and then.
.
"

But scarcely had Pierre uttered these words before he was attacked from
three sides.
 The most vigorous attack came from an old acquaintance,
a boston player who had always been well disposed toward him, Stepan
Stepanovich Adraksin.
 Adraksin was in uniform, and whether as a result
of the uniform or from some other cause Pierre saw before him quite a
different man.
.
.


"Yes, and this is not a time for discussing," he continued, "but for
acting: there is war in Russia! The enemy is advancing to destroy
Russia, to desecrate the tombs of our fathers, to carry off our wives
and children.
" The nobleman smote his breast.
 Several approving voices were heard in the crowd.
 He felt that his
words, apart from what meaning they conveyed, were less audible than the
sound of his opponent's voice.
 This happened not because they were
displeased by the substance of his speech, which had even been forgotten
after the many subsequent speeches, but to animate it the crowd needed a
tangible object to love and a tangible object to hate.
 Pierre became the
latter.
 Many spoke eloquently and with originality.


Glinka, the editor of the Russian Messenger, who was recognized (cries
of "author! author!" were heard in the crowd), said that "hell must be
repulsed by hell," and that he had seen a child smiling at lightning
flashes and thunderclaps, but "we will not be that child.
 Pressed by the throng against the high backs of the
chairs, the orators spoke one after another and sometimes two together.

Those standing behind noticed what a speaker omitted to say and hastened
to supply it.
 Pierre, however, felt excited, and the general desire to show that
they were ready to go to all lengths--which found expression in the
tones and looks more than in the substance of the speeches--infected him
too.


One of the old men nearest to him looked round, but his attention was
immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table.
 "Allow me to speak.
.
.
"
"Gentlemen, you are crushing me!.
.
 Seeing the position we are in, I think
there is little need for discussion.
.
.
 That is the least we can do!"

A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at the table.

The whole consultation passed more than quietly.
 After all the preceding
noise the sound of their old voices saying one after another, "I
agree," or for variety, "I too am of that opinion," and so on had even a
mournful effect.


The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscow
nobility and gentry, that they would furnish ten men, fully equipped,
out of every thousand serfs, as the Smolensk gentry had done.


"The Emperor! The Emperor!" a sudden cry resounded through the halls and
the whole throng hurried to the entrance.


The Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between two lines of
nobles.
 Every face expressed respectful, awe-struck curiosity.
 From
what he did hear he understood that the Emperor spoke of the danger
threatening the empire and of the hopes he placed on the Moscow
nobility.
 He was answered by a voice which informed him of the
resolution just arrived at.
 I thank you in the name of the Fatherland!
Gentlemen, let us act! Time is most precious.
 a royal word," said Count Rostov, with a sob.

There he remained about ten minutes.
 When Pierre saw the Emperor he was coming out accompanied by two
merchants, one of whom Pierre knew, a fat otkupshchik.
 Tears filled the thin man's eyes, and the fat otkupshchik
sobbed outright like a child and kept repeating:

"Our lives and property--take them, Your Majesty!"

Pierre's one feeling at the moment was a desire to show that he was
ready to go all lengths and was prepared to sacrifice everything.
 He now
felt ashamed of his speech with its constitutional tendency and sought
an opportunity of effacing it.
 Having heard that Count Mamonov was
furnishing a regiment, Bezukhov at once informed Rostopchin that he
would give a thousand men and their maintenance.


Next day the Emperor left Moscow.
 The assembled nobles all took off
their uniforms and settled down again in their homes and clubs, and not
without some groans gave orders to their stewards about the enrollment,
feeling amazed themselves at what they had done.






BOOK TEN: 1812





CHAPTER I


Napoleon began the war with Russia because he could not resist going
to Dresden, could not help having his head turned by the homage he
received, could not help donning a Polish uniform and yielding to the
stimulating influence of a June morning, and could not refrain from
bursts of anger in the presence of Kurakin and then of Balashev.
 Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the best
way, because he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a great
commander.
 Rostov charged the French because he could not restrain
his wish for a gallop across a level field; and in the same way the
innumerable people who took part in the war acted in accord with their
personal characteristics, habits, circumstances, and aims.
 Such is the inevitable
fate of men of action, and the higher they stand in the social hierarchy
the less are they free.


Providence compelled all these men, striving to attain personal aims, to
further the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of them at all
expected--neither Napoleon, nor Alexander, nor still less any of those
who did the actual fighting.


The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us
now.
 But no one at the time foresaw (what now seems
so evident) that this was the only way an army of eight hundred thousand
men--the best in the world and led by the best general--could be
destroyed in conflict with a raw army of half its numerical strength,
and led by inexperienced commanders as the Russian army was.
 Not only
did no one see this, but on the Russian side every effort was made to
hinder the only thing that could save Russia, while on the French side,
despite Napoleon's experience and so-called military genius, every
effort was directed to pushing on to Moscow at the end of the summer,
that is, to doing the very thing that was bound to lead to destruction.


In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond of
saying that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line, that he
sought a battle and that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk,
and of making similar statements to show that the danger of the campaign
was even then understood.
 Had that
event not occurred these hints would have been forgotten, as we have
forgotten the thousands and millions of hints and expectations to the
contrary which were current then but have now been forgotten because
the event falsified them.
 There are always so many conjectures as to the
issue of any event that however it may end there will always be people
to say: "I said then that it would be so," quite forgetting that amid
their innumerable conjectures many were to quite the contrary effect.
 All the facts are in flat
contradiction to such conjectures.
 During the whole period of the war
not only was there no wish on the Russian side to draw the French
into the heart of the country, but from their first entry into Russia
everything was done to stop them.
 And not only was Napoleon not afraid
to extend his line, but he welcomed every step forward as a triumph and
did not seek battle as eagerly as in former campaigns, but very lazily.


At the very beginning of the war our armies were divided, and our sole
aim was to unite them, though uniting the armies was no advantage if we
meant to retire and lure the enemy into the depths of the country.
 Our
Emperor joined the army to encourage it to defend every inch of Russian
soil and not to retreat.
 The enormous Drissa camp was formed on Pfuel's
plan, and there was no intention of retiring farther.
 He could
not bear the idea of letting the enemy even reach Smolensk, still less
could he contemplate the burning of Moscow, and when our armies did
unite he was displeased that Smolensk was abandoned and burned without a
general engagement having been fought under its walls.


So thought the Emperor, and the Russian commanders and people were still
more provoked at the thought that our forces were retreating into the
depths of the country.


Napoleon having cut our armies apart advanced far into the country and
missed several chances of forcing an engagement.
 In August he was at
Smolensk and thought only of how to advance farther, though as we now
see that advance was evidently ruinous to him.


The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger of the
advance on Moscow, nor did Alexander and the Russian commanders then
think of luring Napoleon on, but quite the contrary.
 The luring of
Napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan,
for no one believed it to be possible; it resulted from a most complex
interplay of intrigues, aims, and wishes among those who took part in
the war and had no perception whatever of the inevitable, or of the one
way of saving Russia.
 Everything came about fortuitously.
 We tried to unite
them, with the evident intention of giving battle and checking the
enemy's advance, and by this effort to unite them while avoiding battle
with a much stronger enemy, and necessarily withdrawing the armies at
an acute angle--we led the French on to Smolensk.
 But we withdrew at an
acute angle not only because the French advanced between our two armies;
the angle became still more acute and we withdrew still farther, because
Barclay de Tolly was an unpopular foreigner disliked by Bagration (who
would come under his command), and Bagration--being in command of the
second army--tried to postpone joining up and coming under Barclay's
command as long as he could.
 Bagration was slow in effecting the
junction--though that was the chief aim of all at headquarters--because,
as he alleged, he exposed his army to danger on this march, and it was
best for him to retire more to the left and more to the south, worrying
the enemy from flank and rear and securing from the Ukraine recruits for
his army; and it looks as if he planned this in order not to come under
the command of the detested foreigner Barclay, whose rank was inferior
to his own.


The Emperor was with the army to encourage it, but his presence and
ignorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number of advisers and
plans, destroyed the first army's energy and it retired.
 But as Barclay did not inspire confidence
his power was limited.
 The armies were divided, there was no unity of
command, and Barclay was unpopular; but from this confusion, division,
and the unpopularity of the foreign commander in chief, there resulted
on the one hand indecision and the avoidance of a battle (which we could
not have refrained from had the armies been united and had someone else,
instead of Barclay, been in command) and on the other an ever-increasing
indignation against the foreigners and an increase in patriotic zeal.


At last the Emperor left the army, and as the most convenient and indeed
the only pretext for his departure it was decided that it was necessary
for him to inspire the people in the capitals and arouse the nation in
general to a patriotic war.
 And by this visit of the Emperor to Moscow
the strength of the Russian army was trebled.


He left in order not to obstruct the commander in chief's undivided
control of the army, and hoping that more decisive action would then
be taken, but the command of the armies became still more confused and
enfeebled.
 Lubomirski, Bronnitski, Wlocki, and the
others of that group stirred up so much trouble that Barclay, under
pretext of sending papers to the Emperor, dispatched these Polish
adjutants general to Petersburg and plunged into an open struggle with
Bennigsen and the Tsarevich.


At Smolensk the armies at last reunited, much as Bagration disliked it.

Barclay donned his sash and came out to meet and report to his senior
officer Bagration.


Despite his seniority in rank Bagration, in this contest of magnanimity,
took his orders from Barclay, but, having submitted, agreed with him
less than ever.
 He wrote to Arakcheev, the Emperor's confidant: "It must be as
my sovereign pleases, but I cannot work with the Minister (meaning
Barclay).
 For God's sake send me somewhere else if only in command of
a regiment.
 Headquarters are so full of Germans
that a Russian cannot exist and there is no sense in anything.
"

The swarm of Bronnitskis and Wintzingerodes and their like still further
embittered the relations between the commanders in chief, and even
less unity resulted.
 Preparations were made to fight the French before
Smolensk.
 A general was sent to survey the position.


While disputes and intrigues were going on about the future field of
battle, and while we were looking for the French--having lost touch with
them--the French stumbled upon Neverovski's division and reached the
walls of Smolensk.


It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolensk to save our
lines of communication.
 The battle was fought and thousands were killed
on both sides.


Smolensk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and of the
whole people.
 But Smolensk was burned by its own inhabitants-who had
been misled by their governor.
 Napoleon advanced farther and we
retired, thus arriving at the very result which caused his destruction.






CHAPTER II


The day after his son had left, Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary
to come to his study.
 "You've made me quarrel with my
son! Satisfied, are you? That's all you wanted! Satisfied?.
.
 It hurts
me, it hurts.
 I'm old and weak and this is what you wanted.
 Well then,
gloat over it! Gloat over it!"

After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week.


Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness the
old prince not only excluded her from his room, but did not admit
Mademoiselle Bourienne either.


At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his former way
of life, devoting himself with special activity to building operations
and the arrangement of the gardens and completely breaking off his
relations with Mademoiselle Bourienne.
 His looks and cold tone to his
daughter seemed to say: "There, you see? You plotted against me, you
lied to Prince Andrew about my relations with that Frenchwoman and made
me quarrel with him, but you see I need neither her nor you!"

Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas, watching
his lessons, teaching him Russian and music herself, and talking to
Dessalles; the rest of the day she spent over her books, with her old
nurse, or with "God's folk" who sometimes came by the back door to see
her.
 She
feared for her brother who was in it, was horrified by and amazed at
the strange cruelty that impels men to kill one another, but she did not
understand the significance of this war, which seemed to her like all
previous wars.


"I write you in Russian, my good friend," wrote Julie in her Frenchified
Russian, "because I have a detestation for all the French, and the
same for their language which I cannot support to hear spoken.
.
.
.


"You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raevski, embracing his two
sons and saying: 'I will perish with them but we will not be shaken!'
And truly though the enemy was twice stronger than we, we were
unshakable.
.
.

The prince's tone was so calm and confident that Princess Mary
unhesitatingly believed him.


All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and even animated.
 One day he would order his camp
bed to be set up in the glass gallery, another day he remained on the
couch or on the lounge chair in the drawing room and dozed there without
undressing, while--instead of Mademoiselle Bourienne--a serf boy read to
him.
 To this letter the old
prince had replied affectionately, and from that time had kept the
Frenchwoman at a distance.
 In this letter Prince Andrew
pointed out to his father the danger of staying at Bald Hills, so near
the theater of war and on the army's direct line of march, and advised
him to move to Moscow.


"There was a letter from Prince Andrew today," he said to Princess
Mary--"Haven't you read it?"

"No, Father," she replied in a frightened voice.


"He writes about this war," said the prince, with the ironic smile that
had become habitual to him in speaking of the present war.


"That must be very interesting," said Dessalles.
.
.
"

"Oh, very interesting!" said Mademoiselle Bourienne.

"You know--under the paperweight on the little table.
"

Michael Ivanovich rose and went to the study.
 But as soon as he had left
the room the old prince, looking uneasily round, threw down his napkin
and went himself.
.
 always make some muddle," he muttered.


While he was away Princess Mary, Dessalles, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and
even little Nicholas exchanged looks in silence.


On moving to the drawing room he handed the letter to Princess Mary and,
spreading out before him the plan of the new building and fixing his
eyes upon it, told her to read the letter aloud.


"What do you think of it, Prince?" Dessalles ventured to ask.


"I? I?.
.
" said the prince as if unpleasantly awakened, and not taking
his eyes from the plan of the building.


"Very possibly the theater of war will move so near to us that.
.
.
 "Bennigsen should have
advanced into Prussia sooner, then things would have taken a different
turn.
.
.
.
 "Yes.
.
.
.
"
His face suddenly took on a morose expression.
 He paused.
 at.
.
 what river is it?"

Dessalles dropped his eyes.


"Doesn't he? But I didn't invent it myself.
"

No one spoke for a long time.
.
.
 yes.
.
 Well, Michael Ivanovich," he suddenly went on, raising
his head and pointing to the plan of the building, "tell me how you mean
to alter it.
.
.
.
"

Michael Ivanovich went up to the plan, and the prince after speaking to
him about the building looked angrily at Princess Mary and Dessalles and
went to his own room.


Princess Mary saw Dessalles' embarrassed and astonished look fixed on
her father, noticed his silence, and was struck by the fact that her
father had forgotten his son's letter on the drawing-room table; but she
was not only afraid to speak of it and ask Dessalles the reason of his
confusion and silence, but was afraid even to think about it.


In the evening Michael Ivanovich, sent by the prince, came to Princess
Mary for Prince Andrew's letter which had been forgotten in the drawing
room.
 "He's worrying very much
about the new building.
 He has been reading a little, but now"--Michael
Ivanovich went on, lowering his voice--"now he's at his desk, busy with
his will, I expect.
")

"And Alpatych is being sent to Smolensk?" asked Princess Mary.
"





CHAPTER III


When Michael Ivanovich returned to the study with the letter, the old
prince, with spectacles on and a shade over his eyes, was sitting at his
open bureau with screened candles, holding a paper in his
outstretched hand, and in a somewhat dramatic attitude was reading his
manuscript--his "Remarks" as he termed it--which was to be transmitted
to the Emperor after his death.


When Michael Ivanovich went in there were tears in the prince's eyes
evoked by the memory of the time when the paper he was now reading had
been written.
 He took the letter from Michael Ivanovich's hand, put it
in his pocket, folded up his papers, and called in Alpatych who had long
been waiting.


The prince had a list of things to be bought in Smolensk and, walking
up and down the room past Alpatych who stood by the door, he gave his
instructions.


"First, notepaper--do you hear? Eight quires, like this sample,
gilt-edged.
.
 Varnish, sealing wax,
as in Michael Ivanovich's list.


"Then hand to the governor in person a letter about the deed.
"

Next, bolts for the doors of the new building were wanted and had to be
of a special shape the prince had himself designed, and a leather case
had to be ordered to keep the "will" in.
 He sat down, sank into thought, closed his eyes, and
dozed off.
 Alpatych made a slight movement.


"Well, go, go! If anything more is wanted I'll send after you.
 The prince again went to his bureau, glanced into it,
fingered his papers, closed the bureau again, and sat down at the table
to write to the governor.


It was already late when he rose after sealing the letter.
 It was unsatisfactory everywhere,
but the corner behind the piano in the sitting room was better than
other places: he had never slept there yet.


"That's not right! That's not right!" cried the prince, and himself
pushed it a few inches from the corner and then closer in again.


"Well, at last I've finished, now I'll rest," thought the prince, and
let Tikhon undress him.


Frowning with vexation at the effort necessary to divest himself of his
coat and trousers, the prince undressed, sat down heavily on the
bed, and appeared to be meditating as he looked contemptuously at his
withered yellow legs.
 Pressing his lips together he made that effort
for the twenty-thousandth time and lay down.
 But hardly had he done so
before he felt the bed rocking backwards and forwards beneath him as if
it were breathing heavily and jolting.
 He opened his eyes as they were closing.


"No peace, damn them!" he muttered, angry he knew not with whom.
 "Ah
yes, there was something else important, very important, that I was
keeping till I should be in bed.
 The bolts? No, I told him about them.
 Dessalles, that fool, said something.
 Something in
my pocket--can't remember.
.
.
.
.
"

"Be quiet, quiet!" The prince slapped his hand on the table.
 Only now in the stillness of
the night, reading it by the faint light under the green shade, did he
grasp its meaning for a moment.


"Oh, quicker, quicker! To get back to that time and have done with all
the present! Quicker, quicker--and that they should leave me in peace!"





CHAPTER IV


Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's estate, lay forty miles east
from Smolensk and two miles from the main road to Moscow.


Having received all his orders Alpatych, wearing a white beaver hat--a
present from the prince--and carrying a stick as the prince did,
went out accompanied by his family.
 Three well-fed roans stood ready
harnessed to a small conveyance with a leather hood.


The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the harness stuffed
with paper.
 His
satellites--the senior clerk, a countinghouse clerk, a scullery maid,
a cook, two old women, a little pageboy, the coachman, and various
domestic serfs--were seeing him off.


His daughter placed chintz-covered down cushions for him to sit on and
behind his back.


"There! There! Women's fuss! Women, women!" said Alpatych, puffing and
speaking rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed into the trap.


After giving the clerk orders about the work to be done, Alpatych, not
trying to imitate the prince now, lifted the hat from his bald head and
crossed himself three times.


"If there is anything.
.
.


"Women, women! Women's fuss!" muttered Alpatych to himself and started
on his journey, looking round at the fields of yellow rye and the
still-green, thickly growing oats, and at other quite black fields just
being plowed a second time.


Having baited the horses twice on the way, he arrived at the town toward
evening on the fourth of August.


Alpatych kept meeting and overtaking baggage trains and troops on the
road.


On reaching Smolensk on the evening of the fourth of August he put up
in the Gachina suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept by Ferapontov,
where he had been in the habit of putting up for the last thirty years.
 He was a stout, dark,
red-faced peasant in the forties, with thick lips, a broad knob of a
nose, similar knobs over his black frowning brows, and a round belly.
 On seeing Alpatych he went
up to him.


"You're welcome, Yakov Alpatych.
 Folks are leaving the town, but you
have come to it," said he.
 What I say is: orders have been
given not to let them in, so that must be right.
 And the peasants are
asking three rubles for carting--it isn't Christian!"

Yakov Alpatych heard without heeding.
 He asked for a samovar and for hay
for his horses, and when he had had his tea he went to bed.
 Next morning Alpatych
donned a jacket he wore only in town and went out on business.
 "A good day for
harvesting," thought Alpatych.
 Alpatych went to the
shops, to government offices, to the post office, and to the Governor's.

In the offices and shops and at the post office everyone was talking
about the army and about the enemy who was already attacking the town,
everybody was asking what should be done, and all were trying to calm
one another.


In front of the Governor's house Alpatych found a large number of
people, Cossacks, and a traveling carriage of the Governor's.
 At the
porch he met two of the landed gentry, one of whom he knew.
 This man, an
ex-captain of police, was saying angrily:

"It's no joke, you know! It's all very well if you're single.
 'One man
though undone is but one,' as the proverb says, but with thirteen in
your family and all the property.
.
.
 They've brought us to utter ruin!
What sort of governors are they to do that? They ought to be hanged--the
brigands!.
.
"

"Oh come, that's enough!" said the other.


"Oh, Yakov Alpatych! What have you come for?"

"To see the Governor by his excellency's order," answered Alpatych,
lifting his head and proudly thrusting his hand into the bosom of his
coat as he always did when he mentioned the prince.
.
.


"Yes, go and find out!" shouted the angry gentleman.
.
.
.
 the brigands!" he repeated, and
descended the porch steps.


Alpatych swayed his head and went upstairs.
 In the waiting room were
tradesmen, women, and officials, looking silently at one another.
 The
door of the Governor's room opened and they all rose and moved forward.

An official ran out, said some words to a merchant, called a stout
official with a cross hanging on his neck to follow him, and vanished
again, evidently wishing to avoid the inquiring looks and questions
addressed to him.
 Alpatych moved forward and next time the official came
out addressed him, one hand placed in the breast of his buttoned coat,
and handed him two letters.


A few minutes later the Governor received Alpatych and hurriedly said to
him:

"Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothing: I acted on the
highest instructions--here.
.
.
"

But the Governor did not finish: a dusty perspiring officer ran into the
room and began to say something in French.
 The Governor's face expressed
terror.


"Go," he said, nodding his head to Alpatych, and began questioning the
officer.


Eager, frightened, helpless glances were turned on Alpatych when he came
out of the Governor's room.
 Involuntarily listening now to the firing,
which had drawn nearer and was increasing in strength, Alpatych hurried
to his inn.
 From this you will see that
you have a perfect right to reassure the inhabitants of Smolensk, for
those defended by two such brave armies may feel assured of victory.
)


People were anxiously roaming about the streets.


Carts piled high with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards kept
emerging from the gates of the yards and moving along the streets.

Loaded carts stood at the house next to Ferapontov's and women were
wailing and lamenting as they said good-by.


Alpatych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and went
straight to the shed where his horses and trap were.
 The coachman was
asleep.

From the host's room came the sounds of a child crying, the despairing
sobs of a woman, and the hoarse angry shouting of Ferapontov.
 The cook
began running hither and thither in the passage like a frightened hen,
just as Alpatych entered.
.
.
 Beat her.
.
 dragged her
about so!.


"She kept begging to go away.
 She's a woman! 'Take me away,' says she,
'don't let me perish with my little children! Folks,' she says, 'are all
gone, so why,' she says, 'don't we go?' And he began beating and pulling
her about so!"

At these words Alpatych nodded as if in approval, and not wishing to
hear more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper's, where
he had left his purchases.


"You brute, you murderer!" screamed a thin, pale woman who, with a baby
in her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst through the door
at that moment and down the steps into the yard.


Ferapontov came out after her, but on seeing Alpatych adjusted his
waistcoat, smoothed his hair, yawned, and followed Alpatych into the
opposite room.


"Going already?" said he.


Alpatych, without answering or looking at his host, sorted his packages
and asked how much he owed.


"We'll reckon up! Well, have you been to the Governor's?" asked
Ferapontov.


"With our business, how can we get away?" said Ferapontov.
 "Ours must have got the best of it.
 So we're in force, it seems.
.
 The noise of wheels, hoofs, and
bells was heard from the gateway as a little trap passed out.


It was by now late in the afternoon.
 Alpatych looked out of the window
and went to the door.
 Suddenly the strange sound of a far-off whistling
and thud was heard, followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dull
roar that set the windows rattling.


He went out into the street: two men were running past toward the
bridge.
 From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud of
cannon balls and bursting shells falling on the town.
 But these sounds
were hardly heard in comparison with the noise of the firing outside the
town and attracted little attention from the inhabitants.
 The town was
being bombarded by a hundred and thirty guns which Napoleon had ordered
up after four o'clock.


The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate.
 Several people came round the corner talking eagerly.
 Meanwhile still more projectiles, now with
the swift sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with the agreeable
intermittent whistle of a shell, flew over people's heads incessantly,
but not one fell close by, they all flew over.
 Alpatych was getting into
his trap.
 The loudest sound in that crowd was her
wailing.


"Oh-h-h! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don't let me die! My good
souls!.
.
"

Five minutes later no one remained in the street.
 The cook, with her
thigh broken by a shell splinter, had been carried into the kitchen.

Alpatych, his coachman, Ferapontov's wife and children and the house
porter were all sitting in the cellar, listening.
 The roar of guns, the
whistling of projectiles, and the piteous moaning of the cook, which
rose above the other sounds, did not cease for a moment.
 The mistress
rocked and hushed her baby and when anyone came into the cellar asked
in a pathetic whisper what had become of her husband who had remained
in the street.
 A shopman who entered told her that her husband had
gone with others to the cathedral, whence they were fetching the
wonder-working icon of Smolensk.


Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside.
 Alpatych left the cellar
and stopped in the doorway.
 The evening sky that had been so clear was
clouded with smoke, through which, high up, the sickle of the new moon
shone strangely.
 Now that the terrible din of the guns had ceased a hush
seemed to reign over the town, broken only by the rustle of footsteps,
the moaning, the distant cries, and the crackle of fires which seemed
widespread everywhere.
 The cook's moans had now subsided.
 Through
the streets soldiers in various uniforms walked or ran confusedly in
different directions like ants from a ruined ant-hill.
 Alpatych went out
to the gate.
 A retreating regiment, thronging and hurrying, blocked the
street.


Noticing him, an officer said: "The town is being abandoned.
 The women, who had been silent till then, suddenly
began to wail as they looked at the fires--the smoke and even the flames
of which could be seen in the failing twilight--and as if in reply
the same kind of lamentation was heard from other parts of the street.

Inside the shed Alpatych and the coachman arranged the tangled reins and
traces of their horses with trembling hands.
 Just then Ferapontov returned
and entered his shop.
 On seeing the soldiers he was about to shout at
them, but suddenly stopped and, clutching at his hair, burst into sobs
and laughter:

"Loot everything, lads! Don't let those devils get it!" he cried, taking
some bags of flour himself and throwing them into the street.
 On seeing Alpatych, Ferapontov turned to him:

"Russia is done for!" he cried.
 "Alpatych, I'll set the place on fire
myself.
 We're done for!.
.
" and Ferapontov ran into the yard.


Soldiers were passing in a constant stream along the street blocking
it completely, so that Alpatych could not pass out and had to wait.

Ferapontov's wife and children were also sitting in a cart waiting till
it was possible to drive out.
 There were stars in the sky and the new moon shone out
amid the smoke that screened it.
 Black figures
flitted about before the fire, and through the incessant crackling of
the flames talking and shouting could be heard.
 The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallen
in, the wooden roof was collapsing, and the rafters were alight.
 The
crowd was evidently watching for the roof to fall in, and Alpatych
watched for it too.


Prince Andrew in his riding cloak, mounted on a black horse, was looking
at Alpatych from the back of the crowd.


"Why are you here?" he asked.
.
 your excellency," stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs.
 "Are
we really lost? Master!.
.
.
 Alpatych told how he had been sent there and how difficult it
was to get away.


"Are we really quite lost, your excellency?" he asked again.
 He wrote to his sister:


"Smolensk is being abandoned.
 Bald Hills will be occupied by the enemy
within a week.
 Set off immediately for Moscow.
 Let me know at once when
you will start.
 Send by special messenger to Usvyazh.
"


Having written this and given the paper to Alpatych, he told him how
to arrange for departure of the prince, the princess, his son, and the
boy's tutor, and how and where to let him know immediately.
 Before
he had had time to finish giving these instructions, a chief of staff
followed by a suite galloped up to him.


"You are a colonel?" shouted the chief of staff with a German accent,
in a voice familiar to Prince Andrew.
 "Houses are set on fire in your
presence and you stand by! What does this mean? You will answer for
it!" shouted Berg, who was now assistant to the chief of staff of the
commander of the left flank of the infantry of the first army, a place,
as Berg said, "very agreeable and well en evidence.


"So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth, and if by the
tenth I don't receive news that they have all got away I shall have to
throw up everything and come myself to Bald Hills.
"

"Prince," said Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, "I only spoke because
I have to obey orders, because I always do obey exactly.
.
.


Something cracked in the flames.
 The fire died down for a moment and
wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof.
 There was another
terrible crash and something huge collapsed.
 The flames flared up again, lighting the animated, delighted,
exhausted faces of the spectators.


The man in the frieze coat raised his arms and shouted:

"It's fine, lads! Now it's raging.
 It's fine!"

"That's the owner himself," cried several voices.






CHAPTER V


From Smolensk the troops continued to retreat, followed by the enemy.

On the tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marching
along the highroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills.
 The cattle lowed from
hunger, finding no food on the sun-parched meadows.
 Only at night and
in the forests while the dew lasted was there any freshness.
 But on the
road, the highroad along which the troops marched, there was no such
freshness even at night or when the road passed through the forest; the
dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned up more than six inches
deep.
 As soon as day dawned the march began.
 There was no wind, and the men choked in that motionless
atmosphere.
 When they passed through a village they all rushed to the wells
and fought for the water and drank it down to the mud.
 A novel feeling of anger against
the foe made him forget his own sorrow.
 In the regiment they called him "our prince," were proud
of him and loved him.
 As
soon as he came across a former acquaintance or anyone from the
staff, he bristled up immediately and grew spiteful, ironical, and
contemptuous.
 Two days previously
he had received news that his father, son, and sister had left for
Moscow; and though there was nothing for him to do at Bald Hills, Prince
Andrew with a characteristic desire to foment his own grief decided that
he must ride there.
 Riding past the pond where there used always to be dozens
of women chattering as they rinsed their linen or beat it with wooden
beetles, Prince Andrew noticed that there was not a soul about and that
the little washing wharf, torn from its place and half submerged, was
floating on its side in the middle of the pond.
 He rode to the keeper's
lodge.
 No one at the stone entrance gates of the drive and the door
stood open.
 Grass had already begun to grow on the garden paths, and
horses and calves were straying in the English park.
 He called for
Taras the gardener, but no one replied.
 Having gone round the corner
of the hothouse to the ornamental garden, he saw that the carved garden
fence was broken and branches of the plum trees had been torn off with
the fruit.
 An old peasant whom Prince Andrew in his childhood had often
seen at the gate was sitting on a green garden seat, plaiting a bast
shoe.


He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up.


Prince Andrew rode up to the house.
 Several limes in the old garden had
been cut down and a piebald mare and her foal were wandering in front of
the house among the rosebushes.
 The shutters were all closed, except at
one window which was open.
 Alpatych, having sent his family away, was alone at
Bald Hills and was sitting indoors reading the Lives of the Saints.
 Seventy quarters of grain had also been carted
away.
 The hay and the spring corn, of which Alpatych said there had been
a remarkable crop that year, had been commandeered by the troops and
mown down while still green.
 The peasants were ruined; some of them too
had gone to Bogucharovo, only a few remained.


Alpatych, understanding the question to refer to their departure for
Bogucharovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and again went
into details concerning the estate management, asking for instructions.


"What am I to say to him?" thought Prince Andrew, looking down on the
old man's bald head shining in the sun and seeing by the expression on
his face that the old man himself understood how untimely such questions
were and only asked them to allay his grief.
 Three regiments have been here and spent
the night, dragoons mostly.
 I took down the name and rank of their
commanding officer, to hand in a complaint about it.
"

"Well, and what are you going to do? Will you stay here if the enemy
occupies the place?" asked Prince Andrew.


Alpatych turned his face to Prince Andrew, looked at him, and suddenly
with a solemn gesture raised his arm.


A group of bareheaded peasants was approaching across the meadow toward
the prince.


"Well, good-by!" said Prince Andrew, bending over to Alpatych.


The old man was still sitting in the ornamental garden, like a fly
impassive on the face of a loved one who is dead, tapping the last on
which he was making the bast shoe, and two little girls, running out
from the hot house carrying in their skirts plums they had plucked from
the trees there, came upon Prince Andrew.


Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste, unwilling to let them
see that they had been observed.
 He was sorry for the pretty frightened
little girl, was afraid of looking at her, and yet felt an irresistible
desire to do so.
 A new sensation of comfort and relief came over him
when, seeing these girls, he realized the existence of other human
interests entirely aloof from his own and just as legitimate as those
that occupied him.
 Evidently these girls passionately desired one
thing--to carry away and eat those green plums without being caught--and
Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their enterprise.
 He
could not resist looking at them once more.
 Believing their danger past,
they sprang from their ambush and, chirruping something in their shrill
little voices and holding up their skirts, their bare little sunburned
feet scampered merrily and quickly across the meadow grass.


Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by having ridden off the dusty
highroad along which the troops were moving.
 It was past one o'clock.
 The dust always hung motionless above the buzz
of talk that came from the resting troops.
 There was no wind.
 As he
crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled the ooze and freshness of the
pond.
 All this naked white human flesh, laughing and shrieking,
floundered about in that dirty pool like carp stuffed into a watering
can, and the suggestion of merriment in that floundering mass rendered
it specially pathetic.


One fair-haired young soldier of the third company, whom Prince Andrew
knew and who had a strap round the calf of one leg, crossed himself,
stepped back to get a good run, and plunged into the water; another,
a dark noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy, stood up to his
waist in the water joyfully wriggling his muscular figure and snorted
with satisfaction as he poured the water over his head with hands
blackened to the wrists.


"It's dirty," replied Prince Andrew, making a grimace.


"We'll clear it out for you in a minute," said Timokhin, and, still
undressed, ran off to clear the men out of the pond.
 He decided that he
would rather wash himself with water in the barn.



On the seventh of August Prince Bagration wrote as follows from his
quarters at Mikhaylovna on the Smolensk road:


Dear Count Alexis Andreevich--(He was writing to Arakcheev but knew that
his letter would be read by the Emperor, and therefore weighed every
word in it to the best of his ability.
 It is pitiable and sad, and
the whole army is in despair that this most important place has been
wantonly abandoned.
 I, for my part, begged him personally most urgently
and finally wrote him, but nothing would induce him to consent.
 It is disgraceful, a stain
on our army, and as for him, he ought, it seems to me, not to live.
.


What would it have cost him to hold out for another two days? They would
have had to retire of their own accord, for they had no water for men
or horses.
 He gave me his word he would not retreat, but suddenly sent
instructions that he was retiring that night.
.
.
 Your Minister may perhaps
be good as a Minister, but as a general he is not merely bad but
execrable, yet to him is entrusted the fate of our whole country.
 I
am really frantic with vexation; forgive my writing boldly.
 It is clear
that the man who advocates the conclusion of a peace, and that the
Minister should command the army, does not love our sovereign and
desires the ruin of us all.
 For the Minister is leading these visitors after him to Moscow
in a most masterly way.
 The whole army feels great suspicion of the
Imperial aide-de-camp Wolzogen.
 He is said to be more Napoleon's man
than ours, and he is always advising the Minister.
 I am not merely civil
to him but obey him like a corporal, though I am his senior.

Consider that on our retreat we have lost by fatigue and left in the
hospital more than fifteen thousand men, and had we attacked this would
not have happened.
.






CHAPTER VI


Among the innumerable categories applicable to the phenomena of human
life one may discriminate between those in which substance prevails
and those in which form prevails.
 To the latter--as distinguished
from village, country, provincial, or even Moscow life--we may allot
Petersburg life, and especially the life of its salons.
 And in Helene's salon, which Rumyantsev
himself honored with his visits, regarding Helene as a remarkably
intelligent woman, they talked with the same ecstasy in 1812 as in 1808
of the "great nation" and the "great man," and regretted our rupture
with France, a rupture which, according to them, ought to be promptly
terminated by peace.
 The progress of the war was eagerly followed, and only
the reports most flattering to our army were circulated.
 In that circle they discountenanced those
who advised hurried preparations for a removal to Kazan of the court and
the girls' educational establishments under the patronage of the Dowager
Empress.
 In that circle the Moscow enthusiasm--news of which had
reached Petersburg simultaneously with the Emperor's return--was
ridiculed sarcastically and very cleverly, though with much caution.
 He visited his "good friend
Anna Pavlovna" as well as his daughter's "diplomatic salon," and often
in his constant comings and goings between the two camps became confused
and said at Helene's what he should have said at Anna Pavlovna's and
vice versa.


Soon after the Emperor's return Prince Vasili in a conversation about
the war at Anna Pavlovna's severely condemned Barclay de Tolly, but was
undecided as to who ought to be appointed commander in chief.


Anna Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutuzov had done
nothing but cause the Emperor annoyance.


"I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobility," Prince
Vasili interrupted, "but they did not listen to me.
 They did
not listen to me.


"It's all this mania for opposition," he went on.
 "And who for? It is
all because we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Muscovites,"
Prince Vasili continued, forgetting for a moment that though at Helene's
one had to ridicule the Moscow enthusiasm, at Anna Pavlovna's one had to
be ecstatic about it.
 But he retrieved his mistake at once.
 "Now, is
it suitable that Count Kutuzov, the oldest general in Russia, should
preside at that tribunal? He will get nothing for his pains! How could
they make a man commander in chief who cannot mount a horse, who drops
asleep at a council, and has the very worst morals! A good reputation
he made for himself at Bucharest! I don't speak of his capacity as a
general, but at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit, blind old
man, positively blind? A fine idea to have a blind general! He can't see
anything.
 To play blindman's bluff? He can't see at all!"

No one replied to his remarks.
 But on the
twenty-ninth of July Kutuzov received the title of Prince.
 This might
indicate a wish to get rid of him, and therefore Prince Vasili's opinion
continued to be correct though he was not now in any hurry to express
it.
 But on the eighth of August a committee, consisting of Field Marshal
Saltykov, Arakcheev, Vyazmitinov, Lopukhin, and Kochubey met to consider
the progress of the war.
 This committee came to the conclusion that
our failures were due to a want of unity in the command and though the
members of the committee were aware of the Emperor's dislike of Kutuzov,
after a short deliberation they agreed to advise his appointment as
commander in chief.
" The latter was very attentive to Anna Pavlovna
because he wanted to be appointed director of one of the educational
establishments for young ladies.
 Prince Vasili entered the room with the
air of a happy conqueror who has attained the object of his desires.


"Well, have you heard the great news? Prince Kutuzov is field marshal!
All dissensions are at an end! I am so glad, so delighted! At last
we have a man!" said he, glancing sternly and significantly round at
everyone in the drawing room.


The "man of great merit," despite his desire to obtain the post of
director, could not refrain from reminding Prince Vasili of his former
opinion.


"But, Prince, they say he is blind!" said he, reminding Prince Vasili of
his own words.


"Eh? Nonsense! He sees well enough," said Prince Vasili rapidly, in a
deep voice and with a slight cough--the voice and cough with which he
was wont to dispose of all difficulties.


"He sees well enough," he added.
 "And what I am so pleased about," he
went on, "is that our sovereign has given him full powers over all
the armies and the whole region--powers no commander in chief ever had
before.
 He is a second autocrat," he concluded with a victorious smile.


"God grant it! God grant it!" said Anna Pavlovna.


The "man of great merit," who was still a novice in court circles,
wishing to flatter Anna Pavlovna by defending her former position on
this question, observed:

"It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutuzov those powers.

They say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read, when he said to
Kutuzov: 'Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor.
'"

"Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech," said Anna Pavlovna.


"Oh, no, no!" warmly rejoined Prince Vasili, who would not now yield
Kutuzov to anyone; in his opinion Kutuzov was not only admirable
himself, but was adored by everybody.
 "No, that's impossible," said he,
"for our sovereign appreciated him so highly before.
"

"God grant only that Prince Kutuzov assumes real power and does not
allow anyone to put a spoke in his wheel," observed Anna Pavlovna.
 Do you know what he said to the
Emperor?"

And Prince Vasili repeated the words supposed to have been spoken by
Kutuzov to the Emperor.
"

"Oh, a very wise man is Prince Kutuzov! I have known him a long time!"

"They even say," remarked the "man of great merit" who did not yet
possess courtly tact, "that his excellency made it an express condition
that the sovereign himself should not be with the army.
"

As soon as he said this both Prince Vasili and Anna Pavlovna turned away
from him and glanced sadly at one another with a sigh at his naivete.






CHAPTER VII


While this was taking place in Petersburg the French had already passed
Smolensk and were drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow.
 Napoleon's
historian Thiers, like other of his historians, trying to justify his
hero says that he was drawn to the walls of Moscow against his will.
 Here besides the law of retrospection, which regards
all the past as a preparation for events that subsequently occur,
the law of reciprocity comes in, confusing the whole matter.
 A good
chessplayer having lost a game is sincerely convinced that his loss
resulted from a mistake he made and looks for that mistake in the
opening, but forgets that at each stage of the game there were similar
mistakes and that none of his moves were perfect.
 He only notices the
mistake to which he pays attention, because his opponent took advantage
of it.
 How much more complex than this is the game of war, which
occurs under certain limits of time, and where it is not one will that
manipulates lifeless objects, but everything results from innumerable
conflicts of various wills!

After Smolensk Napoleon sought a battle beyond Dorogobuzh at Vyazma, and
then at Tsarevo-Zaymishche, but it happened that owing to a conjunction
of innumerable circumstances the Russians could not give battle till
they reached Borodino, seventy miles from Moscow.
 From Vyazma Napoleon
ordered a direct advance on Moscow.


Moscou, la capitale asiatique de ce grand empire, la ville sacree des
peuples d'Alexandre, Moscou avec ses innombrables eglises en forme de
pagodes chinoises, * this Moscow gave Napoleon's imagination no rest.
 Berthier, his chief of staff, dropped behind to
question a Russian prisoner captured by the cavalry.



     * "Moscow, the Asiatic capital of this great empire, the
     sacred city of Alexander's people, Moscow with its
     innumerable churches shaped like Chinese pagodas.
"


"Well?" asked Napoleon.
 He
is a very shrewd and garrulous fellow.
 Several adjutants galloped
off, and an hour later, Lavrushka, the serf Denisov had handed over
to Rostov, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly's jacket and on a French
cavalry saddle, with a merry, and tipsy face.
 Napoleon told him to ride
by his side and began questioning him.


"You are a Cossack?"

"Yes, a Cossack, your Honor.
"

"The Cossack, not knowing in what company he was, for Napoleon's plain
appearance had nothing about it that would reveal to an Oriental mind
the presence of a monarch, talked with extreme familiarity of the
incidents of the war," says Thiers, narrating this episode.
 In
reality Lavrushka, having got drunk the day before and left his master
dinnerless, had been whipped and sent to the village in quest of
chickens, where he engaged in looting till the French took him prisoner.


Finding himself in the company of Napoleon, whose identity he had easily
and surely recognized, Lavrushka was not in the least abashed but merely
did his utmost to gain his new master's favor.


He knew very well that this was Napoleon, but Napoleon's presence could
no more intimidate him than Rostov's, or a sergeant major's with the
rods, would have done, for he had nothing that either the sergeant major
or Napoleon could deprive him of.


So he rattled on, telling all the gossip he had heard among the
orderlies.
 Much of it true.
 But when Napoleon asked him whether the
Russians thought they would beat Bonaparte or not, Lavrushka screwed up
his eyes and considered.


In this question he saw subtle cunning, as men of his type see cunning
in everything, so he frowned and did not answer immediately.


"It's like this," he said thoughtfully, "if there's a battle soon, yours
will win.
 That's right.
 But if three days pass, then after that, well,
then that same battle will not soon be over.


Lavrushka noticed this and to entertain him further, pretending not to
know who Napoleon was, added:

"We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten everybody in
the world, but we are a different matter.
.


The interpreter translated these words without the last phrase, and
Bonaparte smiled.
 "The young Cossack made his mighty interlocutor
smile," says Thiers.
 After riding a few paces in silence, Napoleon
turned to Berthier and said he wished to see how the news that he was
talking to the Emperor himself, to that very Emperor who had written his
immortally victorious name on the Pyramids, would affect this enfant du
Don.
 *


    * "Child of the Don.
"


The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrushka.
 "As soon as Napoleon's interpreter had spoken," says Thiers,
"the Cossack, seized by amazement, did not utter another word, but rode
on, his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reached him across
the steppes of the East.
 All his loquacity was suddenly arrested and
replaced by a naive and silent feeling of admiration.
"

Napoleon rode on, dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to his
imagination, and "the bird restored to its native fields" galloped to
our outposts, inventing on the way all that had not taken place but that
he meant to relate to his comrades.
 He
found the Cossacks, inquired for the regiment operating with Platov's
detachment and by evening found his master, Nicholas Rostov, quartered
at Yankovo.
 Rostov was just mounting to go for a ride round the
neighboring villages with Ilyin; he let Lavrushka have another horse and
took him along with him.


After the return of Alpatych from Smolensk the old prince suddenly
seemed to awake as from a dream.
 He ordered the militiamen to be called
up from the villages and armed, and wrote a letter to the commander in
chief informing him that he had resolved to remain at Bald Hills to the
last extremity and to defend it, leaving to the commander in chief's
discretion to take measures or not for the defense of Bald Hills, where
one of Russia's oldest generals would be captured or killed, and he
announced to his household that he would remain at Bald Hills.


But while himself remaining, he gave instructions for the departure of
the princess and Dessalles with the little prince to Bogucharovo and
thence to Moscow.
 Princess Mary, alarmed by her father's feverish and
sleepless activity after his previous apathy, could not bring herself to
leave him alone and for the first time in her life ventured to disobey
him.
 She refused to go away and her father's fury broke over her in a
terrible storm.
 He repeated every injustice he had ever inflicted on
her.
 Trying to convict her, he told her she had worn him out, had caused
his quarrel with his son, had harbored nasty suspicions of him, making
it the object of her life to poison his existence, and he drove her from
his study telling her that if she did not go away it was all the same
to him.
 He declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and
warned her not to dare to let him see her.
 The fact that he did not, as
she had feared, order her to be carried away by force but only told her
not to let him see her cheered Princess Mary.
 She knew it was a proof
that in the depth of his soul he was glad she was remaining at home and
had not gone away.


The morning after little Nicholas had left, the old prince donned his
full uniform and prepared to visit the commander in chief.
 His caleche
was already at the door.
 She sat by the window listening to
his voice which reached her from the garden.


Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down the flower-bordered path, and
into the avenue.
 A large crowd of militiamen and domestics were moving
toward her, and in their midst several men were supporting by
the armpits and dragging along a little old man in a uniform and
decorations.
 All she could see
was that his former stern and determined expression had altered to one
of timidity and submission.
 On seeing his daughter he moved his helpless
lips and made a hoarse sound.
 It was impossible to make out what he
wanted.


The doctor, who was fetched that same night, bled him and said that the
prince had had a seizure paralyzing his right side.


It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills, and
next day they moved the prince to Bogucharovo, the doctor accompanying
him.
 He was unconscious and lay like
a distorted corpse.
 He muttered unceasingly, his eyebrows and lips
twitching, and it was impossible to tell whether he understood what was
going on around him or not.


He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally.
 There was no
hope of recovery.
 It was impossible for him to travel, it would not do
to let him die on the road.
 "Would it not be better if the end did come,
the very end?" Princess Mary sometimes thought.
 Night and day, hardly
sleeping at all, she watched him and, terrible to say, often watched
him not with hope of finding signs of improvement but wishing to find
symptoms of the approach of the end.


Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself, yet
there it was.
 And what seemed still more terrible to her was that since
her father's illness began (perhaps even sooner, when she stayed with
him expecting something to happen), all the personal desires and hopes
that had been forgotten or sleeping within her had awakened.
 Thoughts
that had not entered her mind for years--thoughts of a life free from
the fear of her father, and even the possibility of love and of family
happiness--floated continually in her imagination like temptations
of the devil.
 She
assumed an attitude of prayer, looked at the icons, repeated the words
of a prayer, but she could not pray.
 She felt that a different world had
now taken possession of her--the life of a world of strenuous and free
activity, quite opposed to the spiritual world in which till now she
had been confined and in which her greatest comfort had been prayer.


It was becoming dangerous to remain in Bogucharovo.
 News of the approach
of the French came from all sides, and in one village, ten miles from
Bogucharovo, a homestead had been looted by French marauders.


The doctor insisted on the necessity of moving the prince; the
provincial Marshal of the Nobility sent an official to Princess Mary
to persuade her to get away as quickly as possible, and the head of the
rural police having come to Bogucharovo urged the same thing, saying
that the French were only some twenty-five miles away, that French
proclamations were circulating in the villages, and that if the princess
did not take her father away before the fifteenth, he could not answer
for the consequences.


The princess decided to leave on the fifteenth.
 She knew that her going in during
the night at an unusual hour would irritate him.
 Occasionally amid these memories
temptations of the devil would surge into her imagination: thoughts of
how things would be after his death, and how her new, liberated life
would be ordered.


She woke late.
 On waking
she listened to what was going on behind the door and, hearing him
groan, said to herself with a sigh that things were still the same.


She washed, dressed, said her prayers, and went out to the porch.
 In
front of it stood carriages without horses and things were being packed
into the vehicles.


It was a warm, gray morning.
 Princess Mary stopped at the porch, still
horrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrange her thoughts
before going to her father.
 The doctor came downstairs and went out to
her.


"He is a little better today," said he.
 "I was looking for you.
 One can
make out something of what he is saying.
 Come in,
he is asking for you.
"

Princess Mary's heart beat so violently at this news that she grew pale
and leaned against the wall to keep from falling.


"Come," said the doctor.


Princess Mary entered her father's room and went up to his bed.
 He seemed altogether so thin, small, and pathetic.
 His face
seemed to have shriveled or melted; his features had grown smaller.

Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand.
 His left hand pressed hers
so that she understood that he had long been waiting for her to come.


She looked at him in dismay trying to guess what he wanted of her.


Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him.
 The comic
efforts with which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and with
difficulty repress the sobs that rose to her throat.
 He said something,
repeating the same words several times.
 She could not understand them,
but tried to guess what he was saying and inquiringly repeated the words
he uttered.
.
ar.
.
ate.
.
.
.
" he repeated several times.
 The doctor thought
he had guessed them, and inquiringly repeated: "Mary, are you afraid?"
The prince shook his head, again repeated the same sounds.


"My mind, my mind aches?" questioned Princess Mary.
.
 about you.
.
.
 thoughts.
" he then uttered much
more clearly than he had done before, now that he was sure of being
understood.


He moved his hand over her hair.


"I have been calling you all night.
.
.
" she said through her tears.
 "I was afraid to
come in.
"

He pressed her hand.
.
.
 "Why didn't you
come in?"

"And I was wishing for his death!" thought Princess Mary.


He was silent awhile.


"Thank you.
.
 daughter dear!.
.
 for all, for all.
.
.
.
 forgive!.
.
.


"I have a letter from him," she replied.


He glanced at her with timid surprise.


"Where is he?"

"He's with the army, Father, at Smolensk.
"

He closed his eyes and remained silent a long time.


"Yes," he said, softly and distinctly.
 "Russia has perished.
 They've
destroyed her.
 Princess Mary
could no longer restrain herself and wept while she gazed at his face.
 His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes, and
Tikhon, understanding him, wiped away the tears.


Then he again opened his eyes and said something none of them could
understand for a long time, till at last Tikhon understood and repeated
it.
 Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in the mood in
which he had just been speaking.
 She thought he was speaking of Russia,
or Prince Andrew, of herself, of his grandson, or of his own death, and
so she could not guess his words.


"Put on your white dress.


Having understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder, and the doctor
taking her arm led her out to the veranda, soothing her and trying to
persuade her to prepare for her journey.
 The day had cleared, it was hot and
sunny.
 She could understand nothing, think of nothing and feel nothing,
except passionate love for her father, love such as she thought she had
never felt till that moment.
.
 I.
.
.
.
 I wished for his death! Yes, I wanted it to end
quicker.
.
 I wished to be at peace.
.
.
.
 And what will become of me? What
use will peace be when he is no longer here?" Princess Mary murmured,
pacing the garden with hurried steps and pressing her hands to her bosom
which heaved with convulsive sobs.
 Princess Mary listened without understanding him; she
led him to the house, offered him lunch, and sat down with him.


"Go away, Princess! Go away.
.
 She did not know how
long she had been there when she was aroused by the sound of a woman's
footsteps running along the path.
 She rose and saw Dunyasha her maid,
who was evidently looking for her, and who stopped suddenly as if in
alarm on seeing her mistress.


"Please come, Princess.
.
 The Prince," said Dunyasha in a breaking
voice.


"Let me alone; it's not true!" she cried angrily to him.
 "Why are these people with frightened faces stopping me?
I don't want any of them! And what are they doing here?" she thought.
 In the room were her nurse and other women.



In the presence of Tikhon and the doctor the women washed what had been
the prince, tied his head up with a handkerchief that the mouth should
not stiffen while open, and with another handkerchief tied together the
legs that were already spreading apart.
 Toward night candles were burning round his
coffin, a pall was spread over it, the floor was strewn with sprays of
juniper, a printed band was tucked in under his shriveled head, and in a
corner of the room sat a chanter reading the psalms.
 They differed from them in speech, dress, and
disposition.
 They were called steppe peasants.
 The old prince used to
approve of them for their endurance at work when they came to Bald Hills
to help with the harvest or to dig ponds, and ditches, but he disliked
them for their boorishness.


Prince Andrew's last stay at Bogucharovo, when he introduced hospitals
and schools and reduced the quitrent the peasants had to pay, had not
softened their disposition but had on the contrary strengthened in
them the traits of character the old prince called boorishness.
 Various
obscure rumors were always current among them: at one time a rumor that
they would all be enrolled as Cossacks; at another of a new religion to
which they were all to be converted; then of some proclamation of the
Tsar's and of an oath to the Tsar Paul in 1797 (in connection with which
it was rumored that freedom had been granted them but the landowners had
stopped it), then of Peter Fedorovich's return to the throne in seven
years' time, when everything would be made free and so "simple" that
there would be no restrictions.
 Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and
his invasion were connected in their minds with the same sort of vague
notions of Antichrist, the end of the world, and "pure freedom.
 There were very few resident landlords in the neighborhood
and also very few domestic or literate serfs, and in the lives of the
peasantry of those parts the mysterious undercurrents in the life of
the Russian people, the causes and meaning of which are so baffling to
contemporaries, were more clearly and strongly noticeable than among
others.
 One instance, which had occurred some twenty years before, was
a movement among the peasants to emigrate to some unknown "warm rivers.
"
Hundreds of peasants, among them the Bogucharovo folk, suddenly began
selling their cattle and moving in whole families toward the southeast.
 They set off in caravans, bought their freedom one
by one or ran away, and drove or walked toward the "warm rivers.
" Many
of them were punished, some sent to Siberia, many died of cold and
hunger on the road, many returned of their own accord, and the movement
died down of itself just as it had sprung up, without apparent reason.
 Now in 1812, to anyone
living in close touch with these people it was apparent that these
undercurrents were acting strongly and nearing an eruption.


Alpatych, who had reached Bogucharovo shortly before the old prince's
death, noticed an agitation among the peasants, and that contrary to
what was happening in the Bald Hills district, where over a radius of
forty miles all the peasants were moving away and leaving their villages
to be devastated by the Cossacks, the peasants in the steppe region
round Bogucharovo were, it was rumored, in touch with the French,
received leaflets from them that passed from hand to hand, and did not
migrate.
 He learned from domestic serfs loyal to him that the peasant
Karp, who possessed great influence in the village commune and had
recently been away driving a government transport, had returned with
news that the Cossacks were destroying deserted villages, but that the
French did not harm them.
 As proof of this the peasant had
brought from Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes (he did not know that
they were false) paid to him in advance for hay.
 Yet there was no
time to waste.
 On the fifteenth, the day of the old prince's death,
the Marshal had insisted on Princess Mary's leaving at once, as it was
becoming dangerous.
 He had told her that after the sixteenth he could
not be responsible for what might happen.
 But this he was unable to do, for he received tidings that
the French had unexpectedly advanced, and had barely time to remove his
own family and valuables from his estate.


For some thirty years Bogucharovo had been managed by the village Elder,
Dron, whom the old prince called by the diminutive "Dronushka.
"

Dron was one of those physically and mentally vigorous peasants who grow
big beards as soon as they are of age and go on unchanged till they
are sixty or seventy, without a gray hair or the loss of a tooth, as
straight and strong at sixty as at thirty.
" During the
whole time of his service Dron had never been drunk or ill, never after
sleepless nights or the hardest tasks had he shown the least fatigue,
and though he could not read he had never forgotten a single money
account or the number of quarters of flour in any of the endless
cartloads he sold for the prince, nor a single shock of the whole corn
crop on any single acre of the Bogucharovo fields.


Alpatych, arriving from the devastated Bald Hills estate, sent for his
Dron on the day of the prince's funeral and told him to have twelve
horses got ready for the princess' carriages and eighteen carts for
the things to be removed from Bogucharovo.
 Though the peasants paid
quitrent, Alpatych thought no difficulty would be made about complying
with this order, for there were two hundred and thirty households at
work in Bogucharovo and the peasants were well to do.
 Alpatych named certain
peasants he knew, from whom he told him to take the carts.


Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away carting.

Alpatych named others, but they too, according to Dron, had no horses
available: some horses were carting for the government, others were too
weak, and others had died for want of fodder.


Alpatych looked intently at Dron and frowned.
 He was a model steward, possessing in the highest
degree the faculty of divining the needs and instincts of those he dealt
with.
 Having glanced at Dron he at once understood that his answers did
not express his personal views but the general mood of the Bogucharovo
commune, by which the Elder had already been carried away.

He noticed this hesitation in Dron's look and therefore frowned and
moved closer up to him.
 "Don't talk nonsense to me.
 His
excellency Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move all the people
away and not leave them with the enemy, and there is an order from the
Tsar about it too.
 Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar.
 Do you
hear?"

"I hear," Dron answered without lifting his eyes.


Alpatych was not satisfied with this reply.


"The power is in your hands," Dron rejoined sadly.


"Eh, Dron, drop it!" Alpatych repeated, withdrawing his hand from his
bosom and solemnly pointing to the floor at Dron's feet.


Dron got up and was about to say something, but Alpatych interrupted
him.
.
.
 "They're quite beside
themselves; I have already told them.


"Quite beside themselves, Yakov Alpatych; they've fetched another
barrel.
"

"Well, then, listen! I'll go to the police officer, and you tell them
so, and that they must stop this and the carts must be got ready.
"

"I understand.
"

Alpatych did not insist further.
 Having wrung a submissive "I understand"
from Dron, Alpatych contented himself with that, though he not only
doubted but felt almost certain that without the help of troops the
carts would not be forthcoming.
 In the
village, outside the drink shop, another meeting was being held, which
decided that the horses should be driven out into the woods and the
carts should not be provided.
 Without saying anything of this to the
princess, Alpatych had his own belongings taken out of the carts which
had arrived from Bald Hills and had those horses got ready for
the princess' carriages.
 Meanwhile he went himself to the police
authorities.






CHAPTER X


After her father's funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her room and
did not admit anyone.
 A maid came to the door to say that Alpatych was
asking for orders about their departure.
 (This was before his talk with
Dron.
 She wished to pray but did not
dare to, dared not in her present state of mind address herself to God.

She lay for a long time in that position.
 The flow of her thoughts
suddenly stopped.
 Unconsciously she sat up, smoothed her hair, got up,
and went to the window, involuntarily inhaling the freshness of the
clear but windy evening.


"Yes, you can well enjoy the evening now! He is gone and no one will
hinder you," she said to herself, and sinking into a chair she let her
head fall on the window sill.


Someone spoke her name in a soft and tender voice from the garden and
kissed her head.
 She looked up.
 "Besides,
is it for me, for me who desired his death, to condemn anyone?" she
thought.


Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position of Mademoiselle
Bourienne, whom she had of late kept at a distance, but who yet was
dependent on her and living in her house.
 She felt sorry for her
and held out her hand with a glance of gentle inquiry.
 Mademoiselle
Bourienne at once began crying again and kissed that hand, speaking of
the princess' sorrow and making herself a partner in it.
 "I understand that you could not, and cannot,
think of yourself, but with my love for you I must do so.
.
 Has
Alpatych been to you? Has he spoken to you of going away?" she asked.


Princess Mary did not answer.
 She did not understand who was to go or
where to.
 "Is it possible to plan or think of anything now? Is it not
all the same?" she thought, and did not reply.


"You know, chere Marie," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "that we are in
danger--are surrounded by the French.
.
.
"

Princess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what she was
talking about.


"Oh, if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now," she said.
.
.
.
.
.
"

"I've spoken to him.
 "Because, you will agree, chere Marie, to fall into the hands
of the soldiers or of riotous peasants would be terrible.
"

Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a proclamation (not
printed on ordinary Russian paper) of General Rameau's, telling people
not to leave their homes and that the French authorities would afford
them proper protection.
 She handed this to the princess.


"They probably recognized that I am French, by my name," replied
Mademoiselle Bourienne blushing.


Princess Mary, with the paper in her hand, rose from the window and with
a pale face went out of the room and into what had been Prince Andrew's
study.


"Dunyasha, send Alpatych, or Dronushka, or somebody to me!" she said,
"and tell Mademoiselle Bourienne not to come to me," she added, hearing
Mademoiselle Bourienne's voice.


"If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French! That
I, the daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, asked General Rameau for
protection and accepted his favor!" This idea horrified her, made her
shudder, blush, and feel such a rush of anger and pride as she had never
experienced before.
 All that was distressing, and especially all that
was humiliating, in her position rose vividly to her mind.
 "They, the
French, would settle in this house: M.
 Mademoiselle Bourienne would do the honors of
Bogucharovo for him.
" thought Princess Mary,
not thinking her own thoughts but feeling bound to think like her father
and her brother.
 Involuntarily she thought their thoughts
and felt their feelings.
 What they would have said and what they would
have done she felt bound to say and do.


The demands of life, which had seemed to her annihilated by her father's
death, all at once rose before her with a new, previously unknown force
and took possession of her.


Agitated and flushed she paced the room, sending now for Michael
Ivanovich and now for Tikhon or Dron.
 Dunyasha, the nurse, and the other
maids could not say in how far Mademoiselle Bourienne's statement was
correct.
 Alpatych was not at home, he had gone to the police.
 Neither
could the architect Michael Ivanovich, who on being sent for came in
with sleepy eyes, tell Princess Mary anything.
 With just the same smile
of agreement with which for fifteen years he had been accustomed to
answer the old prince without expressing views of his own, he now
replied to Princess Mary, so that nothing definite could be got from his
answers.
 The old valet Tikhon, with sunken, emaciated face that bore the
stamp of inconsolable grief, replied: "Yes, Princess" to all Princess
Mary's questions and hardly refrained from sobbing as he looked at her.


At length Dron, the village Elder, entered the room and with a deep bow
to Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost.


Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of him.
.
" she began, but could not go on.


"We are all in God's hands," said he, with a sigh.


They were silent for a while.


"Dronushka, Alpatych has gone off somewhere and I have no one to turn
to.
 Is it true, as they tell me, that I can't even go away?"

"Why shouldn't you go away, your excellency? You can go," said Dron.
 I have nobody! I want to go away
tonight or early tomorrow morning.
 He looked askance at Princess Mary and said: "There are no
horses; I told Yakov Alpatych so.


"It's all God's scourge," said Dron.
 "What horses we had have been
taken for the army or have died--this is such a year! It's not a case of
feeding horses--we may die of hunger ourselves! As it is, some go three
days without eating.
 We've nothing, we've been ruined.
"

Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her.
.
.
.
"

To Princess Mary it was strange that now, at a moment when such sorrow
was filling her soul, there could be rich people and poor, and the rich
could refrain from helping the poor.
 She began asking Dron about the
peasants' needs and what there was in Bogucharovo that belonged to the
landlord.


"The landlord's grain is all safe," replied Dron proudly.
 "Our prince
did not order it to be sold.
"

"Give it to the peasants, let them have all they need; I give you leave
in my brother's name," said she.


Dron made no answer but sighed deeply.


"Give them that corn if there is enough of it.
 Distribute it all.
 I
give this order in my brother's name; and tell them that what is ours is
theirs.
"

Dron looked intently at the princess while she was speaking.


"Discharge me, little mother, for God's sake! Order the keys to be taken
from me," said he.
 "I have served twenty-three years and have done no
wrong.
 Discharge me, for God's sake!"

Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of her or why he was
asking to be discharged.






CHAPTER XI


An hour later Dunyasha came to tell the princess that Dron had come, and
all the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess' order and
wished to have word with their mistress.


"But I never told them to come," said Princess Mary.
 "I only told Dron
to let them have the grain.
"

"Only, for God's sake, Princess dear, have them sent away and don't go
out to them.
 It's all a trick," said Dunyasha, "and when Yakov Alpatych
returns let us get away.
.
.
"

"What is a trick?" asked Princess Mary in surprise.


"I know it is, only listen to me for God's sake! Ask nurse too.
 They say
they don't agree to leave Bogucharovo as you ordered.
 I never ordered them to go away," said
Princess Mary.
 "Call Dronushka.
 I only said that you were to give them the grain.


"If you order it they will go away," said he.


"No, no.
 I'll go out to them," said Princess Mary, and in spite of
the nurse's and Dunyasha's protests she went out into the porch; Dron,
Dunyasha, the nurse, and Michael Ivanovich following her.


"They probably think I am offering them the grain to bribe them to
remain here, while I myself go away leaving them to the mercy of the
French," thought Princess Mary.
 I am sure Andrew would do even more in
my place," she thought as she went out in the twilight toward the crowd
standing on the pasture by the barn.


The men crowded closer together, stirred, and rapidly took off their
hats.
 Princess Mary lowered her eyes and, tripping over her skirt, came
close up to them.
 So many different eyes, old and young, were fixed
on her, and there were so many different faces, that she could not
distinguish any of them and, feeling that she must speak to them all
at once, did not know how to do it.


"I am very glad you have come," she said without raising her eyes, and
feeling her heart beating quickly and violently.
 the enemy is near.
 because.
.
 I am giving you
everything, my friends, and I beg you to take everything, all our grain,
so that you may not suffer want! And if you have been told that I
am giving you the grain to keep you here--that is not true.


"I am not doing this on my own account," she continued, "I do it in the
name of my dead father, who was a good master to you, and of my brother
and his son.
"

Again she paused.
 No one broke the silence.


"Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together.
 All that is
mine is yours," she concluded, scanning the faces before her.
 She
could not fathom whether it was curiosity, devotion, gratitude, or
apprehension and distrust--but the expression on all the faces was
identical.


"We are all very thankful for your bounty, but it won't do for us to
take the landlord's grain," said a voice at the back of the crowd.


No one replied and Princess Mary, looking round at the crowd, found that
every eye she met now was immediately dropped.


No one answered.


The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch
someone's eye.
 "If you think something more is
wanted, tell me! I will do anything," said she, catching his eye.
"

"Why should we give up everything? We don't agree.
.
.
"
came from various sides of the crowd.


And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression,
though now it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or gratitude,
but of angry resolve.


"But you can't have understood me," said Princess Mary with a sad smile.
.
"

But her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd.


"We're not willing.
"

Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone's eye, but not a single eye
in the crowd was turned to her; evidently they were all trying to avoid
her look.
 Having repeated her order to Dron to have horses ready for her
departure next morning, she went to her room and remained alone with her
own thoughts.


After sunset the wind had dropped.
 Toward
midnight the voices began to subside, a cock crowed, the full moon began
to show from behind the lime trees, a fresh white dewy mist began to
rise, and stillness reigned over the village and the house.


Pictures of the near past--her father's illness and last moments--rose
one after another to her memory.
" And she recalled in
all its detail the night at Bald Hills before he had the last stroke,
when with a foreboding of disaster she had remained at home against his
will.
 In a suffering and weary voice he was saying something to
Tikhon, speaking of the Crimea and its warm nights and of the Empress.

Evidently he had wanted to talk.
 "And why didn't he call me? Why didn't
he let me be there instead of Tikhon?" Princess Mary had thought and
thought again now.
 "Now he will never tell anyone what he had in his
soul.
 Why didn't I enter the room?" she thought.
 While talking
to Tikhon he asked about me twice.
 He wanted to see me, and I was
standing close by, outside the door.
 She now saw his face before
her.
 And not the face she had known ever since she could remember and
had always seen at a distance, but the timid, feeble face she had seen
for the first time quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details,
when she stooped near to his mouth to catch what he said.


"Dear-est!" she repeated again.
 And the
horror that had seized her when she touched him and convinced herself
that that was not he, but something mysterious and horrible, seized her
again.


"Dunyasha," she whispered.






CHAPTER XIII


On the seventeenth of August Rostov and Ilyin, accompanied by Lavrushka
who had just returned from captivity and by an hussar orderly, left
their quarters at Yankovo, ten miles from Bogucharovo, and went for a
ride--to try a new horse Ilyin had bought and to find out whether there
was any hay to be had in the villages.


For the last three days Bogucharovo had lain between the two hostile
armies, so that it was as easy for the Russian rearguard to get to it as
for the French vanguard; Rostov, as a careful squadron commander, wished
to take such provisions as remained at Bogucharovo before the French
could get them.


Rostov had no idea that the village he was entering was the property of
that very Bolkonski who had been engaged to his sister.


Rostov and Ilyin gave rein to their horses for a last race along the
incline before reaching Bogucharovo, and Rostov, outstripping Ilyin, was
the first to gallop into the village street.


"Yes, always first both on the grassland and here," answered Rostov,
stroking his heated Donets horse.


"And I'd have won on my Frenchy, your excellency," said Lavrushka
from behind, alluding to his shabby cart horse, "only I didn't wish to
mortify you.
"

They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a large crowd of peasants was
standing.


Some of the men bared their heads, others stared at the new arrivals
without doffing their caps.
 "Is there any hay here?"

"And how like one another," said Ilyin.


"A mo-o-st me-r-r-y co-o-m-pa.


One of the men came out of the crowd and went up to Rostov.


"Who do you belong to?" he asked.


"Then you are Russians?" the peasant asked again.


"And is there a large force of you here?" said another, a short man,
coming up.


"Very large," answered Rostov.
 "But why have you collected here?" he
added.
 "Is it a holiday?"

"The old men have met to talk over the business of the commune," replied
the peasant, moving away.


At that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two women and a
man in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers.


"The princess ordered me to ask your regiment and your name.
 Following Dunyasha, Alpatych
advanced to Rostov, having bared his head while still at a distance.


"May I make bold to trouble your honor?" said he respectfully, but with
a shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with a hand
thrust into his bosom.
.
.
.
 Won't
you, please, ride on a little farther," said Alpatych with a melancholy
smile, "as it is not convenient in the presence of.
.


"Ah!.
.
.
 Ah, Yakov Alpatych.
.


Rostov looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled.


"No, there's not much to be amused at here," said Rostov, and rode on a
little way.


"I have the honor to report to you the actual truth," said Alpatych.
 Alpatych had gone out to admonish them,
but was told (it was chiefly Karp who did the talking, Dron not showing
himself in the crowd) that they could not let the princess go, that
there was an order to the contrary, but that if she stayed they would
serve her as before and obey her in everything.


"Father! Benefactor! God has sent you!" exclaimed deeply moved voices as
Rostov passed through the anteroom.


Princess Mary was sitting helpless and bewildered in the large sitting
room, when Rostov was shown in.
 She could not grasp who he was and why
he had come, or what was happening to her.
 This
meeting immediately struck Rostov as a romantic event.


When she began to tell him that all this had happened the day after her
father's funeral, her voiced trembled.
 There were tears in Rostov's
eyes.


"I cannot express, Princess, how glad I am that I happened to ride here
and am able to show my readiness to serve you," said Rostov, rising.
"
And bowing respectfully, as if to a lady of royal blood, he moved toward
the door.


Rostov's deferential tone seemed to indicate that though he would
consider himself happy to be acquainted with her, he did not wish to
take advantage of her misfortunes to intrude upon her.


"I am very, very grateful to you," she said in French, "but I hope it
was all a misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for it.
" She
suddenly began to cry.


"Excuse me!" she said.


Rostov, knitting his brows, left the room with another low bow.






CHAPTER XIV


"Well, is she pretty? Ah, friend--my pink one is delicious; her name is
Dunyasha.
.
.
"

But on glancing at Rostov's face Ilyin stopped short.
 He saw that his
hero and commander was following quite a different train of thought.


"I'll show them; I'll give it to them, the brigands!" said he to
himself.


Alpatych at a gliding trot, only just managing not to run, kept up with
him with difficulty.


"What decision have you been pleased to come to?" said he.


Rostov stopped and, clenching his fists, suddenly and sternly turned on
Alpatych.


"Decision? What decision? Old dotard!.
" cried he.
 "What have you been
about? Eh? The peasants are rioting, and you can't manage them? You're
a traitor yourself! I know you.
.
.
" And as if
afraid of wasting his store of anger, he left Alpatych and went rapidly
forward.
 Alpatych, mastering his offended feelings, kept pace with
Rostov at a gliding gait and continued to impart his views.
.
 I'll 'overresist' them!" uttered Rostov
meaninglessly, breathless with irrational animal fury and the need to
vent it.
 And the nearer he drew to it the more
Alpatych felt that this unreasonable action might produce good results.

The peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed when they saw
Rostov's rapid, firm steps and resolute, frowning face.


After the hussars had come to the village and Rostov had gone to see the
princess, a certain confusion and dissension had arisen among the crowd.

Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals were Russians and
might take it amiss that the mistress was being detained.
 Dron was of
this opinion, but as soon as he expressed it Karp and others attacked
their ex-Elder.


"How many years have you been fattening on the commune?" Karp shouted at
him.
.
.
.
 What does it matter to you whether our homes are
ruined or not?"

"We've been told to keep order, and that no one is to leave their homes
or take away a single grain, and that's all about it!" cried another.


"It was your son's turn to be conscripted, but no fear! You begrudged
your lump of a son," a little old man suddenly began attacking
Dron--"and so they took my Vanka to be shaved for a soldier! But we all
have to die.
 I'm not against the commune," said
Dron.
.
 As soon as Rostov, followed by
Ilyin, Lavrushka, and Alpatych, came up to the crowd, Karp, thrusting
his fingers into his belt and smiling a little, walked to the front.

Dron on the contrary retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer
together.


"Who is your Elder here? Hey?" shouted Rostov, coming up to the crowd
with quick steps.


"The Elder? What do you want with him?.
.
.


But before the words were well out of his mouth, his cap flew off and a
fierce blow jerked his head to one side.
.
.
 He wants the Elder!.
 Dron Zakharych, you!" meek and
flustered voices here and there were heard calling and caps began to
come off their heads.
"

"Arguing? Mutiny!.
 Brigands! Traitors!" cried Rostov unmeaningly in a
voice not his own, gripping Karp by the collar.


Lavrushka, however, ran up to Karp and seized him by the arms from
behind.


Alpatych turned to the peasants and ordered two of them by name to come
and bind Karp.
 The men obediently came out of the crowd and began taking
off their belts.


"Where's the Elder?" demanded Rostov in a loud voice.


"Are you the Elder? Bind him, Lavrushka!" shouted Rostov, as if that
order, too, could not possibly meet with any opposition.


"And you all listen to me!" said Rostov to the peasants.
 "Be off to your
houses at once, and don't let one of your voices be heard!"

"Why, we've not done any harm! We did it just out of foolishness.
.
 I said then that it was not in order," voices were heard
bickering with one another.


"There! What did I say?" said Alpatych, coming into his own again.
 "It's
wrong, lads!"

 "All our stupidity, Yakov Alpatych," came the answers, and the
crowd began at once to disperse through the village.
 The two drunken
peasants followed them.


"Aye, when I look at you!.
.
" said one of them to Karp.
 The peasants were briskly carrying out the
proprietor's goods and packing them on the carts, and Dron, liberated at
Princess Mary's wish from the cupboard where he had been confined, was
standing in the yard directing the men.
 "You know it has
cost money! How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cord
where it'll get rubbed? I don't like that way of doing things.
 Look here, put it under the
bast matting and cover it with hay--that's the way!"

"Eh, books, books!" said another peasant, bringing out Prince Andrew's
library cupboards.
"

"Yes, they worked all day and didn't play!" remarked the tall,
round-faced peasant gravely, pointing with a significant wink at the
dictionaries that were on the top.



Unwilling to obtrude himself on the princess, Rostov did not go back to
the house but remained in the village awaiting her departure.
 When her
carriage drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanied her eight
miles from Bogucharovo to where the road was occupied by our troops.
 At
the inn at Yankovo he respectfully took leave of her, for the first time
permitting himself to kiss her hand.


"How can you speak so!" he blushingly replied to Princess Mary's
expressions of gratitude for her deliverance, as she termed what had
occurred.

Good-by, Princess.
 I wish you happiness and consolation and hope to meet
you again in happier circumstances.
 If you don't want to make me blush,
please don't thank me!"

But the princess, if she did not again thank him in words, thanked
him with the whole expression of her face, radiant with gratitude and
tenderness.
 She could not believe that there was nothing to thank him
for.
 On the contrary, it seemed to her certain that had he not been
there she would have perished at the hands of the mutineers and of the
French, and that he had exposed himself to terrible and obvious danger
to save her, and even more certain was it that he was a man of lofty and
noble soul, able to understand her position and her sorrow.


Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallen in
love with a man who would perhaps never love her, she comforted herself
with the thought that no one would ever know it and that she would not
be to blame if, without ever speaking of it to anyone, she continued to
the end of her life to love the man with whom she had fallen in love for
the first and last time in her life.


Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his sympathy, and his words,
happiness did not appear impossible to her.
 It was at those moments that
Dunyasha noticed her smiling as she looked out of the carriage window.


"Was it not fate that brought him to Bogucharovo, and at that very
moment?" thought Princess Mary.
 "And that caused his sister to refuse my
brother?" And in all this Princess Mary saw the hand of Providence.


The impression the princess made on Rostov was a very agreeable one.
 To
remember her gave him pleasure, and when his comrades, hearing of his
adventure at Bogucharovo, rallied him on having gone to look for hay
and having picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia, he grew
angry.
 He
stopped in the village at the priest's house in front of which stood the
commander in chief's carriage, and he sat down on the bench at the gate
awaiting his Serene Highness, as everyone now called Kutuzov.
 Bolkonski made room for him on
the bench and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him.
 "They say he
weceives evewyone, thank God!.
 It's awful with those sausage eaters!
Ermolov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a German! Now p'waps
Wussians will get a look in.
 As it was, devil only knows what was
happening.
 We kept wetweating and wetweating.
 Did you take part in the
campaign?" he asked.


"I had the pleasure," replied Prince Andrew, "not only of taking part
in the retreat but of losing in that retreat all I held dear--not to
mention the estate and home of my birth--my father, who died of grief.
 I
belong to the province of Smolensk.
"

"Ah? You're Pwince Bolkonski? Vewy glad to make your acquaintance! I'm
Lieutenant Colonel Denisov, better known as 'Vaska,'" said Denisov,
pressing Prince Andrew's hand and looking into his face with a
particularly kindly attention.
 "Yes, I heard," said he sympathetically,
and after a short pause added: "Yes, it's Scythian warfare.
 It's all
vewy well--only not for those who get it in the neck.
 This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painful
feelings of which he had not thought lately, but which still found
place in his soul.
 Of late he had received so many new and very serious
impressions--such as the retreat from Smolensk, his visit to Bald Hills,
and the recent news of his father's death--and had experienced so many
emotions, that for a long time past those memories had not entered his
mind, and now that they did, they did not act on him with nearly their
former strength.
 For Denisov, too, the memories awakened by the name of
Bolkonski belonged to a distant, romantic past, when after supper and
after Natasha's singing he had proposed to a little girl of fifteen
without realizing what he was doing.
 He smiled at the recollection of
that time and of his love for Natasha, and passed at once to what now
interested him passionately and exclusively.
 He had
proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it
to Kutuzov.
 The plan was based on the fact that the French line
of operation was too extended, and it proposed that instead of, or
concurrently with, action on the front to bar the advance of the French,
we should attack their line of communication.
 He began explaining his
plan to Prince Andrew.


"They can't hold all that line.
 It's impossible.
 I will undertake to
bweak thwough.
 Give me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line,
that's certain! There's only one way--guewilla warfare!"

Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan to
Bolkonski.
 In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from the
army, growing more incoherent and more diffused, mingling with music
and songs and coming from the field where the review was held.


Bolkonski and Denisov moved to the gate, at which a knot of soldiers
(a guard of honor) was standing, and they saw Kutuzov coming down the
street mounted on a rather small sorrel horse.
 A huge suite of generals
rode behind him.
 Barclay was riding almost beside him, and a crowd of
officers ran after and around them shouting, "Hurrah!"

His adjutants galloped into the yard before him.
 Kutuzov was impatiently
urging on his horse, which ambled smoothly under his weight, and he
raised his hand to his white Horse Guard's cap with a red band and no
peak, nodding his head continually.
 Suddenly his face
assumed a subtle expression, he shrugged his shoulders with an air of
perplexity.


"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" shouted those behind him.


Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutuzov had grown still more
corpulent, flaccid, and fat.
 He was wearing
the white Horse Guard's cap and a military overcoat with a whip hanging
over his shoulder by a thin strap.
.
 whew.
.
.
 His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man who
means to rest after a ceremony.
 He drew his left foot out of the stirrup
and, lurching with his whole body and puckering his face with the
effort, raised it with difficulty onto the saddle, leaned on his knee,
groaned, and slipped down into the arms of the Cossacks and adjutants
who stood ready to assist him.


He pulled himself together, looked round, screwing up his eyes, glanced
at Prince Andrew, and, evidently not recognizing him, moved with his
waddling gait to the porch.
.
.
 whew.
.
 As often occurs with old men, it was
only after some seconds that the impression produced by Prince Andrew's
face linked itself up with Kutuzov's remembrance of his personality.
.
" said he, glancing wearily round, and he stepped onto the porch
which creaked under his weight.
 "I
loved him and respected him, and sympathize with you with all my heart.
"

He embraced Prince Andrew, pressing him to his fat breast, and for some
time did not let him go.
 When he released him Prince Andrew saw that
Kutuzov's flabby lips were trembling and that tears were in his eyes.


"Come! Come with me, we'll have a talk," said he.


But at that moment Denisov, no more intimidated by his superiors than by
the enemy, came with jingling spurs up the steps of the porch, despite
the angry whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him.
 Denisov, having
given his name, announced that he had to communicate to his Serene
Highness a matter of great importance for their country's welfare.
 Denisov came
from those parts and knew the country well.
 His plan seemed decidedly
a good one, especially from the strength of conviction with which he
spoke.
 Kutuzov looked down at his own legs, occasionally glancing at the
door of the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge
from it.
 And from that hut, while Denisov was speaking, a general with a
portfolio under his arm really did appear.


"What?" said Kutuzov, in the midst of Denisov's explanations, "are you
ready so soon?"

"Ready, your Serene Highness," replied the general.


Kutuzov swayed his head, as much as to say: "How is one man to deal with
it all?" and again listened to Denisov.


"I give my word of honor as a Wussian officer," said Denisov, "that I
can bweak Napoleon's line of communication!"

"What relation are you to Intendant General Kiril Andreevich Denisov?"
asked Kutuzov, interrupting him.


"He is my uncle, your Sewene Highness.
"

"Ah, we were friends," said Kutuzov cheerfully.
 "All right, all right,
friend, stay here at the staff and tomorrow we'll have a talk.
 But Kutuzov evidently did not wish to enter that room till he
was disengaged.
 He made a grimace.
.


"No, tell them to bring a small table out here, my dear boy.
 "Don't go away," he added, turning to Prince
Andrew, who remained in the porch and listened to the general's report.


While this was being given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman's
voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door.

Kutuzov's adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of
the priest whose home it was, and that she intended to offer his Serene
Highness bread and salt.
.
.
.
 She's very pretty," added the adjutant with a smile.
 He was listening to the general's
report--which consisted chiefly of a criticism of the position at
Tsarevo-Zaymishche--as he had listened to Denisov, and seven years
previously had listened to the discussion at the Austerlitz council of
war.
 All that Denisov had said was clever and to the
point.
 Prince
Andrew watched the commander in chief's face attentively, and the only
expression he could see there was one of boredom, curiosity as to the
meaning of the feminine whispering behind the door, and a desire to
observe propriety.


After hearing the matter, Kutuzov smacked his lips together and shook
his head.
.
.
 'When wood is chopped the chips will fly.
'" He looked at the
paper again.
 "Oh, this German precision!" he muttered, shaking his head.


The priest's wife, flushing rosy red, caught up the dish she had after
all not managed to present at the right moment, though she had so long
been preparing for it, and with a low bow offered it to Kutuzov.
 "Well, my dear, and how are we getting on?" he asked,
moving to the door of the room assigned to him.
 The priest's wife
smiled, and with dimples in her rosy cheeks followed him into the room.

The adjutant came out to the porch and asked Prince Andrew to lunch with
him.
 Half an hour later Prince Andrew was again called to Kutuzov.

He found him reclining in an armchair, still in the same unbuttoned
overcoat.
 He had in his hand a French book which he closed as Prince
Andrew entered, marking the place with a knife.
 "It's
sad, very sad.
 But remember, my dear fellow, that I am a father to you,
a second father.
.
.
.
"

Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of his father's death, and what
he had seen at Bald Hills when he passed through it.


"What.
.
 what they have brought us to!" Kutuzov suddenly cried in an
agitated voice, evidently picturing vividly to himself from Prince
Andrew's story the condition Russia was in.
 "But give me time, give me
time!" he said with a grim look, evidently not wishing to continue this
agitating conversation, and added: "I sent for you to keep you with me.
"

"I thank your Serene Highness, but I fear I am no longer fit for the
staff," replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutuzov noticed.


Kutuzov glanced inquiringly at him.
 I should be
sorry to leave the regiment.
 If I decline the honor of being with you,
believe me.
.
"

A shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expression lit up Kutuzov's podgy
face.
 He cut Bolkonski short.


"I am sorry, for I need you.
 Advisers are always plentiful, but men are
not.
 I remember you at Austerlitz.
.
.


Taking his hand and drawing him downwards, Kutuzov offered his cheek to
be kissed, and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man's eyes.

Though Prince Andrew knew that Kutuzov's tears came easily, and that he
was particularly tender to and considerate of him from a wish to
show sympathy with his loss, yet this reminder of Austerlitz was both
pleasant and flattering to him.


"Go your way and God be with you.
" And changing the subject, Kutuzov began to speak of the Turkish
war and the peace that had been concluded.
 "Yes, I have been much
blamed," he said, "both for that war and the peace.
.
.
 "Ah, those
advisers!" said he.
 "If we had listened to them all we should not have
made peace with Turkey and should not have been through with that war.
 Kamenski would have
been lost if he had not died.
 It is not difficult to capture a fortress but it is difficult to
win a campaign.
 "And the French shall too,
believe me," he went on, growing warmer and beating his chest, "I'll
make them eat horseflesh!" And tears again dimmed his eyes.
"


"But shan't we have to accept battle?" remarked Prince Andrew.


"We shall if everybody wants it; it can't be helped.
.
.
 But believe
me, my dear boy, there is nothing stronger than those two: patience and
time, they will do it all.

"I'll tell you what to do," he continued, as Prince Andrew still did not
reply: "I will tell you what to do, and what I do.



     * "Don't see it that way, that's the trouble.
"


"Well, good-by, my dear fellow; remember that with all my heart I share
your sorrow, and that for you I am not a Serene Highness, nor a prince,
nor a commander in chief, but a father! If you want anything come
straight to me.
 Good-by, my dear boy.
"

Again he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew, but before the latter
had left the room Kutuzov gave a sigh of relief and went on with his
unfinished novel, Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.


Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but after that
interview with Kutuzov he went back to his regiment reassured as to
the general course of affairs and as to the man to whom it had been
entrusted.
 "He will not
bring in any plan of his own.
 He will not devise or undertake
anything," thought Prince Andrew, "but he will hear everything, remember
everything, and put everything in its place.
 He will not hinder
anything useful nor allow anything harmful.
 He understands that there is
something stronger and more important than his own will--the inevitable
course of events, and he can see them and grasp their significance,
and seeing that significance can refrain from meddling and renounce his
personal wish directed to something else.
 And above all," thought Prince
Andrew, "one believes in him because he's Russian, despite the novel
by Genlis and the French proverbs, and because his voice shook when he
said: 'What they have brought us to!' and had a sob in it when he said
he would 'make them eat horseflesh!'"

On such feelings, more or less dimly shared by all, the unanimity and
general approval were founded with which, despite court influences, the
popular choice of Kutuzov as commander in chief was received.






CHAPTER XVII


After the Emperor had left Moscow, life flowed on there in its usual
course, and its course was so very usual that it was difficult to
remember the recent days of patriotic elation and ardor, hard to believe
that Russia was really in danger and that the members of the English
Club were also sons of the Fatherland ready to sacrifice everything
for it.
 The one thing that recalled the patriotic fervor everyone had
displayed during the Emperor's stay was the call for contributions of
men and money, a necessity that as soon as the promises had been made
assumed a legal, official form and became unavoidable.


With the enemy's approach to Moscow, the Moscovites' view of their
situation did not grow more serious but on the contrary became even
more frivolous, as always happens with people who see a great danger
approaching.
 So it was now with the
inhabitants of Moscow.


Rostopchin's broadsheets, headed by woodcuts of a drink shop, a potman,
and a Moscow burgher called Karpushka Chigirin, "who--having been
a militiaman and having had rather too much at the pub--heard that
Napoleon wished to come to Moscow, grew angry, abused the French in very
bad language, came out of the drink shop, and, under the sign of the
eagle, began to address the assembled people," were read and discussed,
together with the latest of Vasili Lvovich Pushkin's bouts rimes.


In the corner room at the Club, members gathered to read these
broadsheets, and some liked the way Karpushka jeered at the French,
saying: "They will swell up with Russian cabbage, burst with our
buckwheat porridge, and choke themselves with cabbage soup.
"
Others did not like that tone and said it was stupid and vulgar.
 It was said that Mamonov's
regiment would cost him eight hundred thousand rubles, and that Bezukhov
had spent even more on his, but that the best thing about Bezukhov's
action was that he himself was going to don a uniform and ride at the
head of his regiment without charging anything for the show.



     * "Think it over; get into the barque, and take care not to
     make it a barque of Charon.
"


"You don't spare anyone," said Julie Drubetskaya as she collected
and pressed together a bunch of raveled lint with her thin, beringed
fingers.


"Bezukhov est ridicule, but he is so kind and good-natured.
 What
pleasure is there to be so caustique?"

"A forfeit!" cried a young man in militia uniform whom Julie called "mon
chevalier," and who was going with her to Nizhni.


In Julie's set, as in many other circles in Moscow, it had been agreed
that they would speak nothing but Russian and that those who made a
slip and spoke French should pay fines to the Committee of Voluntary
Contributions.


"For caustique--I am guilty and will pay, and I am prepared to pay again
for the pleasure of telling you the truth.
 For Gallicisms I won't be
responsible," she remarked, turning to the author: "I have neither the
money nor the time, like Prince Galitsyn, to engage a master to teach me
Russian!"

"Ah, here he is!" she added.
.
.
 No, no," she said to the
militia officer, "you won't catch me.
 Speak of the sun and you see its
rays!" and she smiled amiably at Pierre.
 "We were
saying that your regiment would be sure to be better than Mamonov's.
"

"You will, of course, command it yourself?" said Julie, directing a sly,
sarcastic glance toward the militia officer.


The latter in Pierre's presence had ceased to be caustic, and his face
expressed perplexity as to what Julie's smile might mean.
 In spite of
his absent-mindedness and good nature, Pierre's personality immediately
checked any attempt to ridicule him to his face.


"No," said Pierre, with a laughing glance at his big, stout body.
 "I
should make too good a target for the French, besides I am afraid I
should hardly be able to climb onto a horse.
"

Among those whom Julie's guests happened to choose to gossip about were
the Rostovs.
 The Razumovskis wanted
to buy his house and his estate near Moscow, but it drags on and on.
 "You don't think Moscow is in danger?"

"Then why are you leaving?"

"I? What a question! I am going because.
.
.
"

"Well, of course, of course! Let me have some more strips of linen.
"

"If he manages the business properly he will be able to pay off all his
debts," said the militia officer, speaking of Rostov.
 Natalie is quite
well again now, isn't she?" Julie asked Pierre with a knowing smile.
 But now they have had him transferred to my regiment and
are expecting him every day.
"

"I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkharovs'.
 Natalie has
recovered her looks and is brighter.
 How easily some
people get over everything!"

"Get over what?" inquired Pierre, looking displeased.


Julie smiled.
"

"What knights? What do you mean?" demanded Pierre, blushing.


"Oh, come, my dear count! C'est la fable de tout Moscou.
 Je vous admire,
ma parole d'honneur!" *


    * "It is the talk of all Moscow.
 My word, I admire you!"


"Forfeit, forfeit!" cried the militia officer.


"I know you were friendly with Natalie, and so.
.
.
 but I was always more
friendly with Vera--that dear Vera.
.
.
"

"Qui s'excuse s'accuse," * said Julie, smiling and waving the lint
triumphantly, and to have the last word she promptly changed the
subject.
 "Do you know what I heard today? Poor Mary Bolkonskaya arrived
in Moscow yesterday.
 Do you know that she has lost her father?"


    * "Who excuses himself, accuses himself.


"I spent the evening with her yesterday.
 She is going to their estate
near Moscow either today or tomorrow morning, with her nephew.
 But do you know who rescued her? It is quite a
romance.
 He rushed in and saved her.
.
.
.
 "Really, this general
flight has been arranged to get all the old maids married off.
"

"Do you know, I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeune
homme.


The first declared that the report that Count Rostopchin had forbidden
people to leave Moscow was false; on the contrary he was glad that
ladies and tradesmen's wives were leaving the city.
" These words showed Pierre
clearly for the first time that the French would enter Moscow.
 The tone of the proclamation was not as jocose as in the former
Chigirin talks.
 Pierre pondered over these broadsheets.
 Evidently the
terrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strength of his soul
but which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawing near.


"Shall I join the army and enter the service, or wait?" he asked himself
for the hundredth time.
 He took a pack of cards that lay on the table
and began to lay them out for a game of patience.
.
 what does it mean?"

He had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice of the
eldest princess at the door asking whether she might come in.


Only the eldest princess, the one with the stony face and long waist,
was still living in Pierre's house.
 "You know some decision must be come to.
 How is
it that we are staying on?"

"On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, ma cousine," said Pierre
in the bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her, always feeling
uncomfortable in the role of her benefactor.
 It certainly does them
credit! And the people too are quite mutinous--they no longer obey,
even my maid has taken to being rude.
 One can't walk in the streets.
 But, above all, the French
will be here any day now, so what are we waiting for? I ask just one
thing of you, cousin," she went on, "arrange for me to be taken to
Petersburg.
 Whatever I may be, I can't live under Bonaparte's rule.
.
.
"

"I won't submit to your Napoleon! Others may if they please.
.
.
.
 If you
don't want to do this.
.
"

"But I will, I'll give the order at once.

Muttering to herself, she sat down on a chair.


"But you have been misinformed," said Pierre.
 See! I've just been
reading.
.
.
" He showed her the broadsheet.
 "Count Rostopchin writes that
he will stake his life on it that the enemy will not enter Moscow.
"

"Oh, that count of yours!" said the princess malevolently.
 Didn't
he write in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone, 'whoever it might be,
should be dragged to the lockup by his hair'? (How silly!) 'And honor
and glory to whoever captures him,' he says.
 This is what his cajolery
has brought us to! Barbara Ivanovna told me the mob near killed her
because she said something in French.
 You take everything so to heart," said Pierre, and
began laying out his cards for patience.


Although that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army,
but remained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of agitation,
irresolution, and alarm, yet at the same time joyfully expecting
something terrible.


Next day toward evening the princess set off, and Pierre's head steward
came to inform him that the money needed for the equipment of his
regiment could not be found without selling one of the estates.
 In
general the head steward made out to Pierre that his project of raising
a regiment would ruin him.
 "What's to be done? I can't draw back
now!"

The worse everything became, especially his own affairs, the better
was Pierre pleased and the more evident was it that the catastrophe he
expected was approaching.
 Julie
had gone, and so had Princess Mary.
 Of his intimate friends only the
Rostovs remained, but he did not go to see them.
 The balloon was not yet
ready, but Pierre learned that it was being constructed by the Emperor's
desire.
 The Emperor had written to Count Rostopchin as follows:


As soon as Leppich is ready, get together a crew of reliable and
intelligent men for his car and send a courier to General Kutuzov to let
him know.
 I have informed him of the matter.


Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful where he descends for
the first time, that he may not make a mistake and fall into the enemy's
hands.



On his way home from Vorontsovo, as he was passing the Bolotnoe Place
Pierre, seeing a large crowd round the Lobnoe Place, stopped and got out
of his trap.
 A French cook accused of being a spy was being flogged.
 Judging by their faces they were both Frenchmen.
 With
a frightened and suffering look resembling that on the thin Frenchman's
face, Pierre pushed his way in through the crowd.


"What is it? Who is it? What is it for?" he kept asking.
 In the crowd
people began talking loudly, to stifle their feelings of pity as it
seemed to Pierre.


"He's cook to some prince.
"

"Eh, mounseer, Russian sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman.
.


The clerk glanced round, evidently hoping that his joke would be
appreciated.
 Some people began to laugh, others continued to watch in
dismay the executioner who was undressing the other man.


Pierre choked, his face puckered, and he turned hastily away, went back
to his trap muttering something to himself as he went, and took his
seat.
 As they drove along he shuddered and exclaimed several times so
audibly that the coachman asked him:

"What is your pleasure?"

"Where are you going?" shouted Pierre to the man, who was driving to
Lubyanka Street.


"To the Governor's, as you ordered," answered the coachman.


At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding the
Lobnoe Place, Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he could no
longer remain in Moscow and would leave for the army that very day that
it seemed to him that either he had told the coachman this or that the
man ought to have known it for himself.


On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain, and
after dinner Pierre left Moscow.
 Cossacks, foot and horse soldiers, wagons, caissons, and cannon
were everywhere.
 It was a feeling akin to
what he had felt at the Sloboda Palace during the Emperor's visit--a
sense of the necessity of undertaking something and sacrificing
something.
 He now experienced a glad consciousness that everything that
constitutes men's happiness--the comforts of life, wealth, even
life itself--is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away, compared with
something.
.
.
 With what? Pierre could not say, and he did not try to
determine for whom and for what he felt such particular delight in
sacrificing everything.
 He was not occupied with the question of what to
sacrifice for; the fact of sacrificing in itself afforded him a new and
joyous sensation.


Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino given and
accepted? Why was the battle of Borodino fought? There was not the least
sense in it for either the French or the Russians.
 Its immediate result
for the Russians was, and was bound to be, that we were brought nearer
to the destruction of Moscow--which we feared more than anything in
the world; and for the French its immediate result was that they were
brought nearer to the destruction of their whole army--which they feared
more than anything in the world.
 What the result must be was quite
obvious, and yet Napoleon offered and Kutuzov accepted that battle.
 For Kutuzov this was
mathematically clear, as it is that if when playing draughts I have one
man less and go on exchanging, I shall certainly lose, and therefore
should not exchange.
 When my opponent has sixteen men and I have
fourteen, I am only one eighth weaker than he, but when I have exchanged
thirteen more men he will be three times as strong as I am.


Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to the French
was about as five to six, but after that battle it was little more than
one to two: previously we had a hundred thousand against a hundred and
twenty thousand; afterwards little more than fifty thousand against a
hundred thousand.
 Yet the shrewd and experienced Kutuzov accepted the
battle, while Napoleon, who was said to be a commander of genius,
gave it, losing a quarter of his army and lengthening his lines of
communication still more.


In giving and accepting battle at Borodino, Kutuzov acted involuntarily
and irrationally.
 But later on, to fit what had occurred, the historians
provided cunningly devised evidence of the foresight and genius of the
generals who, of all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved
and involuntary.


The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes furnish
the whole interest of the story, and we are still unable to accustom
ourselves to the fact that for our epoch histories of that kind are
meaningless.
 All the historians describe the
affair as follows:

The Russian army, they say, in its retreat from Smolensk sought out
for itself the best position for a general engagement and found such a
position at Borodino.


The Russians, they say, fortified this position in advance on the left
of the highroad (from Moscow to Smolensk) and almost at a right angle
to it, from Borodino to Utitsa, at the very place where the battle was
fought.


In front of this position, they say, a fortified outpost was set up on
the Shevardino mound to observe the enemy.
 On the twenty-fourth, we
are told, Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it, and, on the
twenty-sixth, attacked the whole Russian army, which was in position on
the field of Borodino.


So the histories say, and it is all quite wrong, as anyone who cares to
look into the matter can easily convince himself.


The Russians did not seek out the best position but, on the contrary,
during the retreat passed many positions better than Borodino.
 They did
not stop at any one of these positions because Kutuzov did not wish to
occupy a position he had not himself chosen, because the popular demand
for a battle had not yet expressed itself strongly enough, and because
Miloradovich had not yet arrived with the militia, and for many other
reasons.
 That redoubt was quite senseless
in front of the position where the battle was accepted.
 Thirdly, as proof that the position on which the
battle was fought had not been foreseen and that the Shevardino Redoubt
was not an advanced post of that position, we have the fact that up to
the twenty-fifth, Barclay de Tolly and Bagration were convinced that the
Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of the position, and that Kutuzov
himself in his report, written in hot haste after the battle, speaks of
the Shevardino Redoubt as the left flank of the position.
 It was much
later, when reports on the battle of Borodino were written at leisure,
that the incorrect and extraordinary statement was invented (probably to
justify the mistakes of a commander in chief who had to be represented
as infallible) that the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post--whereas
in reality it was simply a fortified point on the left flank--and
that the battle of Borodino was fought by us on an entrenched position
previously selected, where as it was fought on a quite unexpected spot
which was almost unentrenched.


The case was evidently this: a position was selected along the river
Kolocha--which crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at an acute
angle--so that the left flank was at Shevardino, the right flank near
the village of Novoe, and the center at Borodino at the confluence of
the rivers Kolocha and Voyna.


To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of how
the battle was actually fought, this position, protected by the river
Kolocha, presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was to
prevent an enemy from advancing along the Smolensk road to Moscow.


Napoleon, riding to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth, did not see (as the
history books say he did) the position of the Russians from Utitsa
to Borodino (he could not have seen that position because it did not
exist), nor did he see an advanced post of the Russian army, but while
pursuing the Russian rearguard he came upon the left flank of the
Russian position--at the Shevardino Redoubt--and unexpectedly for the
Russians moved his army across the Kolocha.
 In that case
we should probably have defended the Shevardino Redoubt--our left
flank--still more obstinately.
 We should have attacked Napoleon in the
center or on the right, and the engagement would have taken place on the
twenty-fifth, in the position we intended and had fortified.
 (Poniatowski's action against Utitsa,
and Uvarov's on the right flank against the French, were actions
distinct from the main course of the battle.






CHAPTER XX


On the morning of the twenty-fifth Pierre was leaving Mozhaysk.
 Coming up toward him was a train of carts carrying men who
had been wounded in the engagement the day before.
 The
carts, in each of which three or four wounded soldiers were lying
or sitting, jolted over the stones that had been thrown on the steep
incline to make it something like a road.
 The cavalry regiment, as it descended the hill
with its singers, surrounded Pierre's carriage and blocked the road.

Pierre stopped, being pressed against the side of the cutting in which
the road ran.
 One of the
carts with wounded stopped by the side of the road close to Pierre.


One of the wounded, an old soldier with a bandaged arm who was following
the cart on foot, caught hold of it with his sound hand and turned to
look at Pierre.


"I say, fellow countryman! Will they set us down here or take us on to
Moscow?" he asked.


Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question.
 He was
looking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoy of wounded,
now at the cart by which he was standing, in which two wounded men
were sitting and one was lying.
 His whole head was wrapped in rags
and one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby's head.
 This soldier was looking at the
cathedral and crossing himself.
 The third lay prone so that his
face was not visible.
 The cavalry singers were passing close by:

   Ah lost, quite lost.
.
 is my head so keen,
   Living in a foreign land.
 But beneath the slope, by the cart with the wounded near the
panting little nag where Pierre stood, it was damp, somber, and sad.


The soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalry
singers.


"It's not the soldiers only, but I've seen peasants today, too.
.
.
 "No distinctions made nowadays.
.
.

They want the whole nation to fall on them--in a word, it's Moscow! They
want to make an end of it.


He kept looking to either side of the road for familiar faces, but only
saw everywhere the unfamiliar faces of various military men of different
branches of the service, who all looked with astonishment at his white
hat and green tail coat.


Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance and
eagerly addressed him.
 This was one of the head army doctors.
 He was
driving toward Pierre in a covered gig, sitting beside a young surgeon,
and on recognizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver's
seat to pull up.


"Count! Your excellency, how come you to be here?" asked the doctor.


"Well, you know, I wanted to see.
.
.
"

"Yes, yes, there will be something to see.
.
.
"

Pierre got out and talked to the doctor, explaining his intention of
taking part in a battle.
.
 Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position is
exactly?" said Pierre.


"The position?" repeated the doctor.
 "Well, that's not my line.
 Drive
past Tatarinova, a lot of digging is going on there.
"

"Can one see from there?.
.
 If you would.
.


"I would go with you but on my honor I'm up to here"--and he pointed to
his throat.
 "I'm galloping to the commander of the corps.
.
 We have ten thousand carts, but we need other things as
well--we must manage as best we can!"

The strange thought that of the thousands of men, young and old, who
had stared with merry surprise at his hat (perhaps the very men he had
noticed), twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and death
amazed Pierre.


"The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a moment
think of what awaits them, but pass by, winking at the wounded.

Pierre drove on toward Gorki.


When he had ascended the hill and reached the little village street, he
saw for the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts and with
crosses on their caps, who, talking and laughing loudly, animated and
perspiring, were at work on a huge knoll overgrown with grass to the
right of the road.


Two officers were standing on the knoll, directing the men.
 On seeing
these peasants, who were evidently still amused by the novelty of their
position as soldiers, Pierre once more thought of the wounded men at
Mozhaysk and understood what the soldier had meant when he said: "They
want the whole nation to fall on them.
" The sight of these bearded
peasants at work on the battlefield, with their queer, clumsy boots
and perspiring necks, and their shirts opening from the left toward
the middle, unfastened, exposing their sunburned collarbones, impressed
Pierre more strongly with the solemnity and importance of the moment
than anything he had yet seen or heard.






CHAPTER XXI


Pierre stepped out of his carriage and, passing the toiling militiamen,
ascended the knoll from which, according to the doctor, the battlefield
could be seen.


It was about eleven o'clock.
 The sun shone somewhat to the left and
behind him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which, rising like
an amphitheater, extended before him in the clear rarefied atmosphere.


From above on the left, bisecting that amphitheater, wound the Smolensk
highroad, passing through a village with a white church some five
hundred paces in front of the knoll and below it.
 This was Borodino.
 Beyond Valuevo
the road disappeared into a yellowing forest on the horizon.
 Here and
there over the whole of that blue expanse, to right and left of the
forest and the road, smoking campfires could be seen and indefinite
masses of troops--ours and the enemy's.

Between the hollows the villages of Bezubova and Zakharino showed in the
distance.
 On the left the ground was more level; there were fields of
grain, and the smoking ruins of Semenovsk, which had been burned down,
could be seen.
 Nowhere
could he see the battlefield he had expected to find, but only fields,
meadows, troops, woods, the smoke of campfires, villages, mounds, and
streams; and try as he would he could descry no military "position" in
this place which teemed with life, nor could he even distinguish our
troops from the enemy's.


"I must ask someone who knows," he thought, and addressed an officer who
was looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure.


"May I ask you," said Pierre, "what village that is in front?"

"Burdino, isn't it?" said the officer, turning to his companion.


"Borodino," the other corrected him.


The officer, evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk, moved up to
Pierre.


"Are those our men there?" Pierre inquired.


"Yes, and there, further on, are the French," said the officer.
 "There
they are, there.
.
.
 you can see them.
"

"Where? Where?" asked Pierre.


"One can see them with the naked eye.
.
.
 Why, there!"

The officer pointed with his hand to the smoke visible on the left
beyond the river, and the same stern and serious expression that Pierre
had noticed on many of the faces he had met came into his face.


"Ah, those are the French! And over there?.
.
" Pierre pointed to a knoll
on the left, near which some troops could be seen.


"Those are ours.
" Pierre pointed to another knoll in the
distance with a big tree on it, near a village that lay in a hollow
where also some campfires were smoking and something black was visible.
)
"It was ours yesterday, but now it is his.
 There, you see? There's our center, at Borodino, just
there," and he pointed to the village in front of them with the white
church.
 "That's where one crosses the Kolocha.
.
.
.
.
.
 "But the battle will hardly
be there.
 But wherever it may be,
many a man will be missing tomorrow!" he remarked.


An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was giving
these explanations had waited in silence for him to finish speaking, but
at this point, evidently not liking the officer's remark, interrupted
him.


"Gabions must be sent for," said he sternly.


"Well, send number three company again," the officer replied hurriedly.


"And you, are you one of the doctors?"

"No, I've come on my own," answered Pierre, and he went down the hill
again, passing the militiamen.


"Oh, those damned fellows!" muttered the officer who followed him,
holding his nose as he ran past the men at work.


"There they are.
.
 bringing her, coming.
.
 There they are.
.
 They'll be
here in a minute.
.
.
" voices were suddenly heard saying; and officers,
soldiers, and militiamen began running forward along the road.


A church procession was coming up the hill from Borodino.
 From behind them came the sound of church singing.


"They are bringing her, our Protectress!.
.
 The Iberian Mother of God!"
someone cried.


"The Smolensk Mother of God," another corrected him.


The militiamen, both those who had been in the village and those who had
been at work on the battery, threw down their spades and ran to meet the
church procession.
 Following the battalion that marched along the dusty
road came priests in their vestments--one little old man in a hood with
attendants and singers.
 Behind them soldiers and officers bore a large,
dark-faced icon with an embossed metal cover.
 This was the icon that had
been brought from Smolensk and had since accompanied the army.

The singing did not sound loud under the open sky.
 An immense crowd
of bareheaded officers, soldiers, and militiamen surrounded the icon.

Behind the priest and a chanter stood the notabilities on a spot
reserved for them.
 Standing among the crowd of peasants, Pierre
recognized several acquaintances among these notables, but did not
look at them--his whole attention was absorbed in watching the serious
expression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen who were
all gazing eagerly at the icon.


The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre.


It was Kutuzov, who had been riding round the position and on his way
back to Tatarinova had stopped where the service was being held.
 Pierre
recognized him at once by his peculiar figure, which distinguished him
from everybody else.
 Despite the presence of the commander in chief, who attracted
the attention of all the superior officers, the militiamen and soldiers
continued their prayers without looking at him.
 At last he rose, kissed the icon as
a child does with naively pouting lips, and again bowed till he touched
the ground with his hand.
 The other generals followed his example,
then the officers, and after them with excited faces, pressing on one
another, crowding, panting, and pushing, scrambled the soldiers and
militiamen.


Meanwhile Kutuzov had reached the village and seated himself in the
shade of the nearest house, on a bench which one Cossack had run
to fetch and another had hastily covered with a rug.


The icon was carried further, accompanied by the throng.
 Pierre stopped
some thirty paces from Kutuzov, talking to Boris.


He explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see the
position.
 "I will do the honors of the
camp to you.
 I am in attendance on him, you know; I'll mention it to him.

But if you want to ride round the position, come along with us.
 We are
just going to the left flank.
 Then when we get back, do spend the night
with me and we'll arrange a game of cards.


"But I should like to see the right flank.
 They say it's very strong,"
said Pierre.
 "I should like to start from the Moskva River and ride
round the whole position.
"

"Yes, yes.
 But where is Prince Bolkonski's regiment? Can you point it
out to me?"

"Prince Andrew's? We shall pass it and I'll take you to him.
"

"What about the left flank?" asked Pierre

"To tell you the truth, between ourselves, God only knows what state our
left flank is in," said Boris confidentially lowering his voice.
.
 You see.
.
" but
Boris did not finish, for at that moment Kaysarov, Kutuzov's adjutant,
came up to Pierre.
 "Ah, Kaysarov!" said Boris, addressing him with an
unembarrassed smile, "I was just trying to explain our position to
the count.


"Yes, exactly; the left flank is now extremely strong.
"

Though Kutuzov had dismissed all unnecessary men from the staff, Boris
had contrived to remain at headquarters after the changes.
 He had
established himself with Count Bennigsen, who, like all on whom Boris
had been in attendance, considered young Prince Drubetskoy an invaluable
man.
 Now the decisive moment of battle had come
when Kutuzov would be destroyed and the power pass to Bennigsen, or even
if Kutuzov won the battle it would be felt that everything was done by
Bennigsen.
 In any case many great rewards would have to be given for
tomorrow's action, and new men would come to the front.
 So Boris was
full of nervous vivacity all day.


After Kaysarov, others whom Pierre knew came up to him, and he had not
time to reply to all the questions about Moscow that were showered upon
him, or to listen to all that was told him.


"Call him to me," said Kutuzov.


An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene Highness' wish, and Pierre went
toward Kutuzov's bench.
 But a militiaman got there before him.


"How did that fellow get here?" asked Pierre.
 "He
has been degraded, you know.
.
.
.


"I concluded that if I reported to your Serene Highness you might send
me away or say that you knew what I was reporting, but then I shouldn't
lose anything.
"

"Yes, yes.
 Perhaps I may prove useful to your Serene
Highness.
"

"Yes.
.
.
 Yes.
.
" Kutuzov repeated, his laughing eye narrowing more and
more as he looked at Pierre.


"What are you saying about the militia?" he asked Boris.
.
.
 a wonderful, a matchless people!" said Kutuzov; and he closed his
eyes and swayed his head.
 "A matchless people!" he repeated with a sigh.


"So you want to smell gunpowder?" he said to Pierre.
 "Yes, it's a
pleasant smell.
 I have the honor to be one of your wife's adorers.
"

And as often happens with old people, Kutuzov began looking about
absent-mindedly as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do.


Then, evidently remembering what he wanted, he beckoned to Andrew
Kaysarov, his adjutant's brother.
.
 those verses of Marin's.
.
 how do they go, eh? Those he
wrote about Gerakov: 'Lectures for the corps inditing'.
.


Kaysarov recited.
.
.
.


"I am very glad to meet you here, Count," he said aloud, regardless
of the presence of strangers and in a particularly resolute and solemn
tone.
 "On the eve of a day when God alone knows who of us is fated to
survive, I am glad of this opportunity to tell you that I regret the
misunderstandings that occurred between us and should wish you not to
have any ill feeling for me.
"

Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile, not knowing what to say to him.

With tears in his eyes Dolokhov embraced Pierre and kissed him.


"Yes, very much," replied Pierre.


Half an hour later Kutuzov left for Tatarinova, and Bennigsen and his
suite, with Pierre among them, set out on their ride along the line.






CHAPTER XXIII


From Gorki, Bennigsen descended the highroad to the bridge which, when
they had looked at it from the hill, the officer had pointed out as
being the center of our position and where rows of fragrant new-mown hay
lay by the riverside.

This was the redoubt, as yet unnamed, which afterwards became known as
the Raevski Redoubt, or the Knoll Battery, but Pierre paid no special
attention to it.
 He did not know that it would become more memorable to
him than any other spot on the plain of Borodino.


They then crossed the hollow to Semenovsk, where the soldiers were
dragging away the last logs from the huts and barns.



    * A kind of entrenchment.
 The officers said that either Napoleon or
Murat was there, and they all gazed eagerly at this little group of
horsemen.


Bennigsen spoke to a general who approached him, and began explaining
the whole position of our troops.
 He could make nothing of it.


From the fleches they rode still farther to the left, along a road
winding through a thick, low-growing birch wood.
 In the middle of the
wood a brown hare with white feet sprang out and, scared by the tramp of
the many horses, grew so confused that it leaped along the road in front
of them for some time, arousing general attention and laughter, and only
when several voices shouted at it did it dart to one side and disappear
in the thicket.
 After going through the wood for about a mile and a half
they came out on a glade where troops of Tuchkov's corps were stationed
to defend the left flank.
 Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake, saying
that it was madness to leave a height which commanded the country around
unoccupied and to place troops below it.
 Some of the generals expressed
the same opinion.
 This disposition on the left flank
increased Pierre's doubt of his own capacity to understand military
matters.
 Listening to Bennigsen and the generals criticizing the
position of the troops behind the hill, he quite understood them and
shared their opinion, but for that very reason he could not understand
how the man who put them there behind the hill could have made so gross
and palpable a blunder.


He had received and given the orders for next day's battle and had
nothing more to do.
 He knew that
tomorrow's battle would be the most terrible of all he had taken
part in, and for the first time in his life the possibility of death
presented itself to him--not in relation to any worldly matter or with
reference to its effect on others, but simply in relation to himself, to
his own soul--vividly, plainly, terribly, and almost as a certainty.
 And
from the height of this perception all that had previously tormented and
preoccupied him suddenly became illumined by a cold white light without
shadows, without perspective, without distinction of outline.
 Now he suddenly saw those
badly daubed pictures in clear daylight and without a glass.
 "There they are, those
rudely painted figures that once seemed splendid and mysterious.

Glory, the good of society, love of a woman, the Fatherland itself--how
important these pictures appeared to me, with what profound meaning they
seemed to be filled! And it is all so simple, pale, and crude in the
cold white light of this morning which I feel is dawning for me.
" The
three great sorrows of his life held his attention in particular: his
love for a woman, his father's death, and the French invasion which had
overrun half Russia.
 "Love.
.
.
 that little girl who seemed to me brimming
over with mystic forces! Yes, indeed, I loved her.
 I made romantic plans
of love and happiness with her! Oh, what a boy I was!" he said aloud
bitterly.
.
.
 But it was much simpler
really.
.
.
 But Napoleon came and swept him aside,
unconscious of his existence, as he might brush a chip from his path,
and his Bald Hills and his whole life fell to pieces.
 Princess Mary says
it is a trial sent from above.
 What is the trial for, when he is not
here and will never return? He is not here! For whom then is the trial
intended? The Fatherland, the destruction of Moscow! And tomorrow I
shall be killed, perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by one of our own
men, by a soldier discharging a musket close to my ear as one of them
did yesterday, and the French will come and take me by head and heels
and fling me into a hole that I may not stink under their noses, and new
conditions of life will arise, which will seem quite ordinary to others
and about which I shall know nothing.
.
.
.
.
 to be
killed tomorrow.
 That I should not exist.
.
.
.
.
"

And the birches with their light and shade, the curly clouds, the
smoke of the campfires, and all that was around him changed and seemed
terrible and menacing.
 A cold shiver ran down his spine.


Prince Andrew rose hastily, listened to the business they had come
about, gave them some further instructions, and was about to dismiss
them when he heard a familiar, lisping, voice behind the shed.


"Devil take it!" said the voice of a man stumbling over something.


Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre, who had tripped
over a pole on the ground and had nearly fallen, coming his way.


"You? What a surprise!" said he.
 He had approached
the shed full of animation, but on seeing Prince Andrew's face he felt
constrained and ill at ease.


"I have come.
.
.
.
.
 you know.
.
.
 come.
.
 Julie Drubetskaya told me so.
 I went to see them, but
missed them.
 They have gone to your estate near Moscow.
 Seats were brought in and so was the tea.
 The officers gazed with
surprise at Pierre's huge stout figure and listened to his talk of
Moscow and the position of our army, round which he had ridden.


"So you understand the whole position of our troops?" Prince Andrew
interrupted him.
"

"Well, then, you know more than anyone else, be it who it may," said
Prince Andrew.


"And tell me your opinion of Barclay de Tolly.
 In Moscow they are saying
heaven knows what about him.
.
.
.
 What do you think of him?"

"Ask them," replied Prince Andrew, indicating the officers.


Pierre looked at Timokhin with the condescendingly interrogative smile
with which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer.


"We see light again, since his Serenity has been appointed, your
excellency," said Timokhin timidly, and continually turning to glance at
his colonel.


"Well, to mention only firewood and fodder, let me inform you.
 Why, when
we were retreating from Sventsyani we dare not touch a stick or a wisp
of hay or anything.
 You see, we were going away, so he would get it all;
wasn't it so, your excellency?" and again Timokhin turned to the prince.
 In our regiment two officers were court-martialed for
that kind of thing.
.
 Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew.
 He
ordered us to retreat, and all our efforts and losses went for nothing.

He had no thought of betraying us, he tried to do the best he could,
he thought out everything, and that is why he is unsuitable.
 How can I explain?.
.
 Well, say your
father has a German valet, and he is a splendid valet and satisfies your
father's requirements better than you could, then it's all right to let
him serve.
 But if your father is mortally sick you'll send the valet
away and attend to your father with your own unpracticed, awkward hands,
and will soothe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could.
 But in your Club they have been making him
out a traitor! They slander him as a traitor, and the only result will
be that afterwards, ashamed of their false accusations, they will make
him out a hero or a genius instead of a traitor, and that will be still
more unjust.
 He is an honest and very punctilious German.
"

"And they say he's a skillful commander," rejoined Pierre.


"I don't understand what is meant by 'a skillful commander,'" replied
Prince Andrew ironically.


"A skillful commander?" replied Pierre.
 and foresees the adversary's intentions.
"

"But that's impossible," said Prince Andrew as if it were a matter
settled long ago.


Pierre looked at him in surprise.


"And yet they say that war is like a game of chess?" he remarked.


"Yes," replied Prince Andrew, "but with this little difference, that
in chess you may think over each move as long as you please and are not
limited for time, and with this difference too, that a knight is always
stronger than a pawn, and two pawns are always stronger than one, while
in war a battalion is sometimes stronger than a division and sometimes
weaker than a company.
.
.
 Success never depends,
and never will depend, on position, or equipment, or even on numbers,
and least of all on position.
"

"But on what then?"

"On the feeling that is in me and in him," he pointed to Timokhin, "and
in each soldier.
 In contrast to his former reticent taciturnity
Prince Andrew now seemed excited.
 He could apparently not refrain from
expressing the thoughts that had suddenly occurred to him.


"A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it! Why did we lose
the battle at Austerlitz? The French losses were almost equal to ours,
but very early we said to ourselves that we were losing the battle,
and we did lose it.
 And we said so because we had nothing to fight for
there, we wanted to get away from the battlefield as soon as we could.

'We've lost, so let us run,' and we ran.
 But tomorrow we
shan't say it! You talk about our position, the left flank weak and the
right flank too extended," he went on.
 "That's all nonsense, there's
nothing of the kind.


"At such a moment!" Prince Andrew repeated.
 "To them it is only a moment
affording opportunities to undermine a rival and obtain an extra cross
or ribbon.
 For me tomorrow means this: a Russian army of a hundred
thousand and a French army of a hundred thousand have met to fight, and
the thing is that these two hundred thousand men will fight and the side
that fights more fiercely and spares itself least will win.
 And if you
like I will tell you that whatever happens and whatever muddles those at
the top may make, we shall win tomorrow's battle.
 Tomorrow, happen what
may, we shall win!"

"There now, your excellency! That's the truth, the real truth," said
Timokhin.
 "Who would spare himself now? The soldiers in my battalion,
believe me, wouldn't drink their vodka! 'It's not the day for that!'
they say.
"

All were silent.
 The officers rose.
 Prince Andrew went out of the shed
with them, giving final orders to the adjutant.
 After they had gone
Pierre approached Prince Andrew and was about to start a conversation
when they heard the clatter of three horses' hoofs on the road not far
from the shed, and looking in that direction Prince Andrew recognized
Wolzogen and Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack.
 Der Ansicht kann ich nicht genug
Preis geben," * said one of them.



     * "The war must be extended widely.
"


"Oh, ja," said the other, "der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schwachen,
so kann man gewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat-Personen in Achtung
nehmen.
"


"Oh, no," agreed the other.


"Extend widely!" said Prince Andrew with an angry snort, when they had
ridden past.
 "In that 'extend' were my father, son, and sister, at
Bald Hills.


"So you think we shall win tomorrow's battle?" asked Pierre.
 "One thing I would do if
I had the power," he began again, "I would not take prisoners.
 They are my enemies.
 In my opinion they are all criminals.
 He now
understood the whole meaning and importance of this war and of the
impending battle.
 All he had seen that day, all the significant and
stern expressions on the faces he had seen in passing, were lit up
for him by a new light.
 He understood that latent heat (as they say in
physics) of patriotism which was present in all these men he had seen,
and this explained to him why they all prepared for death calmly, and as
it were lightheartedly.
 As it is we have
played at war--that's what's vile! We play at magnanimity and all that
stuff.
 Such magnanimity and sensibility are like the magnanimity and
sensibility of a lady who faints when she sees a calf being killed: she
is so kindhearted that she can't look at blood, but enjoys eating the
calf served up with sauce.
 They talk to us of the rules of war, of
chivalry, of flags of truce, of mercy to the unfortunate and so on.
 It's
all rubbish! I saw chivalry and flags of truce in 1805; they humbugged
us and we humbugged them.
 They plunder other people's houses, issue
false paper money, and worst of all they kill my children and my
father, and then talk of rules of war and magnanimity to foes! Take no
prisoners, but kill and be killed! He who has come to this as I have
through the same sufferings.
.
 He paced up and down a
few times in silence, but his eyes glittered feverishly and his lips
quivered as he began speaking.


"If there was none of this magnanimity in war, we should go to war only
when it was worth while going to certain death, as now.
 Then there would
not be war because Paul Ivanovich had offended Michael Ivanovich.
 We ought to
accept this terrible necessity sternly and seriously.
 It all lies in
that: get rid of falsehood and let war be war and not a game.
 As it is
now, war is the favorite pastime of the idle and frivolous.


"But what is war? What is needed for success in warfare? What are the
habits of the military? The aim of war is murder; the methods of war
are spying, treachery, and their encouragement, the ruin of a country's
inhabitants, robbing them or stealing to provision the army, and fraud
and falsehood termed military craft.
 The habits of the military class
are the absence of freedom, that is, discipline, idleness, ignorance,
cruelty, debauchery, and drunkenness.
 And in spite of all this it is the
highest class, respected by everyone.
 I see that I have
begun to understand too much.
.


"However, you're sleepy, and it's time for me to sleep.
 Go back to
Gorki!" said Prince Andrew suddenly.


He came quickly up to Pierre and embraced and kissed him.
 "Good-by, be
off!" he shouted.
 "Whether we meet again or not.
.
" and turning away
hurriedly he entered the shed.
 "No, he does not want it!" Pierre concluded.
 "And I know
that this is our last meeting!" He sighed deeply and rode back to Gorki.


On re-entering the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a rug, but he could
not sleep.
 One picture succeeded another in his imagination.
 On
one of them he dwelt long and joyfully.
 He vividly recalled an evening
in Petersburg.
 Natasha with animated and excited face was telling him
how she had gone to look for mushrooms the previous summer and had lost
her way in the big forest.
 She incoherently described the depths of
the forest, her feelings, and a talk with a beekeeper she met, and
constantly interrupted her story to say: "No, I can't! I'm not telling
it right; no, you don't understand," though he encouraged her by saying
that he did understand, and he really had understood all she wanted to
say.
 But Natasha was not satisfied with her own words: she felt that
they did not convey the passionately poetic feeling she had experienced
that day and wished to convey.
 "He was such a delightful old man, and
it was so dark in the forest.
.
.
.
 No, I can't
describe it," she had said, flushed and excited.
 "I
understood her," he thought.
 "I not only understood her, but it was
just that inner, spiritual force, that sincerity, that frankness of
soul--that very soul of hers which seemed to be fettered by her body--it
was that soul I loved in her.
.
.
 loved so strongly and happily.
.
.
 "He did not need anything
of that kind.
 He neither saw nor understood anything of the sort.
 He
only saw in her a pretty and fresh young girl, with whom he did not
deign to unite his fate.
.






CHAPTER XXVI


On August 25, the eve of the battle of Borodino, M.
 de Beausset ordered a box he had
brought for the Emperor to be carried before him and entered the first
compartment of Napoleon's tent, where he began opening the box while
conversing with Napoleon's aides-de-camp who surrounded him.


Fabvier, not entering the tent, remained at the entrance talking to some
generals of his acquaintance.


The Emperor Napoleon had not yet left his bedroom and was finishing his
toilet.
 "Go on, harder, go on!" he muttered to the valet
who was rubbing him, slightly twitching and grunting.
 An aide-de-camp,
who had entered the bedroom to report to the Emperor the number of
prisoners taken in yesterday's action, was standing by the door after
delivering his message, awaiting permission to withdraw.


"No prisoners!" said he, repeating the aide-de-camp's words.
 "They
are forcing us to exterminate them.
.
.
.
 harder, harder!" he muttered, hunching his back and
presenting his fat shoulders.


Two valets rapidly dressed His Majesty, and wearing the blue uniform of
the Guards he went with firm quick steps to the reception room.


De Beausset's hands meanwhile were busily engaged arranging the present
he had brought from the Empress, on two chairs directly in front of the
entrance.
 But Napoleon had dressed and come out with such unexpected
rapidity that he had not time to finish arranging the surprise.


Napoleon noticed at once what they were about and guessed that they were
not ready.
 Napoleon made ironic remarks during
Fabvier's account, as if he had not expected that matters could go
otherwise in his absence.


"I must make up for that in Moscow," said Napoleon.


"You have hurried here.
 I am very glad.


"Sire, all Paris regrets your absence," replied de Beausset as was
proper.
 Again he honored him by touching his ear.


"I am very sorry to have made you travel so far," said he.


Napoleon smiled and, lifting his head absent-mindedly, glanced to the
right.


"Yes, it has happened luckily for you," he said, raising the open
snuffbox to his nose.
 "You are fond of travel, and in three days you
will see Moscow.

You will have a pleasant journey.


With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and without turning his
back to the Emperor retired two steps, twitching off the cloth at the
same time, and said:

"A present to Your Majesty from the Empress.
"

It was a portrait, painted in bright colors by Gerard, of the son borne
to Napoleon by the daughter of the Emperor of Austria, the boy whom for
some reason everyone called "The King of Rome.
"

A very pretty curly-headed boy with a look of the Christ in the Sistine
Madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball.
 The ball represented the
terrestrial globe and the stick in his other hand a scepter.


Though it was not clear what the artist meant to express by depicting
the so-called King of Rome spiking the earth with a stick, the allegory
apparently seemed to Napoleon, as it had done to all who had seen it in
Paris, quite clear and very pleasing.


"The King of Rome!" he said, pointing to the portrait with a graceful
gesture.
 "Admirable!"

With the natural capacity of an Italian for changing the expression of
his face at will, he drew nearer to the portrait and assumed a look
of pensive tenderness.
 He felt that what he now said and did would
be historical, and it seemed to him that it would now be best for
him--whose grandeur enabled his son to play stick and ball with the
terrestrial globe--to show, in contrast to that grandeur, the simplest
paternal tenderness.
 His eyes grew dim, he moved forward, glanced round
at a chair (which seemed to place itself under him), and sat down on it
before the portrait.
 At a single gesture from him everyone went out on
tiptoe, leaving the great man to himself and his emotion.


Having sat still for a while he touched--himself not knowing why--the
thick spot of paint representing the highest light in the portrait,
rose, and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty.


After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset's presence dictated his order of
the day to the army.


"Short and energetic!" he remarked when he had read over the
proclamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections.
 Victory depends on
you.
 It is essential for us; it will give us all we need: comfortable
quarters and a speedy return to our country.
 Behave as you did at
Austerlitz, Friedland, Vitebsk, and Smolensk.
 de Beausset, who was
so fond of travel, to accompany him on his ride, he went out of the tent
to where the horses stood saddled.


"Your Majesty is too kind!" replied de Beausset to the invitation to
accompany the Emperor; he wanted to sleep, did not know how to ride and
was afraid of doing so.
 When
Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before his
son's portrait grew still louder.
 Napoleon frowned.
 "It is too soon for him to see a field of battle.
"

De Beausset closed his eyes, bowed his head, and sighed deeply, to
indicate how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor's words.






CHAPTER XXVII


On the twenty-fifth of August, so his historians tell us, Napoleon spent
the whole day on horseback inspecting the locality, considering plans
submitted to him by his marshals, and personally giving commands to his
generals.
 That part of the line was not entrenched and in front of it the
ground was more open and level than elsewhere.


Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with a profound
air and in silence, nodded with approval or shook his head dubiously,
and without communicating to the generals around him the profound
course of ideas which guided his decisions merely gave them his final
conclusions in the form of commands.
 Having listened to a suggestion
from Davout, who was now called Prince d'Eckmuhl, to turn the Russian
left wing, Napoleon said it should not be done, without explaining
why not.


Having inspected the country opposite the Shevardino Redoubt, Napoleon
pondered a little in silence and then indicated the spots where two
batteries should be set up by the morrow to act against the Russian
entrenchments, and the places where, in line with them, the field
artillery should be placed.


At the same time the commander of the artillery of the 1st Corps,
General Pernetti, with thirty cannon of Campan's division and all the
howitzers of Dessaix's and Friant's divisions, will move forward, open
fire, and overwhelm with shellfire the enemy's battery, against which
will operate:

        24 guns of the artillery of the Guards
        30 guns of Campan's division

 and     8 guns of Friant's and Dessaix's divisions
        --

 in all 62 guns.


During the cannonade Prince Poniatowski is to advance through the wood
on the village and turn the enemy's position.


General Campan will move through the wood to seize the first
fortification.


After the advance has begun in this manner, orders will be given in
accordance with the enemy's movements.


The cannonade on the left flank will begin as soon as the guns of the
right wing are heard.
 The sharpshooters of Morand's division and of
the vice-King's division will open a heavy fire on seeing the attack
commence on the right wing.


The vice-King will occupy the village and cross by its three bridges,
advancing to the same heights as Morand's and Gibrard's divisions, which
under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt and come into
line with the rest of the forces.


The Imperial Camp near Mozhaysk,

September, 6, 1812.
 Not one of these was, or could be, carried out.
 This could not be
done, as from the spots selected by Napoleon the projectiles did not
carry to the Russian works, and those 102 guns shot into the air until
the nearest commander, contrary to Napoleon's instructions, moved them
forward.


The second order was that Poniatowski, moving to the village through the
wood, should turn the Russian left flank.
 This could not be done and
was not done, because Poniatowski, advancing on the village through the
wood, met Tuchkov there barring his way, and could not and did not turn
the Russian position.


The third order was: General Campan will move through the wood to seize
the first fortification.


The fourth order was: The vice-King will occupy the village (Borodino)
and cross by its three bridges, advancing to the same heights as
Morand's and Gdrard's divisions (for whose movements no directions are
given), which under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt
and come into line with the rest of the forces.
 After passing through Borodino the vice-King was driven
back to the Kolocha and could get no farther; while the divisions of
Morand and Gerard did not take the redoubt but were driven back, and the
redoubt was only taken at the end of the battle by the cavalry (a thing
probably unforeseen and not heard of by Napoleon).
 So not one of
the orders in the disposition was, or could be, executed.
 But in the
disposition it is said that, after the fight has commenced in this
manner, orders will be given in accordance with the enemy's movements,
and so it might be supposed that all necessary arrangements would be
made by Napoleon during the battle.
 But this was not and could not be
done, for during the whole battle Napoleon was so far away that, as
appeared later, he could not know the course of the battle and not one
of his orders during the fight could be executed.
 To historians who believe that Russia was shaped by
the will of one man--Peter the Great--and that France from a republic
became an empire and French armies went to Russia at the will of one
man--Napoleon--to say that Russia remained a power because Napoleon
had a bad cold on the twenty-fourth of August may seem logical and
convincing.
 Bartholomew was due to Charles IX's stomach being deranged.
 But
to men who do not admit that Russia was formed by the will of one man,
Peter I, or that the French Empire was formed and the war with Russia
begun by the will of one man, Napoleon, that argument seems not merely
untrue and irrational, but contrary to all human reality.
 To the
question of what causes historic events another answer presents itself,
namely, that the course of human events is predetermined from on
high--depends on the coincidence of the wills of all who take part
in the events, and that a Napoleon's influence on the course of these
events is purely external and fictitious.
 Bartholomew was not due to Charles IX's will, though he gave the
order for it and thought it was done as a result of that order; and
strange as it may seem to suppose that the slaughter of eighty thousand
men at Borodino was not due to Napoleon's will, though he ordered the
commencement and conduct of the battle and thought it was done
because he ordered it; strange as these suppositions appear, yet human
dignity--which tells me that each of us is, if not more at least not
less a man than the great Napoleon--demands the acceptance of that
solution of the question, and historic investigation abundantly confirms
it.


At the battle of Borodino Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one.

That was all done by the soldiers.
 Therefore it was not he who killed
people.


The French soldiers went to kill and be killed at the battle of Borodino
not because of Napoleon's orders but by their own volition.
 Had Napoleon then
forbidden them to fight the Russians, they would have killed him and
have proceeded to fight the Russians because it was inevitable.

There was nothing left for them to do but cry "Vive l'Empereur!" and go
to fight, in order to get food and rest as conquerors in Moscow.
 So it
was not because of Napoleon's commands that they killed their fellow
men.


And it was not Napoleon who directed the course of the battle, for none
of his orders were executed and during the battle he did not know what
was going on before him.
 And so the question whether he had or had not a
cold has no more historic interest than the cold of the least of the
transport soldiers.


The dispositions cited above are not at all worse, but are even
better, than previous dispositions by which he had won victories.
 His
pseudo-orders during the battle were also no worse than formerly, but
much the same as usual.






CHAPTER XXIX


On returning from a second inspection of the lines, Napoleon remarked:

"The chessmen are set up, the game will begin tomorrow!"

Having ordered punch and summoned de Beausset, he began to talk to him
about Paris and about some changes he meant to make in the Empress'
household, surprising the prefect by his memory of minute details
relating to the court.


He showed an interest in trifles, joked about de Beausset's love of
travel, and chatted carelessly, as a famous, self-confident surgeon who
knows his job does when turning up his sleeves and putting on his apron
while a patient is being strapped to the operating table.
 "The matter is
in my hands and is clear and definite in my head.
 He
was so much interested in that task that he was unable to sleep, and
in spite of his cold which had grown worse from the dampness of the
evening, he went into the large division of the tent at three o'clock in
the morning, loudly blowing his nose.
 He asked whether the Russians had
not withdrawn, and was told that the enemy's fires were still in the
same places.
 He nodded approval.


The adjutant in attendance came into the tent.


"Well, Rapp, do you think we shall do good business today?" Napoleon
asked him.


"Without doubt, sire," replied Rapp.


Napoleon looked at him.
 "The wine is drawn and must be drunk.
"

Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long time leaning his head on his
hand.


"This poor army!" he suddenly remarked.
 "It has diminished greatly since
Smolensk.
 But the Guards, Rapp, the Guards
are intact?" he remarked interrogatively.


Napoleon took a lozenge, put it in his mouth, and glanced at his watch.

He was not sleepy and it was still not nearly morning.
 It was impossible
to give further orders for the sake of killing time, for the orders had
all been given and were now being executed.


"Have the biscuits and rice been served out to the regiments of the
Guards?" asked Napoleon sternly.


"Yes, sire.
"

"The rice too?"

Rapp replied that he had given the Emperor's order about the rice, but
Napoleon shook his head in dissatisfaction as if not believing that
his order had been executed.
 An attendant came in with punch.
 Napoleon
ordered another glass to be brought for Rapp, and silently sipped his
own.

Our body is a machine for living.

Our body is like a perfect watch that should go for a certain time; the
watchmaker cannot open it, he can only adjust it by fumbling, and that
blindfold.
.
"

And having entered on the path of definition, of which he was fond,
Napoleon suddenly and unexpectedly gave a new one.


"Do you know, Rapp, what military art is?" asked he.
 "It is the art of
being stronger than the enemy at a given moment.
 That's all.


"Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutuzov!" said Napoleon.
 We shall
see!"

He looked at his watch.
 It was still only four o'clock.
 He did not feel
sleepy.
 The punch was finished and there was still nothing to do.
 The night was dark and damp, a scarcely perceptible
moisture was descending from above.


Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, looked at the fires and
listened to these sounds, and as he was passing a tall guardsman in
a shaggy cap, who was standing sentinel before his tent and had drawn
himself up like a black pillar at sight of the Emperor, Napoleon stopped
in front of him.


The man answered the question.


"Ah! One of the old ones! Has your regiment had its rice?"

"It has, Your Majesty.



At half-past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shevardino.


It was growing light, the sky was clearing, only a single cloud lay in
the east.
 The abandoned campfires were burning themselves out in the
faint morning light.


On the right a single deep report of a cannon resounded and died away in
the prevailing silence.
 Some minutes passed.
 A second and a third report
shook the air, then a fourth and a fifth boomed solemnly near by on the
right.


Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevardino Redoubt where he
dismounted.






CHAPTER XXX


On returning to Gorki after having seen Prince Andrew, Pierre ordered
his groom to get the horses ready and to call him early in the morning,
and then immediately fell asleep behind a partition in a corner Boris
had given up to him.


Before he was thoroughly awake next morning everybody had already left
the hut.
 The panes were rattling in the little windows and his groom was
shaking him.
 "All the
gentlemen have gone out, and his Serene Highness himself rode past long
ago.
"

Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the porch.
 Outside all was bright,
fresh, dewy, and cheerful.
 The sun, just bursting forth from behind a
cloud that had concealed it, was shining, with rays still half broken
by the clouds, over the roofs of the street opposite, on the
dew-besprinkled dust of the road, on the walls of the houses, on the
windows, the fence, and on Pierre's horses standing before the hut.
 The
roar of guns sounded more distinct outside.


"It's time, Count; it's time!" cried the adjutant.


Telling the groom to follow him with the horses, Pierre went down the
street to the knoll from which he had looked at the field of battle the
day before.
 A crowd of military men was assembled there, members of the
staff could be heard conversing in French, and Kutuzov's gray head in
a white cap with a red band was visible, his gray nape sunk between his
shoulders.
 He was looking through a field glass down the highroad before
him.

There were troops to be seen everywhere, in front and to the right and
left.


Above the Kolocha, in Borodino and on both sides of it, especially to
the left where the Voyna flowing between its marshy banks falls into
the Kolocha, a mist had spread which seemed to melt, to dissolve, and to
become translucent when the brilliant sun appeared and magically colored
and outlined everything.
 The smoke of the guns mingled with this mist,
and over the whole expanse and through that mist the rays of the morning
sun were reflected, flashing back like lightning from the water, from
the dew, and from the bayonets of the troops crowded together by the
riverbanks and in Borodino.
 A white church could be seen through the
mist, and here and there the roofs of huts in Borodino as well as dense
masses of soldiers, or green ammunition chests and ordnance.
 And all
this moved, or seemed to move, as the smoke and mist spread out over
the whole space.
 Just as in the mist-enveloped hollow near Borodino, so
along the entire line outside and above it and especially in the woods
and fields to the left, in the valleys and on the summits of the high
ground, clouds of powder smoke seemed continually to spring up out of
nothing, now singly, now several at a time, some translucent, others
dense, which, swelling, growing, rolling, and blending, extended over
the whole expanse.


These puffs of smoke and (strange to say) the sound of the firing
produced the chief beauty of the spectacle.


"Puff!"--suddenly a round compact cloud of smoke was seen merging from
violet into gray and milky white, and "boom!" came the report a second
later.


"Puff! puff!"--and two clouds arose pushing one another and blending
together; and "boom, boom!" came the sounds confirming what the eye had
seen.


Pierre glanced round at the first cloud, which he had seen as a round
compact ball, and in its place already were balloons of smoke floating
to one side, and--"puff" (with a pause)--"puff, puff!" three and
then four more appeared and then from each, with the same
interval--"boom--boom, boom!" came the fine, firm, precise sounds in
reply.
 It seemed as if those smoke clouds sometimes ran and sometimes
stood still while woods, fields, and glittering bayonets ran past them.

From the left, over fields and bushes, those large balls of smoke were
continually appearing followed by their solemn reports, while nearer
still, in the hollows and woods, there burst from the muskets small
cloudlets that had no time to become balls, but had their little echoes
in just the same way.
 "Trakh-ta-ta-takh!" came the frequent crackle of
musketry, but it was irregular and feeble in comparison with the reports
of the cannon.


Pierre wished to be there with that smoke, those shining bayonets, that
movement, and those sounds.
 He turned to look at Kutuzov and his suite,
to compare his impressions with those of others.
 All their faces were now shining with that latent warmth
of feeling Pierre had noticed the day before and had fully understood
after his talk with Prince Andrew.


"Go, my dear fellow, go.
.


"To the crossing!" said the general coldly and sternly in reply to one
of the staff who asked where he was going.


The general mounted a horse a Cossack had brought him.
 Pierre went to
his groom who was holding his horses and, asking which was the quietest,
clambered onto it, seized it by the mane, and turning out his toes
pressed his heels against its sides and, feeling that his spectacles
were slipping off but unable to let go of the mane and reins, he
galloped after the general, causing the staff officers to smile as they
watched him from the knoll.






CHAPTER XXXI


Having descended the hill the general after whom Pierre was galloping
turned sharply to the left, and Pierre, losing sight of him, galloped
in among some ranks of infantry marching ahead of him.
 He tried to pass
either in front of them or to the right or left, but there were soldiers
everywhere, all with the same preoccupied expression and busy with
some unseen but evidently important task.
 They all gazed with the same
dissatisfied and inquiring expression at this stout man in a white hat,
who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them under his horse's
hoofs.


"Why ride into the middle of the battalion?" one of them shouted at him.


There was a bridge ahead of him, where other soldiers stood firing.
 He did
not notice the sound of the bullets whistling from every side, or the
projectiles that flew over him, did not see the enemy on the other side
of the river, and for a long time did not notice the killed and wounded,
though many fell near him.


"Why's that fellow in front of the line?" shouted somebody at him again.


"To the left!.
 Keep to the right!" the men shouted to him.


Pierre went to the right, and unexpectedly encountered one of Raevski's
adjutants whom he knew.


"How have you got here?" he said, and galloped on.


Pierre, feeling out of place there, having nothing to do, and afraid of
getting in someone's way again, galloped after the adjutant.


"What's happening here? May I come with you?" he asked.


"One moment, one moment!" replied the adjutant, and riding up to a stout
colonel who was standing in the meadow, he gave him some message and
then addressed Pierre.


"Why have you come here, Count?" he asked with a smile.


But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on.


"Here it's tolerable," said he, "but with Bagration on the left flank
they're getting it frightfully hot.
"

"Really?" said Pierre.
 "Where is that?"

"Come along with me to our knoll.
 "Will you come?"

"Yes, I'll come with you," replied Pierre, looking round for his groom.


It was only now that he noticed wounded men staggering along or being
carried on stretchers.
 On that very meadow he had ridden over the day
before, a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay, with his
head thrown awkwardly back and his shako off.
 His horse lagged behind the adjutant's
and jolted him at every step.


"You don't seem to be used to riding, Count?" remarked the adjutant.


"No it's not that, but her action seems so jerky," said Pierre in a
puzzled tone.
.
.
 she's wounded!" said the adjutant.
 "In the off foreleg above the
knee.
 I congratulate you, Count, on your baptism of
fire!"

Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps, behind the artillery
which had been moved forward and was in action, deafening them with the
noise of firing, they came to a small wood.
 There it was cool and quiet,
with a scent of autumn.
 Pierre and the adjutant dismounted and walked up
the hill on foot.


The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now.
 You'll see everything from there and it's less dangerous, and
I'll come for you.
 They did not meet
again, and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm that
day.


This redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three sides of which trenches had
been dug.


In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which also fired
incessantly.
 A little behind the guns stood infantry.
 When ascending
that knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot, on which small trenches
had been dug and from which a few guns were firing, was the most
important point of the battle.


On the contrary, just because he happened to be there he thought it one
of the least significant parts of the field.


Having reached the knoll, Pierre sat down at one end of a trench
surrounding the battery and gazed at what was going on around him with
an unconsciously happy smile.
 Occasionally he rose and walked about the
battery still with that same smile, trying not to obstruct the soldiers
who were loading, hauling the guns, and continually running past
him with bags and charges.
 The guns of that battery were being fired
continually one after another with a deafening roar, enveloping the
whole neighborhood in powder smoke.


In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed in support,
here in the battery where a small number of men busy at their work were
separated from the rest by a trench, everyone experienced a common and
as it were family feeling of animation.


The intrusion of Pierre's nonmilitary figure in a white hat made an
unpleasant impression at first.
 The soldiers looked askance at him with
surprise and even alarm as they went past him.
 The senior artillery
officer, a tall, long-legged, pockmarked man, moved over to Pierre as if
to see the action of the farthest gun and looked at him with curiosity.


A young round-faced officer, quite a boy still and evidently only just
out of the Cadet College, who was zealously commanding the two guns
entrusted to him, addressed Pierre sternly.


"Sir," he said, "permit me to ask you to stand aside.
 You must not be
here.
 The men soon accepted Pierre into their family, adopted him,
gave him a nickname ("our gentleman"), and made kindly fun of him among
themselves.


"And how's it you're not afraid, sir, really now?" a red-faced,
broad-shouldered soldier asked Pierre, with a grin that disclosed a set
of sound, white teeth.


"Are you afraid, then?" said Pierre.


"What else do you expect?" answered the soldier.
 "She has no mercy, you
know! When she comes spluttering down, out go your innards.


"It's the business of us soldiers.


The young officer was evidently exercising his duties for the first or
second time and therefore treated both his superiors and the men with
great precision and formality.
 Moreover, his whole attention
was engrossed by watching the family circle--separated from all
else--formed by the men in the battery.
 His first unconscious feeling
of joyful animation produced by the sights and sounds of the battlefield
was now replaced by another, especially since he had seen that soldier
lying alone in the hayfield.


By ten o'clock some twenty men had already been carried away from the
battery; two guns were smashed and cannon balls fell more and more
frequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistled around.


"A live one!" shouted a man as a whistling shell approached.


"Not this way! To the infantry!" added another with loud laughter,
seeing the shell fly past and fall into the ranks of the supports.


Several soldiers gathered by the wall of the trench, looking out to see
what was happening in front.


"Mind your own business," an old sergeant shouted at them.
 "If they've
retired it's because there's work for them to do farther back.
"

And the sergeant, taking one of the men by the shoulders, gave him a
shove with his knee.


"Now then, all together, like bargees!" rose the merry voices of those
who were moving the gun.


"Oh, she nearly knocked our gentleman's hat off!" cried the red-faced
humorist, showing his teeth chaffing Pierre.


"There, lads.
.
.
 oh, oh!" they mimicked the peasants, "they don't like it
at all!"

Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt, and after
every loss, the liveliness increased more and more.


As the flames of the fire hidden within come more and more vividly and
rapidly from an approaching thundercloud, so, as if in opposition to
what was taking place, the lightning of hidden fire growing more and
more intense glowed in the faces of these men.


Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concerned to know
what was happening there; he was entirely absorbed in watching this fire
which burned ever more brightly and which he felt was flaming up in the
same way in his own soul.


At ten o'clock the infantry that had been among the bushes in front of
the battery and along the Kamenka streamlet retreated.
 From the battery
they could be seen running back past it carrying their wounded on
their muskets.
 A general with his suite came to the battery, and after
speaking to the colonel gave Pierre an angry look and went away again
having ordered the infantry supports behind the battery to lie down,
so as to be less exposed to fire.
 After this from amid the ranks of
infantry to the right of the battery came the sound of a drum and shouts
of command, and from the battery one saw how those ranks of infantry
moved forward.


The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their
long-drawn shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard.
 A few
minutes later crowds of wounded men and stretcher-bearers came back from
that direction.
 Projectiles began to fall still more frequently in the
battery.
 Several men were lying about who had not been removed.
 Around
the cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily.
 The senior officer moved with big, rapid strides from one
gun to another with a frowning face.
 The
soldiers handed up the charges, turned, loaded, and did their business
with strained smartness.
 They gave little jumps as they walked, as
though they were on springs.
 Pierre standing beside the
commanding officer.
 The young officer, his hand to his shako, ran up to
his superior.
 Are
we to continue firing?" he asked.


One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck the earthwork, a
soldier, or a gun.
 On the right of the battery soldiers shouting
"Hurrah!" were running not forwards but backwards, it seemed to Pierre.


"All with grapeshot!" shouted the officer.


The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whisper informed
him (as a butler at dinner informs his master that there is no more of
some wine asked for) that there were no more charges.


"The scoundrels! What are they doing?" shouted the officer, turning to
Pierre.


The officer's face was red and perspiring and his eyes glittered under
his frowning brow.


"Run to the reserves and bring up the ammunition boxes!" he yelled,
angrily avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men.


"I'll go," said Pierre.


The officer, without answering him, strode across to the opposite side.


"Don't fire.
.
.
.


"Eh, sir, this is no place for you," said he, and ran down the slope.


One cannon ball, another, and a third flew over him, falling in front,
beside, and behind him.
 "Where am I going?"
he suddenly asked himself when he was already near the green ammunition
wagons.
 At the
same instant he was dazzled by a great flash of flame, and immediately a
deafening roar, crackling, and whistling made his ears tingle.


When he came to himself he was sitting on the ground leaning on his
hands; the ammunition wagons he had been approaching no longer existed,
only charred green boards and rags littered the scorched grass, and a
horse, dangling fragments of its shaft behind it, galloped past, while
another horse lay, like Pierre, on the ground, uttering prolonged and
piercing cries.






CHAPTER XXXII


Beside himself with terror Pierre jumped up and ran back to the battery,
as to the only refuge from the horrors that surrounded him.
 He saw the senior officer lying on
the earth wall with his back turned as if he were examining something
down below and that one of the soldiers he had noticed before was
struggling forward shouting "Brothers!" and trying to free himself from
some men who were holding him by the arm.
 Instinctively
guarding against the shock--for they had been running together at full
speed before they saw one another--Pierre put out his hands and seized
the man (a French officer) by the shoulder with one hand and by the
throat with the other.


For some seconds they gazed with frightened eyes at one another's
unfamiliar faces and both were perplexed at what they had done and
what they were to do next.
 "Am I taken prisoner or have I taken him
prisoner?" each was thinking.
 (This was the attack for which Ermolov claimed the credit,
declaring that only his courage and good luck made such a feat possible:
it was the attack in which he was said to have thrown some St.
 George's
Crosses he had in his pocket into the battery for the first soldiers to
take who got there.
)

The French who had occupied the battery fled, and our troops shouting
"Hurrah!" pursued them so far beyond the battery that it was difficult
to call them back.
 Pierre again went up onto the knoll where
he had spent over an hour, and of that family circle which had received
him as a member he did not find a single one.
 The red-faced man was still twitching, but they did not carry him
away.


"Now they will stop it, now they will be horrified at what they have
done!" he thought, aimlessly going toward a crowd of stretcher bearers
moving from the battlefield.


But behind the veil of smoke the sun was still high, and in front and
especially to the left, near Semenovsk, something seemed to be seething
in the smoke, and the roar of cannon and musketry did not diminish, but
even increased to desperation like a man who, straining himself, shrieks
with all his remaining strength.






CHAPTER XXXIII


The chief action of the battle of Borodino was fought within the seven
thousand feet between Borodino and Bagration's fleches.
 Beyond that
space there was, on the one side, a demonstration made by the Russians
with Uvarov's cavalry at midday, and on the other side, beyond Utitsa,
Poniatowski's collision with Tuchkov; but these two were detached and
feeble actions in comparison with what took place in the center of the
battlefield.
 On the field between Borodino and the fleches, beside the
wood, the chief action of the day took place on an open space visible
from both sides and was fought in the simplest and most artless way.


The battle began on both sides with a cannonade from several hundred
guns.


Then when the whole field was covered with smoke, two divisions,
Campan's and Dessaix's, advanced from the French right, while Murat's
troops advanced on Borodino from their left.


From the Shevardino Redoubt where Napoleon was standing the fleches were
two thirds of a mile away, and it was more than a mile as the crow flies
to Borodino, so that Napoleon could not see what was happening there,
especially as the smoke mingling with the mist hid the whole locality.

The soldiers of Dessaix's division advancing against the fleches could
only be seen till they had entered the hollow that lay between them and
the fleches.
 As soon as they had descended into that hollow, the smoke
of the guns and musketry on the fleches grew so dense that it covered
the whole approach on that side of it.
 Through the smoke glimpses could
be caught of something black--probably men--and at times the glint of
bayonets.
 But whether they were moving or stationary, whether they were
French or Russian, could not be discovered from the Shevardino Redoubt.


The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straight into
Napoleon's face as, shading his eyes with his hand, he looked at the
fleches.
 Sometimes shouts
were heard through the firing, but it was impossible to tell what was
being done there.


Napoleon, standing on the knoll, looked through a field glass, and in
its small circlet saw smoke and men, sometimes his own and sometimes
Russians, but when he looked again with the naked eye, he could not tell
where what he had seen was.


He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it.


But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening from where
he was standing down below, or from the knoll above on which some of his
generals had taken their stand, but even from the fleches themselves--in
which by this time there were now Russian and now French soldiers,
alternately or together, dead, wounded, alive, frightened, or
maddened--even at those fleches themselves it was impossible to make out
what was taking place.
 There for several hours amid incessant cannon and
musketry fire, now Russians were seen alone, now Frenchmen alone, now
infantry, and now cavalry: they appeared, fired, fell, collided, not
knowing what to do with one another, screamed, and ran back again.
 Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings that
Borodino had been occupied and the bridge over the Kolocha was in the
hands of the French.


An adjutant galloped up from the fleches with a pale and frightened face
and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed, Campan
wounded, and Davout killed; yet at the very time the adjutant had been
told that the French had been repulsed, the fleches had in fact been
recaptured by other French troops, and Davout was alive and only
slightly bruised.
 For the most part things happened contrary to their orders.

In this way two cavalry regiments galloped through the Semenovsk hollow
and as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round and
galloped full speed back again.
 The infantry moved in the same way,
sometimes running to quite other places than those they were ordered to
go to.
 They did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling
orders or for acting on their own initiative, for in battle what is at
stake is what is dearest to man--his own life--and it sometimes seems
that safety lies in running back, sometimes in running forward; and
these men who were right in the heat of the battle acted according to
the mood of the moment.
 In reality, however, all these movements forward
and backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops.






CHAPTER XXXIV


Napoleon's generals--Davout, Ney, and Murat, who were near that region
of fire and sometimes even entered it--repeatedly led into it huge
masses of well-ordered troops.


Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll, drinking punch, when Murat's
adjutant galloped up with an assurance that the Russians would be routed
if His Majesty would let him have another division.


"Reinforcements!" thought Napoleon to himself.
.
.
"

The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply without
removing his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men were being
slaughtered.


Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier began
talking to them about matters unconnected with the battle.


In the midst of this conversation, which was beginning to interest
Napoleon, Berthier's eyes turned to look at a general with a suite, who
was galloping toward the knoll on a lathering horse.
 He swore on his honor that the Russians were lost if the
Emperor would give another division.


Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and down
without replying.


"You are very fiery, Belliard," said Napoleon, when he again came up to
the general.
 "In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake.
 Go
and have another look and then come back to me.


"Now then, what do you want?" asked Napoleon in the tone of a man
irritated at being continually disturbed.
.
.
" began the adjutant.


The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report, but the
Emperor turned from him, took a couple of steps, stopped, came back, and
called Berthier.


"We must give reserves," he said, moving his arms slightly apart.


Napoleon nodded assent.


"No!" he suddenly said to Berthier.
 Send
Friant's division.
"

Though there was no advantage in sending Friant's division instead of
Claparede's, and even in obvious inconvenience and delay in stopping
Claparede and sending Friant now, the order was carried out exactly.


Friant's division disappeared as the others had done into the smoke
of the battlefield.


M.


Napoleon silently shook his head in negation.
 de Beausset ventured
with respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for not
having lunch when one can get it.


"Go away.
" exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely, and turned aside.
 de
Beausset's face and he glided away to the other generals.


Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of depression like that of an
ever-lucky gambler who, after recklessly flinging money about and always
winning, suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances of the
game, finds that the more he considers his play the more surely he
loses.


His troops were the same, his generals the same, the same preparations
had been made, the same dispositions, and the same proclamation courte
et energique, he himself was still the same: he knew that and knew that
he was now even more experienced and skillful than before.
 Even the
enemy was the same as at Austerlitz and Friedland--yet the terrible
stroke of his arm had supernaturally become impotent.


All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned with success: the
concentration of batteries on one point, an attack by reserves to break
the enemy's line, and a cavalry attack by "the men of iron," all these
methods had already been employed, yet not only was there no victory,
but from all sides came the same news of generals killed and wounded,
of reinforcements needed, of the impossibility of driving back the
Russians, and of disorganization among his own troops.
 But now something strange was happening
to his troops.
 All their faces looked dejected, and
they all shunned one another's eyes--only a de Beausset could fail to
grasp the meaning of what was happening.
 He knew that it was a lost battle and that
the least accident might now--with the fight balanced on such a strained
center--destroy him and his army.
 The Russians might fall on his left wing,
might break through his center, he himself might be killed by a stray
cannon ball.
 All this was possible.
 In former battles he had only
considered the possibilities of success, but now innumerable unlucky
chances presented themselves, and he expected them all.


Amid the powder smoke, slowly dispersing over the whole space through
which Napoleon rode, horses and men were lying in pools of blood, singly
or in heaps.
 Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals had ever before
seen such horrors or so many slain in such a small area.
 They
were Russians.
 It was no longer a battle: it was a continuous
slaughter which could be of no avail either to the French or the
Russians.
 Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into the reverie
from which Berthier had aroused him.


One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead
the Old Guard into action.
 Ney and Berthier, standing near Napoleon,
exchanged looks and smiled contemptuously at this general's senseless
offer.


Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a long time.






CHAPTER XXXV


On the rug-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morning sat
Kutuzov, his gray head hanging, his heavy body relaxed.
 He gave no
orders, but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested.
 "Yes, yes: go,
dear boy, and have a look," he would say to one or another of those
about him; or, "No, don't, we'd better wait!" He listened to the reports
that were brought him and gave directions when his subordinates demanded
that of him; but when listening to the reports it seemed as if he
were not interested in the import of the words spoken, but rather in
something else--in the expression of face and tone of voice of those who
were reporting.


Kutuzov's general expression was one of concentrated quiet attention,
and his face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to master
the fatigue of his old and feeble body.
 Kutuzov
groaned and swayed his head.


"Will Your Highness please take command of the first army?"

Soon after the duke's departure--before he could possibly have reached
Semenovsk--his adjutant came back from him and told Kutuzov that the
duke asked for more troops.
 When
they brought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner, and the staff
officers congratulated him, Kutuzov smiled.
 "The battle is won, and there is
nothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat.


"Go, my dear fellow," he said to Ermolov, "and see whether something
can't be done.
 The
attack directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been several
times repulsed.


Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased.
 Several times his head dropped low as if
it were falling and he dozed off.
 Dinner was brought him.


Adjutant General Wolzogen, the man who when riding past Prince Andrew
had said, "the war should be extended widely," and whom Bagration so
detested, rode up while Kutuzov was at dinner.
 Wolzogen had come from
Barclay de Tolly to report on the progress of affairs on the left flank.


Kutuzov was chewing a piece of roast chicken with difficulty and glanced
at Wolzogen with eyes that brightened under their puckering lids.


"All the points of our position are in the enemy's hands and we cannot
dislodge them for lack of troops, the men are running away and it is
impossible to stop them," he reported.


Kutuzov ceased chewing and fixed an astonished gaze on Wolzogen, as
if not understanding what was said to him.
 Wolzogen, noticing "the old
gentleman's" agitation, said with a smile:

"I have not considered it right to conceal from your Serene Highness
what I have seen.
 The troops are in complete disorder.
"

"You have seen? You have seen?.
.
" Kutuzov shouted frowning, and rising
quickly he went up to Wolzogen.
.
.
 how dare you!.
.
" he shouted, choking and making a threatening
gesture with his trembling arms: "How dare you, sir, say that to me? You
know nothing about it.
"

Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder, but Kutuzov interrupted him.


"The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the right
flank.


All were silent, and the only sound audible was the heavy breathing of
the panting old general.


"They are repulsed everywhere, for which I thank God and our brave army!
The enemy is beaten, and tomorrow we shall drive him from the sacred
soil of Russia," said Kutuzov crossing himself, and he suddenly sobbed
as his eyes filled with tears.


"Ah, here he is, my hero!" said Kutuzov to a portly, handsome,
dark-haired general who was just ascending the knoll.


This was Raevski, who had spent the whole day at the most important part
of the field of Borodino.


After hearing him, Kutuzov said in French:

"Then you do not think, like some others, that we must retreat?"

"On the contrary, your Highness, in indecisive actions it is always
the most stubborn who remain victors," replied Raevski, "and in my
opinion.
.
.
 "Sit down and write out
the order of the day for tomorrow.
 And you," he continued, addressing
another, "ride along the line and announce that tomorrow we attack.
"

While Kutuzov was talking to Raevski and dictating the order of the day,
Wolzogen returned from Barclay and said that General Barclay wished to
have written confirmation of the order the field marshal had given.


Kutuzov, without looking at Wolzogen, gave directions for the order to
be written out which the former commander in chief, to avoid personal
responsibility, very judiciously wished to receive.


And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintains
throughout an army one and the same temper, known as "the spirit of
the army," and which constitutes the sinew of war, Kutuzov's words, his
order for a battle next day, immediately became known from one end of
the army to the other.
 The tales passing from mouth to mouth at
different ends of the army did not even resemble what Kutuzov had said,
but the sense of his words spread everywhere because what he said was
not the outcome of cunning calculations, but of a feeling that lay in
the commander in chief's soul as in that of every Russian.


And on learning that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy, and hearing
from the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe,
the exhausted, wavering men felt comforted and inspirited.
 Toward two o'clock the regiment, having already lost more than
two hundred men, was moved forward into a trampled oatfield in the gap
between Semenovsk and the Knoll Battery, where thousands of men perished
that day and on which an intense, concentrated fire from several hundred
enemy guns was directed between one and two o'clock.


Without moving from that spot or firing a single shot the regiment here
lost another third of its men.
 From in front and especially from the
right, in the unlifting smoke the guns boomed, and out of the mysterious
domain of smoke that overlay the whole space in front, quick hissing
cannon balls and slow whistling shells flew unceasingly.
 At times, as
if to allow them a respite, a quarter of an hour passed during which
the cannon balls and shells all flew overhead, but sometimes several men
were torn from the regiment in a minute and the slain were continually
being dragged away and the wounded carried off.


With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those not
yet killed.
 All alike were taciturn and morose.
 Most of the time, by their
officers' order, the men sat on the ground.
 One, having taken off his
shako, carefully loosened the gathers of its lining and drew them tight
again; another, rubbing some dry clay between his palms, polished
his bayonet; another fingered the strap and pulled the buckle of his
bandolier, while another smoothed and refolded his leg bands and put
his boots on again.
 When men were killed or wounded, when
rows of stretchers went past, when some troops retreated, and when great
masses of the enemy came into view through the smoke, no one paid any
attention to these things.
 But when our artillery or cavalry advanced or
some of our infantry were seen to move forward, words of approval
were heard on all sides.
 But the liveliest attention was attracted by
occurrences quite apart from, and unconnected with, the battle.

"Hey, look at the trace horse!.
.
 Another time, general attention was attracted by a small brown
dog, coming heaven knows whence, which trotted in a preoccupied manner
in front of the ranks with tail stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell
close by, when it yelped, tucked its tail between its legs, and darted
aside.
 Yells and shrieks of laughter rose from the whole regiment.
 Everything
went on of itself.
 If any soldiers ran to the
rear they returned immediately and hastily.
 At first Prince Andrew,
considering it his duty to rouse the courage of the men and to set them
an example, walked about among the ranks, but he soon became convinced
that this was unnecessary and that there was nothing he could teach
them.
 Nothing remained
of the previous day's thoughts.
 He thought of nothing.
 He listened with
weary ears to the ever-recurring sounds, distinguishing the whistle
of flying projectiles from the booming of the reports, glanced at the
tiresomely familiar faces of the men of the first battalion, and
waited.
 "Here it comes.
.
 this one is coming our way again!" he thought,
listening to an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke.
.
 "No,
it has gone over.
 But this one has hit!" And again he started trying
to reach the boundary strip in sixteen paces.


"Adjutant!" he shouted.
 "Order them not to crowd together.

From the other side a battalion commander rode up.
 The horse first, regardless of whether it
was right or wrong to show fear, snorted, reared almost throwing the
major, and galloped aside.


"Lie down!" cried the adjutant, throwing himself flat on the ground.


Prince Andrew hesitated.


"Can this be death?" thought Prince Andrew, looking with a quite new,
envious glance at the grass, the wormwood, and the streamlet of smoke
that curled up from the rotating black ball.
 I love life--I love this grass, this earth, this air.
.
" He
thought this, and at the same time remembered that people were looking
at him.


"It's shameful, sir!" he said to the adjutant.
 "What.
.
.
 At one and the same moment came the sound of
an explosion, a whistle of splinters as from a breaking window frame,
a suffocating smell of powder, and Prince Andrew started to one side,
raising his arm, and fell on his chest.
 Several officers ran up to him.


The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind the
officers.
 Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass,
breathing heavily and noisily.


"What are you waiting for? Come along!"

The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs, but he
moaned piteously and, exchanging looks, they set him down again.


"Pick him up, lift him, it's all the same!" cried someone.


They again took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher.


"Ah, God! My God! What is it? The stomach? That means death! My
God!"--voices among the officers were heard saying.


"It flew a hair's breadth past my ear," said the adjutant.


The peasants, adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders, started
hurriedly along the path they had trodden down, to the dressing station.


"Keep in step! Ah.
.
 those peasants!" shouted an officer, seizing by
their shoulders and checking the peasants, who were walking unevenly and
jolting the stretcher.


"Get into step, Fedor.
.


Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from the
stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again his eyelids
drooped.



The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to the dressing station by the
wood, where wagons were stationed.
 The horses were eating
oats from their movable troughs and sparrows flew down and pecked the
grains that fell.
 Some crows, scenting blood, flew among the birch
trees cawing impatiently.
 Around the tents, over more than five acres,
bloodstained men in various garbs stood, sat, or lay.
 Around the wounded
stood crowds of soldier stretcher-bearers with dismal and attentive
faces, whom the officers keeping order tried in vain to drive from the
spot.
 From the
tents came now loud angry cries and now plaintive groans.
 Occasionally
dressers ran out to fetch water, or to point out those who were to be
brought in next.
 Some were
delirious.
 Prince Andrew's bearers, stepping over the wounded who had
not yet been bandaged, took him, as a regimental commander, close up to
one of the tents and there stopped, awaiting instructions.

Two steps from him, leaning against a branch and talking loudly and
attracting general attention, stood a tall, handsome, black-haired
noncommissioned officer with a bandaged head.


"We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything, we grabbed
the King himself!" cried he, looking around him with eyes that glittered
with fever.
.
"

Like all the others near the speaker, Prince Andrew looked at him with
shining eyes and experienced a sense of comfort.
 "But isn't it all the
same now?" thought he.
 After turning his head from right to left for some time,
he sighed and looked down.


Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting.


"It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have a
chance!" remarked one.
 Prince Andrew could not
make out distinctly what was in that tent.
 All he saw about him merged into a general impression of naked,
bleeding human bodies that seemed to fill the whole of the low tent, as
a few weeks previously, on that hot August day, such bodies had filled
the dirty pond beside the Smolensk road.
 Two were occupied, and
on the third they placed Prince Andrew.
 For a little while he was left
alone and involuntarily witnessed what was taking place on the other two
tables.
 Four soldiers were holding him, and
a spectacled doctor was cutting into his muscular brown back.


"Ooh, ooh, ooh!" grunted the Tartar, and suddenly lifting up his swarthy
snub-nosed face with its high cheekbones, and baring his white teeth,
he began to wriggle and twitch his body and utter piercing, ringing,
and prolonged yells.
 Several dressers were pressing on his chest
to hold him down.


He glanced at Prince Andrew's face and quickly turned away.


"Undress him! What are you waiting for?" he cried angrily to the
dressers.
 The doctor bent
down over the wound, felt it, and sighed deeply.
 When he came to himself the splintered portions of
his thighbone had been extracted, the torn flesh cut away, and the
wound bandaged.
 Water was being sprinkled on his face.


"Show it to me.
.
.
 Oh, ooh.
.
.
 Oh! Oh, ooh!" his frightened moans could
be heard, subdued by suffering and broken by sobs.


Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep.


"My God! What is this? Why is he here?" said Prince Andrew to himself.


In the miserable, sobbing, enfeebled man whose leg had just been
amputated, he recognized Anatole Kuragin.
 Men were supporting him in
their arms and offering him a glass of water, but his trembling, swollen
lips could not grasp its rim.
 "Yes, it is
he! Yes, that man is somehow closely and painfully connected with me,"
thought Prince Andrew, not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him.

"What is the connection of that man with my childhood and life?" he
asked himself without finding an answer.
 He remembered Natasha as he had seen her for the first time at the
ball in 1810, with her slender neck and arms and with a frightened happy
face ready for rapture, and love and tenderness for her, stronger
and more vivid than ever, awoke in his soul.
 He now remembered the
connection that existed between himself and this man who was dimly
gazing at him through tears that filled his swollen eyes.
 He remembered
everything, and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happy
heart.


Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tender loving
tears for his fellow men, for himself, and for his own and their errors.
 But now it is too late.
 This day the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame
that strength of mind which he thought constituted his merit and his
greatness.
 He rode hurriedly from the battlefield and returned to the
Shevardino knoll, where he sat on his campstool, his sallow face
swollen and heavy, his eyes dim, his nose red, and his voice hoarse,
involuntarily listening, with downcast eyes, to the sounds of firing.
 He felt in his own
person the sufferings and death he had witnessed on the battlefield.
 At that moment he did not desire
Moscow, or victory, or glory (what need had he for any more glory?).

Napoleon had assented and had given orders that news should be brought
to him of the effect those batteries produced.


"Our fire is mowing them down by rows, but still they hold on," said the
adjutant.
.
.
 "Let them have it!"

Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire, and for
which he gave the order only because he thought it was expected of him,
was being done.


And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience
darkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happening
lay more than on all the others who took part in it.
 Never to the end
of his life could he understand goodness, beauty, or truth, or the
significance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness and
truth, too remote from everything human, for him ever to be able to
grasp their meaning.


Not only on that day, as he rode over the battlefield strewn with men
killed and maimed (by his will as he believed), did he reckon as he
looked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and,
deceiving himself, find reason for rejoicing in the calculation that
there were five Russians for every Frenchman.
 Not on that day alone
did he write in a letter to Paris that "the battle field was superb,"
because fifty thousand corpses lay there, but even on the island of St.

Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said he intended to devote his
leisure to an account of the great deeds he had done, he wrote:


The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modern times:
it was a war of good sense, for real interests, for the tranquillity and
security of all; it was purely pacific and conservative.
 A new horizon and new labors were opening out,
full of well-being and prosperity for all.
 The European system was
already founded; all that remained was to organize it.


Europe would in this way soon have been, in fact, but one people, and
anyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in the
common fatherland.
 I should have demanded the freedom of all navigable
rivers for everybody, that the seas should be common to all, and that
the great standing armies should be reduced henceforth to mere guards
for the sovereigns.
 I should have associated my son in the
Empire; my dictatorship would have been finished, and his constitutional
reign would have begun.


Paris would have been the capital of the world, and the French the envy
of the nations!

My leisure then, and my old age, would have been devoted, in company
with the Empress and during the royal apprenticeship of my son, to
leisurely visiting, with our own horses and like a true country couple,
every corner of the Empire, receiving complaints, redressing wrongs,
and scattering public buildings and benefactions on all sides and
everywhere.



"Of four hundred thousand who crossed the Vistula," he wrote further
of the Russian war, "half were Austrians, Prussians, Saxons, Poles,
Bavarians, Wurttembergers, Mecklenburgers, Spaniards, Italians, and
Neapolitans.
 The Imperial army, strictly speaking, was one third
composed of Dutch, Belgians, men from the borders of the Rhine,
Piedmontese, Swiss, Genevese, Tuscans, Romans, inhabitants of the
Thirty-second Military Division, of Bremen, of Hamburg, and so on: it
included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French.
 He boldly took the
whole responsibility for what happened, and his darkened mind found
justification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands who
perished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians.






CHAPTER XXXIX


Several tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures and
various uniforms on the fields and meadows belonging to the Davydov
family and to the crown serfs--those fields and meadows where for
hundreds of years the peasants of Borodino, Gorki, Shevardino, and
Semenovsk had reaped their harvests and pastured their cattle.
 At the
dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a space
of some three acres around.
 Crowds of men of various arms, wounded and
unwounded, with frightened faces, dragged themselves back to Mozhaysk
from the one army and back to Valuevo from the other.
 Other crowds,
exhausted and hungry, went forward led by their officers.


Over the whole field, previously so gaily beautiful with the glitter of
bayonets and cloudlets of smoke in the morning sun, there now spread a
mist of damp and smoke and a strange acid smell of saltpeter and blood.
 bethink yourselves! What are you doing?"

To the men of both sides alike, worn out by want of food and rest,
it began equally to appear doubtful whether they should continue to
slaughter one another; all the faces expressed hesitation, and the
question arose in every soul: "For what, for whom, must I kill and be
killed?.
 You may go and kill whom you please, but I don't want to do
so anymore!" By evening this thought had ripened in every soul.
 At any
moment these men might have been seized with horror at what they were
doing and might have thrown up everything and run away anywhere.


But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror of
what they were doing, though they would have been glad to leave off,
some incomprehensible, mysterious power continued to control them, and
they still brought up the charges, loaded, aimed, and applied the match,
though only one artilleryman survived out of every three, and though
they stumbled and panted with fatigue, perspiring and stained with blood
and powder.
 The cannon balls flew just as swiftly and cruelly from both
sides, crushing human bodies, and that terrible work which was not done
by the will of a man but at the will of Him who governs men and worlds
continued.


Anyone looking at the disorganized rear of the Russian army would have
said that, if only the French made one more slight effort, it would
disappear; and anyone looking at the rear of the French army would have
said that the Russians need only make one more slight effort and the
French would be destroyed.
 But neither the French nor the Russians made
that effort, and the flame of battle burned slowly out.
 The French
who had attacked the Russian army in order to drive it from its position
ought to have made that effort, for as long as the Russians continued to
block the road to Moscow as before, the aim of the French had not been
attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain.
 But the French
did not make that effort.
 Some historians say that Napoleon need only
have used his Old Guards, who were intact, and the battle would have
been won.
 Napoleon did not give his Guards, not because he did not
want to, but because it could not be done.
 The moral force of the
attacking French army was exhausted.
 Not that sort of victory which is
defined by the capture of pieces of material fastened to sticks, called
standards, and of the ground on which the troops had stood and were
standing, but a moral victory that convinces the enemy of the moral
superiority of his opponent and of his own impotence was gained by the
Russians at Borodino.
 The French invaders, like an infuriated animal
that has in its onslaught received a mortal wound, felt that they were
perishing, but could not stop, any more than the Russian army, weaker
by one half, could help swerving.
 The direct consequence of the battle
of Borodino was Napoleon's senseless flight from Moscow, his retreat
along the old Smolensk road, the destruction of the invading army of
five hundred thousand men, and the downfall of Napoleonic France, on
which at Borodino for the first time the hand of an opponent of stronger
spirit had been laid.






BOOK ELEVEN: 1812





CHAPTER I


Absolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the human mind.

Laws of motion of any kind become comprehensible to man only when he
examines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion; but at the
same time, a large proportion of human error comes from the arbitrary
division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements.
 By
the time Achilles has covered the distance that separated him from the
tortoise, the tortoise has covered one tenth of that distance ahead
of him: when Achilles has covered that tenth, the tortoise has covered
another one hundredth, and so on forever.
 This problem seemed to
the ancients insoluble.
 The absurd answer (that Achilles could never
overtake the tortoise) resulted from this: that motion was arbitrarily
divided into discontinuous elements, whereas the motion both of Achilles
and of the tortoise was continuous.


By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach a
solution of the problem, but never reach it.


A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing with
the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complex
problems of motion which used to appear insoluble.


This modern branch of mathematics, unknown to the ancients, when dealing
with problems of motion admits the conception of the infinitely small,
and so conforms to the chief condition of motion (absolute continuity)
and thereby corrects the inevitable error which the human mind cannot
avoid when it deals with separate elements of motion instead of
examining continuous motion.


To understand the laws of this continuous movement is the aim of
history.
 The first method of history is to take an arbitrarily selected
series of continuous events and examine it apart from others, though
there is and can be no beginning to any event, for one event always
flows uninterruptedly from another.


Historical science in its endeavor to draw nearer to truth continually
takes smaller and smaller units for examination.


It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust any deductions
drawn from history.
 Men leave their customary
pursuits, hasten from one side of Europe to the other, plunder and
slaughter one another, triumph and are plunged in despair, and for some
years the whole course of life is altered and presents an intensive
movement which first increases and then slackens.


But the mind of man not only refuses to believe this explanation, but
plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious, because in
it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger.
 The sum of
human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon, and only the sum of
those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them.
 And, indeed, human reason replies: every time
conquerors appear there have been wars, but this does not prove that the
conquerors caused the wars and that it is possible to find the laws of
a war in the personal activity of a single man.
 Whenever I look at my
watch and its hands point to ten, I hear the bells of the neighboring
church; but because the bells begin to ring when the hands of the clock
reach ten, I have no right to assume that the movement of the bells is
caused by the position of the hands of the watch.


Whenever I see the movement of a locomotive I hear the whistle and see
the valves opening and wheels turning; but I have no right to conclude
that the whistling and the turning of wheels are the cause of the
movement of the engine.


The peasants say that a cold wind blows in late spring because the oaks
are budding, and really every spring cold winds do blow when the oak
is budding.
 History must do the same.
 No one can say in how far it is possible for man to advance
in this way toward an understanding of the laws of history; but it is
evident that only along that path does the possibility of discovering
the laws of history lie, and that as yet not a millionth part as much
mental effort has been applied in this direction by historians as has
been devoted to describing the actions of various kings, commanders,
and ministers and propounding the historians' own reflections concerning
these actions.






CHAPTER II


The forces of a dozen European nations burst into Russia.
 The French army pushed on to Moscow, its
goal, its impetus ever increasing as it neared its aim, just as the
velocity of a falling body increases as it approaches the earth.
 At Borodino a collision took place.
 Neither army was
broken up, but the Russian army retreated immediately after the
collision as inevitably as a ball recoils after colliding with another
having a greater momentum, and with equal inevitability the ball
of invasion that had advanced with such momentum rolled on for some
distance, though the collision had deprived it of all its force.


The Russians retreated eighty miles--to beyond Moscow--and the French
reached Moscow and there came to a standstill.
 The French did not move.
 As a bleeding,
mortally wounded animal licks its wounds, they remained inert in Moscow
for five weeks, and then suddenly, with no fresh reason, fled back:
they made a dash for the Kaluga road, and (after a victory--for at
Malo-Yaroslavets the field of conflict again remained theirs) without
undertaking a single serious battle, they fled still more rapidly back
to Smolensk, beyond Smolensk, beyond the Berezina, beyond Vilna, and
farther still.


On the evening of the twenty-sixth of August, Kutuzov and the whole
Russian army were convinced that the battle of Borodino was a victory.
 He gave orders to prepare for a
fresh conflict to finish the enemy and did this not to deceive anyone,
but because he knew that the enemy was beaten, as everyone who had taken
part in the battle knew it.


It was impossible to give battle before information had been collected,
the wounded gathered in, the supplies of ammunition replenished, the
slain reckoned up, new officers appointed to replace those who had been
killed, and before the men had had food and sleep.
 But to make an attack the wish to do so is not
sufficient, there must also be a possibility of doing it, and that
possibility did not exist.
 It was impossible not to retreat a day's
march, and then in the same way it was impossible not to retreat another
and a third day's march, and at last, on the first of September when
the army drew near Moscow--despite the strength of the feeling that had
arisen in all ranks--the force of circumstances compelled it to retire
beyond Moscow.
 A commander in chief is never dealing
with the beginning of any event--the position from which we always
contemplate it.


Learned military authorities quite seriously tell us that Kutuzov should
have moved his army to the Kaluga road long before reaching Fili, and
that somebody actually submitted such a proposal to him.
 But even that he cannot do.
 Events and time do not
wait.
 An
order must be given him at once, that instant.
 And after the adjutant
comes the commissary general asking where the stores are to be taken,
and the chief of the hospitals asks where the wounded are to go, and a
courier from Petersburg brings a letter from the sovereign which does
not admit of the possibility of abandoning Moscow, and the commander in
chief's rival, the man who is undermining him (and there are always
not merely one but several such), presents a new project diametrically
opposed to that of turning to the Kaluga road, and the commander in
chief himself needs sleep and refreshment to maintain his energy and
a respectable general who has been overlooked in the distribution of
rewards comes to complain, and the inhabitants of the district pray to
be defended, and an officer sent to inspect the locality comes in and
gives a report quite contrary to what was said by the officer
previously sent; and a spy, a prisoner, and a general who has been
on reconnaissance, all describe the position of the enemy's army
differently.
 People accustomed to misunderstand or to forget these
inevitable conditions of a commander in chief's actions describe to
us, for instance, the position of the army at Fili and assume that the
commander in chief could, on the first of September, quite freely decide
whether to abandon Moscow or defend it; whereas, with the Russian army
less than four miles from Moscow, no such question existed.


"Give me your hand," said he and, turning it over so as to feel the
pulse, added: "You are not well, my dear fellow.
 Think what you are
saying!"

Kutuzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreating beyond Moscow
without a battle.


On the Poklonny Hill, four miles from the Dorogomilov gate of Moscow,
Kutuzov got out of his carriage and sat down on a bench by the roadside.

A great crowd of generals gathered round him, and Count Rostopchin, who
had come out from Moscow, joined them.
 This brilliant company separated
into several groups who all discussed the advantages and disadvantages
of the position, the state of the army, the plans suggested, the
situation of Moscow, and military questions generally.
 Though they had
not been summoned for the purpose, and though it was not so called, they
all felt that this was really a council of war.
 The conversations all
dealt with public questions.
 If anyone gave or asked for personal
news, it was done in a whisper and they immediately reverted to general
matters.
 The commander in chief listened to what was being said
and sometimes asked them to repeat their remarks, but did not himself
take part in the conversations or express any opinion.
 After hearing
what was being said by one or other of these groups he generally turned
away with an air of disappointment, as though they were not speaking of
anything he wished to hear.
) Count Rostopchin
was telling a fourth group that he was prepared to die with the city
train bands under the walls of the capital, but that he still could not
help regretting having been left in ignorance of what was happening, and
that had he known it sooner things would have been different.
.
.
 A
fifth group, displaying the profundity of their strategic perceptions,
discussed the direction the troops would now have to take.
 A sixth group
was talking absolute nonsense.
 Kutuzov's expression grew more and more
preoccupied and gloomy.
 If Bennigsen insisted on the position being
defended and others still discussed it, the question was no longer
important in itself but only as a pretext for disputes and intrigue.


Bennigsen, who had chosen the position, warmly displayed his Russian
patriotism (Kutuzov could not listen to this without wincing) by
insisting that Moscow must be defended.
 But this
intrigue did not now occupy the old man's mind.
 The
question for him now was: "Have I really allowed Napoleon to reach
Moscow, and when did I do so? When was it decided? Can it have been
yesterday when I ordered Platov to retreat, or was it the evening
before, when I had a nap and told Bennigsen to issue orders? Or was it
earlier still?.
.
 When, when was this terrible affair decided? Moscow
must be abandoned.
" To give that terrible order seemed to him equivalent to
resigning the command of the army.
 But
something had to be decided, and these conversations around him which
were assuming too free a character must be stopped.


He called the most important generals to him.


"My head, be it good or bad, must depend on itself," said he, rising
from the bench, and he rode to Fili where his carriages were waiting.
 The men, women, and
children of the large peasant family crowded into the back room across
the passage.
 Only Malasha, Andrew's six-year-old granddaughter whom
his Serene Highness had petted and to whom he had given a lump of sugar
while drinking his tea, remained on the top of the brick oven in the
larger room.
 "Granddad" himself, as Malasha in her own mind called
Kutuzov, sat apart in a dark corner behind the oven.


Round the peasant's deal table, on which lay maps, plans, pencils, and
papers, so many people gathered that the orderlies brought in another
bench and put it beside the table.
 Ermolov, Kaysarov, and Toll, who had
just arrived, sat down on this bench.
 In the foremost place, immediately
under the icons, sat Barclay de Tolly, his high forehead merging into
his bald crown.
 He had a St.
 George's Cross round his neck and looked
pale and ill.
 He had been feverish for two days and was now shivering
and in pain.
 Beside him sat Uvarov, who with rapid gesticulations was
giving him some information, speaking in low tones as they all did.

Chubby little Dokhturov was listening attentively with eyebrows
raised and arms folded on his stomach.
 On the other side sat Count
Ostermann-Tolstoy, seemingly absorbed in his own thoughts.
 His broad
head with its bold features and glittering eyes was resting on his hand.

Raevski, twitching forward the black hair on his temples as was his
habit, glanced now at Kutuzov and now at the door with a look of
impatience.
 His glance met Malasha's, and the expression of his
eyes caused the little girl to smile.


They were all waiting for Bennigsen, who on the pretext of inspecting
the position was finishing his savory dinner.
 They waited for him from
four till six o'clock and did not begin their deliberations all that
time but talked in low tones of other matters.
 All eyes were gazing at him.
 Malasha too looked at
"Granddad.


"Russia's ancient and sacred capital!" he suddenly said, repeating
Bennigsen's words in an angry voice and thereby drawing attention to the
false note in them.
 "Allow me to tell you, your excellency, that that
question has no meaning for a Russian.

Admitting the view of Barclay and others that a defensive battle at
Fili was impossible, but imbued with Russian patriotism and the love
of Moscow, he proposed to move troops from the right to the left flank
during the night and attack the French right flank the following day.

Opinions were divided, and arguments were advanced for and against that
project.

Malasha, who kept her eyes fixed on what was going on before her,
understood the meaning of the council differently.
 It seemed to her that
it was only a personal struggle between "Granddad" and "Long-coat" as
she termed Bennigsen.
 She saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke to
one another, and in her heart she sided with "Granddad.
" In the midst of
the conversation she noticed "Granddad" give Bennigsen a quick, subtle
glance, and then to her joys he saw that "Granddad" said something to
"Long-coat" which settled him.
 Bennigsen suddenly reddened and paced
angrily up and down the room.
 What so affected him was Kutuzov's calm
and quiet comment on the advantage or disadvantage of Bennigsen's
proposal to move troops by night from the right to the left flank to
attack the French right wing.


"Gentlemen," said Kutuzov, "I cannot approve of the count's plan.
 Moving
troops in close proximity to an enemy is always dangerous, and military
history supports that view.
.
.
.
.
 not fully successful, only because our
troops were rearranged too near the enemy.
"

There followed a momentary pause, which seemed very long to them all.


During one of these pauses Kutuzov heaved a deep sigh as if preparing to
speak.
 They all looked at him.


"Well, gentlemen, I see that it is I who will have to pay for the broken
crockery," said he, and rising slowly he moved to the table.
 But I," he
paused, "by the authority entrusted to me by my Sovereign and country,
order a retreat.


Some of the generals, in low tones and in a strain very different from
the way they had spoken during the council, communicated something to
their commander in chief.


Malasha, who had long been expected for supper, climbed carefully
backwards down from the oven, her bare little feet catching at its
projections, and slipping between the legs of the generals she darted
out of the room.
"

"You should take some rest, your Serene Highness," replied Schneider.


"But no! They shall eat horseflesh yet, like the Turks!" exclaimed
Kutuzov without replying, striking the table with his podgy fist.
 "They
shall too, if only.
.


Every Russian might have predicted it, not by reasoning but by the
feeling implanted in each of us and in our fathers.


The same thing that took place in Moscow had happened in all the towns
and villages on Russian soil beginning with Smolensk, without the
participation of Count Rostopchin and his broadsheets.
 The people
awaited the enemy unconcernedly, did not riot or become excited or tear
anyone to pieces, but faced its fate, feeling within it the strength to
find what it should do at that most difficult moment.


The consciousness that this would be so and would always be so was and
is present in the heart of every Russian.
 And a consciousness of this,
and a foreboding that Moscow would be taken, was present in Russian
Moscow society in 1812.
 Those who had quitted Moscow already in July
and at the beginning of August showed that they expected this.
 Those who
went away, taking what they could and abandoning their houses and half
their belongings, did so from the latent patriotism which expresses
itself not by phrases or by giving one's children to save the fatherland
and similar unnatural exploits, but unobtrusively, simply, organically,
and therefore in the way that always produces the most powerful results.


"It is disgraceful to run away from danger; only cowards are running
away from Moscow," they were told.
 In his broadsheets Rostopchin
impressed on them that to leave Moscow was shameful.
 Why did they go? It is impossible to suppose that
Rostopchin had scared them by his accounts of horrors Napoleon had
committed in conquered countries.
 The first people to go away were the
rich educated people who knew quite well that Vienna and Berlin had
remained intact and that during Napoleon's occupation the inhabitants
had spent their time pleasantly in the company of the charming Frenchmen
whom the Russians, and especially the Russian ladies, then liked so
much.
 It was
out of the question to be under French rule, it would be the worst thing
that could happen.
 They knew that it was for the army to fight, and that
if it could not succeed it would not do to take young ladies and house
serfs to the Three Hills quarter of Moscow to fight Napoleon, and that
they must go away, sorry as they were to abandon their property
to destruction.
 They went away without thinking of the tremendous
significance of that immense and wealthy city being given over to
destruction, for a great city with wooden buildings was certain when
abandoned by its inhabitants to be burned.
 The lady who, afraid of being
stopped by Count Rostopchin's orders, had already in June moved with her
Negroes and her women jesters from Moscow to her Saratov estate, with
a vague consciousness that she was not Bonaparte's servant, was really,
simply, and truly carrying out the great work which saved Russia.
 But
Count Rostopchin, who now taunted those who left Moscow and now had the
government offices removed; now distributed quite useless weapons to
the drunken rabble; now had processions displaying the icons, and now
forbade Father Augustin to remove icons or the relics of saints; now
seized all the private carts in Moscow and on one hundred and thirty-six
of them removed the balloon that was being constructed by Leppich; now
hinted that he would burn Moscow and related how he had set fire to his
own house; now wrote a proclamation to the French solemnly upbraiding
them for having destroyed his Orphanage; now claimed the glory of
having hinted that he would burn Moscow and now repudiated the deed;
now ordered the people to catch all spies and bring them to him, and now
reproached them for doing so; now expelled all the French residents from
Moscow, and now allowed Madame Aubert-Chalme (the center of the whole
French colony in Moscow) to remain, but ordered the venerable old
postmaster Klyucharev to be arrested and exiled for no particular
offense; now assembled the people at the Three Hills to fight the French
and now, to get rid of them, handed over to them a man to be killed
and himself drove away by a back gate; now declared that he would
not survive the fall of Moscow, and now wrote French verses in albums
concerning his share in the affair--this man did not understand the
meaning of what was happening but merely wanted to do something himself
that would astonish people, to perform some patriotically heroic
feat; and like a child he made sport of the momentous, and unavoidable
event--the abandonment and burning of Moscow--and tried with his puny
hand now to speed and now to stay the enormous, popular tide that bore
him along with it.
 In Vilna she had formed
an intimacy with a young foreign prince.
 When she returned to Petersburg
both the magnate and the prince were there, and both claimed their
rights.
 Helene was faced by a new problem--how to preserve her intimacy
with both without offending either.


What would have seemed difficult or even impossible to another woman did
not cause the least embarrassment to Countess Bezukhova, who evidently
deserved her reputation of being a very clever woman.
 Had she attempted
concealment, or tried to extricate herself from her awkward position
by cunning, she would have spoiled her case by acknowledging herself
guilty.
 But Helene, like a really great man who can do whatever
he pleases, at once assumed her own position to be correct, as she
sincerely believed it to be, and that everyone else was to blame.


The first time the young foreigner allowed himself to reproach her, she
lifted her beautiful head and, half turning to him, said firmly: "That's
just like a man--selfish and cruel! I expected nothing else.
 A woman
sacrifices herself for you, she suffers, and this is her reward! What
right have you, monseigneur, to demand an account of my attachments and
friendships? He is a man who has been more than a father to me!" The
prince was about to say something, but Helene interrupted him.


"But for heaven's sake listen to me!"

"Marry me, and I will be your slave!"

"But that's impossible.
.
.
.


"The law, religion.
.
 What have they been invented for if they can't
arrange that?" said Helene.


The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurred to him,
and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of the Society of Jesus,
with whom he was on intimate terms.


A few days later at one of those enchanting fetes which Helene gave at
her country house on the Stone Island, the charming Monsieur de Jobert,
a man no longer young, with snow white hair and brilliant black eyes,
a Jesuit a robe courte * was presented to her, and in the garden by the
light of the illuminations and to the sound of music talked to her for a
long time of the love of God, of Christ, of the Sacred Heart, and of the
consolations the one true Catholic religion affords in this world and
the next.
 Helene was touched, and more than once tears rose to her eyes
and to those of Monsieur de Jobert and their voices trembled.



    * Lay member of the Society of Jesus.
 She confessed to
him, and he absolved her from her sins.
 Next day she received a box
containing the Sacred Host, which was left at her house for her to
partake of.


All that was done around her and to her at this time, all the attention
devoted to her by so many clever men and expressed in such pleasant,
refined ways, and the state of dove-like purity she was now in (she wore
only white dresses and white ribbons all that time) gave her pleasure,
but her pleasure did not cause her for a moment to forget her aim.
 In her view the aim of every religion was merely
to preserve certain proprieties while affording satisfaction to
human desires.
 And with this aim, in one of her talks with her Father
Confessor, she insisted on an answer to the question, in how far was she
bound by her marriage?

They were sitting in the twilight by a window in the drawing room.

The scent of flowers came in at the window.
 Helene was wearing a white
dress, transparent over her shoulders and bosom.
 Helene with an uneasy smile looked at his curly hair and his
plump, clean-shaven, blackish cheeks and every moment expected the
conversation to take a fresh turn.


The course of the Father Confessor's arguments ran as follows: "Ignorant
of the import of what you were undertaking, you made a vow of conjugal
fidelity to a man who on his part, by entering the married state without
faith in the religious significance of marriage, committed an act of
sacrilege.
 That marriage lacked the dual significance it should have
had.
 Yet in spite of this your vow was binding.

What did you commit by so acting? A venial, or a mortal, sin? A venial
sin, for you acted without evil intention.
 But the
question is again a twofold one: firstly.
.
.
"

The director of her conscience was astounded at having the case
presented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus' egg.






CHAPTER VII


Helene understood that the question was very simple and easy from
the ecclesiastical point of view, and that her directors were making
difficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how the matter
would be regarded by the secular authorities.
 The elderly
magnate was at first as much taken aback by this suggestion of marriage
with a woman whose husband was alive, as the younger man had been, but
Helene's imperturbable conviction that it was as simple and natural as
marrying a maiden had its effect on him too.
 Had Helene herself shown
the least sign of hesitation, shame, or secrecy, her cause would
certainly have been lost; but not only did she show no signs of secrecy
or shame, on the contrary, with good-natured naivete she told her
intimate friends (and these were all Petersburg) that both the prince
and the magnate had proposed to her and that she loved both and was
afraid of grieving either.


A rumor immediately spread in Petersburg, not that Helene wanted to
be divorced from her husband (had such a report spread many would have
opposed so illegal an intention) but simply that the unfortunate and
interesting Helene was in doubt which of the two men she should marry.

The question was no longer whether this was possible, but only which was
the better match and how the matter would be regarded at court.
 There
were, it is true, some rigid individuals unable to rise to the height of
such a question, who saw in the project a desecration of the sacrament
of marriage, but there were not many such and they remained silent,
while the majority were interested in Helene's good fortune and in the
question which match would be the more advantageous.
 Whether it was
right or wrong to remarry while one had a husband living they did not
discuss, for that question had evidently been settled by people "wiser
than you or me," as they said, and to doubt the correctness of that
decision would be to risk exposing one's stupidity and incapacity to
live in society.


Though people were afraid of Marya Dmitrievna she was regarded in
Petersburg as a buffoon, and so of what she had said they only noticed,
and repeated in a whisper, the one coarse word she had used, supposing
the whole sting of her remark to lie in that word.


Prince Vasili, who of late very often forgot what he had said and
repeated one and the same thing a hundred times, remarked to his
daughter whenever he chanced to see her:

"Helene, I have a word to say to you," and he would lead her
aside, drawing her hand downward.
 "I have heard of certain projects
concerning.
.
.
 you know.
 Well my dear child, you know how your father's
heart rejoices to know that you.
.
.
.
.
 But, my
dear child, consult only your own heart.


"Listen, Bilibin," said Helene (she always called friends of that sort
by their surnames), and she touched his coat sleeve with her white,
beringed fingers.

Which of the two?"

Bilibin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered, with a
smile on his lips.


"You are not taking me unawares, you know," said he.
.
.


"That's a true friend!" said Helene beaming, and again touching
Bilibin's sleeve.
 "But I love them, you know, and don't want to distress
either of them.
 I would give my life for the happiness of them both.
"

Bilibin shrugged his shoulders, as much as to say that not even he could
help in that difficulty.


"Une maitresse-femme! * That's what is called putting things squarely.

She would like to be married to all three at the same time," thought he.



    * A masterly woman.



"But tell me, how will your husband look at the matter?" Bilibin asked,
his reputation being so well established that he did not fear to ask so
naive a question.
 "He will do anything for me.


"Even divorce you?" said he.


Helene laughed.


Armed with these arguments, which appeared to her unanswerable, she
drove to her daughter's early one morning so as to find her alone.


Having listened to her mother's objections, Helene smiled blandly and
ironically.
.


"Ah, Maman, ne dites pas de betises.
 Vous ne comprenez rein.



     * "Oh, Mamma, don't talk nonsense! You don't understand
     anything.
"


"But, my dear.
.
"

"Oh, Mamma, how is it you don't understand that the Holy Father, who has
the right to grant dispensations.
.
"

Just then the lady companion who lived with Helene came in to announce
that His Highness was in the ballroom and wished to see her.


"Non, dites-lui que je ne veux pas le voir, que je suis furieuse contre
lui, parce qu'il m'a manque parole.
" *


     * "No, tell him I don't wish to see him, I am furious with
     him for not keeping his word to me.
"


"Comtesse, a tout peche misericorde," * said a fair-haired young man
with a long face and nose, as he entered the room.
"


The old princess rose respectfully and curtsied.


"Yes, she is right," thought the old princess, all her convictions
dissipated by the appearance of His Highness.



By the beginning of August Helene's affairs were clearly defined and
she wrote a letter to her husband--who, as she imagined, loved her very
much--informing him of her intention to marry N.
 and of her having
embraced the one true faith, and asking him to carry out all the
formalities necessary for a divorce, which would be explained to him by
the bearer of the letter.



This letter was brought to Pierre's house when he was on the field of
Borodino.






CHAPTER VIII


Toward the end of the battle of Borodino, Pierre, having run down
from Raevski's battery a second time, made his way through a gully to
Knyazkovo with a crowd of soldiers, reached the dressing station, and
seeing blood and hearing cries and groans hurried on, still entangled in
the crowds of soldiers.


The one thing he now desired with his whole soul was to get away quickly
from the terrible sensations amid which he had lived that day and return
to ordinary conditions of life and sleep quietly in a room in his own
bed.
 He felt that only in the ordinary conditions of life would he
be able to understand himself and all he had seen and felt.


Though shells and bullets did not whistle over the road along which he
was going, still on all sides there was what there had been on the field
of battle.
 There were still the same suffering, exhausted, and sometimes
strangely indifferent faces, the same blood, the same soldiers'
overcoats, the same sounds of firing which, though distant now, still
aroused terror, and besides this there were the foul air and the dust.
 Pierre lay leaning on
his elbow for a long time, gazing at the shadows that moved past him in
the darkness.
 He was continually imagining that a cannon ball was flying
toward him with a terrific whizz, and then he shuddered and sat up.
 In the middle of the night three
soldiers, having brought some firewood, settled down near him and began
lighting a fire.


The soldiers, who threw sidelong glances at Pierre, got the fire to burn
and placed an iron pot on it into which they broke some dried bread and
put a little dripping.
 The three soldiers were
eating and talking among themselves, taking no notice of him.
.
 "By rights I am a militia officer, but my men
are not here.
 I came to the battle and have lost them.
"

"There now!" said one of the soldiers.


Another shook his head.
 As he sat bending greedily over it, helping himself
to large spoonfuls and chewing one after another, his face was lit up by
the fire and the soldiers looked at him in silence.


"To Mozhaysk.
"

"You're a gentleman, aren't you?"

"Yes.
"

"And what's your name?"

"Peter Kirilych.
"

"Well then, Peter Kirilych, come along with us, we'll take you there.
"

In the total darkness the soldiers walked with Pierre to Mozhaysk.


By the time they got near Mozhaysk and began ascending the steep hill
into the town, the cocks were already crowing.
 He would not soon have remembered
this, such was his state of forgetfulness, had he not halfway up the
hill stumbled upon his groom, who had been to look for him in the
town and was returning to the inn.


"Your excellency!" he said.
 "Why, we were beginning to despair! How is
it you are on foot? And where are you going, please?"

"Oh, yes!" said Pierre.
 "Well, good-by, Peter
Kirilych--isn't it?"

"Good-by, Peter Kirilych!" Pierre heard the other voices repeat.


"Good-by!" he said and turned with his groom toward the inn.


"I ought to give them something!" he thought, and felt in his pocket.

"No, better not!" said another, inner voice.


There was not a room to be had at the inn, they were all occupied.

Pierre went out into the yard and, covering himself up head and all, lay
down in his carriage.
 All was tranquil in the yard.
 Only
someone's orderly passed through the gateway, splashing through the mud,
and talked to the innkeeper.
 Above Pierre's head some pigeons, disturbed
by the movement he had made in sitting up, fluttered under the dark roof
of the penthouse.
 The whole courtyard was permeated by a strong peaceful
smell of stable yards, delightful to Pierre at that moment.
 He could see
the clear starry sky between the dark roofs of two penthouses.


"Thank God, there is no more of that!" he thought, covering up his head
again.
 "Oh, what a terrible thing is fear, and how shamefully I yielded
to it! But they.
.
 they were steady and calm all the time, to the
end.
.
.
" thought he.


They, in Pierre's mind, were the soldiers, those who had been at the
battery, those who had given him food, and those who had prayed before
the icon.


"To be a soldier, just a soldier!" thought Pierre as he fell asleep,
"to enter communal life completely, to be imbued by what makes them what
they are.
 But how cast off all the superfluous, devilish burden of my
outer man? There was a time when I could have done it.
 Or I might have been sent to serve
as a soldier after the duel with Dolokhov.
" And the memory of the dinner
at the English Club when he had challenged Dolokhov flashed through
Pierre's mind, and then he remembered his benefactor at Torzhok.
 And now
a picture of a solemn meeting of the lodge presented itself to his mind.

It was taking place at the English Club and someone near and dear to him
sat at the end of the table.

But he died!" thought Pierre.
 How sorry I am that he died, and how glad I am that he is alive
again!" On one side of the table sat Anatole, Dolokhov, Nesvitski,
Denisov, and others like them (in his dream the category to which these
men belonged was as clearly defined in his mind as the category of
those he termed they), and he heard those people, Anatole and Dolokhov,
shouting and singing loudly; yet through their shouting the voice of his
benefactor was heard speaking all the time and the sound of his words
was as weighty and uninterrupted as the booming on the battlefield, but
pleasant and comforting.
 Pierre did not understand what his benefactor
was saying, but he knew (the categories of thoughts were also quite
distinct in his dream) that he was talking of goodness and the
possibility of being what they were.
 But though they were
kindly they did not look at Pierre and did not know him.


He felt ashamed, and with one arm covered his legs from which his cloak
had in fact slipped.


"It is dawn," thought Pierre.
 "But that's not what I want.
 I want to
hear and understand my benefactor's words.
" Again he covered himself up
with his cloak, but now neither the lodge nor his benefactor was there.

There were only thoughts clearly expressed in words, thoughts that
someone was uttering or that he himself was formulating.
 He had never, it seemed to him, been able to think
and express his thoughts like that when awake.


"To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man's freedom to
the law of God," the voice had said.
 And they are simple.

Man can be master of nothing while he fears death, but he who does not
fear it possesses all.
 To unite all?" he asked himself.
 "No, not
to unite.


"Yes, one must harness, it is time to harness.
"

"Time to harness, time to harness, your excellency! Your excellency!"
some voice was repeating.
 "We must harness, it is time to harness.
.
 The sun shone
straight into Pierre's face.
 Pierre turned away with
repugnance, and closing his eyes quickly fell back on the carriage seat.

"No, I don't want that, I don't want to see and understand that.
 One second
more and I should have understood it all! But what am I to do? Harness,
but how can I harness everything?" and Pierre felt with horror that the
meaning of all he had seen and thought in the dream had been destroyed.


The groom, the coachman, and the innkeeper told Pierre that an officer
had come with news that the French were already near Mozhaysk and that
our men were leaving it.


Pierre got up and, having told them to harness and overtake him, went on
foot through the town.


The troops were moving on, leaving about ten thousand wounded behind
them.
 There were wounded in the yards, at the windows of the houses, and
the streets were crowded with them.
 In the streets, around carts that
were to take some of the wounded away, shouts, curses, and blows could
be heard.
 Close to the gates of
the city he was met by Count Rostopchin's adjutant.


"We have been looking for you everywhere," said the adjutant.
 "The count
wants to see you particularly.
"

Without going home, Pierre took a cab and drove to see the Moscow
commander in chief.


Count Rostopchin had only that morning returned to town from his summer
villa at Sokolniki.

Vasilchikov and Platov had already seen the count and explained to him
that it was impossible to defend Moscow and that it would have to be
surrendered.
 Though this news was being concealed from the inhabitants,
the officials--the heads of the various government departments--knew
that Moscow would soon be in the enemy's hands, just as Count Rostopchin
himself knew it, and to escape personal responsibility they had all
come to the governor to ask how they were to deal with their various
departments.


As Pierre was entering the reception room a courier from the army came
out of Rostopchin's private room.


In answer to questions with which he was greeted, the courier made a
despairing gesture with his hand and passed through the room.


While waiting in the reception room Pierre with weary eyes watched the
various officials, old and young, military and civilian, who were there.

They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy.
 Pierre went up to a group of
men, one of whom he knew.
"

"But you see what he writes.
.
.
 That's necessary for the people," said the
first.


"Oh, it's a fresh broadsheet.
"

Pierre took it and began reading.



His Serene Highness has passed through Mozhaysk in order to join up with
the troops moving toward him and has taken up a strong position where
the enemy will not soon attack him.
 Forty eight guns with ammunition
have been sent him from here, and his Serene Highness says he will
defend Moscow to the last drop of blood and is even ready to fight in
the streets.
 An ax will be useful, a hunting spear not bad, but a
three-pronged fork will be best of all: a Frenchman is no heavier than a
sheaf of rye.



"But military men have told me that it is impossible to fight in the
town," said Pierre, "and that the position.


"The count had a sty," replied the adjutant smiling, "and was very much
upset when I told him people had come to ask what was the matter with
him.
.
.
 I only say what I
heard.
 I expect it's
nonsense.
.
.
"

"Possibly," remarked Pierre, looking about him absent-mindedly.
 "And who
is that?" he asked, indicating a short old man in a clean blue peasant
overcoat, with a big snow-white beard and eyebrows and a ruddy face.


"He? That's a tradesman, that is to say, he's the restaurant
keeper, Vereshchagin.
 Perhaps you have heard of that affair with the
proclamation.
"

"Oh, so that is Vereshchagin!" said Pierre, looking at the firm, calm
face of the old man and seeking any indication of his being a traitor.
 "The young man is in prison and I
expect it will go hard with him.


"It's a complicated story, you know," said the adjutant.
 "That
proclamation appeared about two months ago.
 The count was informed of
it.
 He asked one, 'From whom did you get it?' 'From
so-and-so.
' He went to the next one.
 'From whom did you get it?' and so
on till he reached Vereshchagin, a half educated tradesman, you know, 'a
pet of a trader,'" said the adjutant smiling.
 "They asked him, 'Who gave
it you?' And the point is that we knew whom he had it from.
 But evidently they had come to
some understanding.
 He replied: 'From no one; I made it up myself.
' And so it was reported to the count, who sent for the man.

'From whom did you get the proclamation?' 'I wrote it myself.


"Not at all," rejoined the adjutant in dismay.
' And what do you think? 'No,' said he, 'I have not
read any papers, I made it up myself.
' 'If that's so, you're a traitor
and I'll have you tried, and you'll be hanged! Say from whom you had
it.
' 'I have seen no papers, I made it up myself.
' And that was the end
of it.

He was sent for trial and condemned to hard labor, I believe.
 Now the
father has come to intercede for him.
 That's the sort of fellow he is.

Well, he took that icon home with him for a few days and what did he do?
He found some scoundrel of a painter.
.
"





CHAPTER XI


In the middle of this fresh tale Pierre was summoned to the commander in
chief.


When he entered the private room Count Rostopchin, puckering his face,
was rubbing his forehead and eyes with his hand.
 But that's not
the point.
 Pierre remained silent.
 "I am well
informed, my friend, but I am aware that there are Masons and I hope
that you are not one of those who on pretense of saving mankind wish to
ruin Russia.


"There, you see, mon cher! I expect you know that Messrs.
 Speranski and
Magnitski have been deported to their proper place.
 Mr.
 You can understand that there are reasons for this and
that I could not have exiled the Postmaster had he not been a harmful
person.
 It has now come to my knowledge that you lent him your carriage
for his removal from town, and that you have even accepted papers from
him for safe custody.


"That is for me to know, but not for you to ask," shouted Rostopchin.


"If he is accused of circulating Napoleon's proclamation it is not
proved that he did so," said Pierre without looking at Rostopchin, "and
Vereshchagin.
.
 "But I did not summon you to
discuss my actions, but to give you advice--or an order if you prefer
it.
 I beg you to leave the town and break off all communication
with such men as Klyucharev.
 My head is
sometimes in a whirl.
 Well, mon cher, what are you doing personally?"

"Why, nothing," answered Pierre without raising his eyes or changing the
thoughtful expression of his face.


The count frowned.


"A word of friendly advice, mon cher.
 Be off as soon as you can, that's
all I have to tell you.
 Happy he who has ears to hear.


When he reached home it was already getting dark.
 Some eight people had
come to see him that evening: the secretary of a committee, the colonel
of his battalion, his steward, his major-domo, and various petitioners.
 Pierre
did not understand and was not interested in any of these questions and
only answered them in order to get rid of these people.
 When left alone
at last he opened and read his wife's letter.
.
.
 Simplicity is submission to God.
.
 the
meaning of all.
.
.
.
.
 my wife is getting married.
.
.
 One
must forget and understand.
.
.


A dozen persons who had business with Pierre were awaiting him in the
drawing room.
 Pierre dressed hurriedly and, instead of going to see
them, went to the back porch and out through the gate.
 The thought that both her sons were at the war, had both
gone from under her wing, that today or tomorrow either or both of them
might be killed like the three sons of one of her acquaintances, struck
her that summer for the first time with cruel clearness.
 Nicholas was
somewhere with the army and had not sent a word since his last letter,
in which he had given a detailed account of his meeting with Princess
Mary.
 The countess did not sleep at night, or when she did fall asleep
dreamed that she saw her sons lying dead.
 After many consultations and
conversations, the count at last devised means to tranquillize her.
 He
got Petya transferred from Obolenski's regiment to Bezukhov's, which was
in training near Moscow.
 Though Petya would remain in the service, this
transfer would give the countess the consolation of seeing at least one
of her sons under her wing, and she hoped to arrange matters for her
Petya so as not to let him go again, but always get him appointed to
places where he could not possibly take part in a battle.
 The nearer the time came for Petya to return, the more uneasy
grew the countess.
 She began to think she would never live to see such
happiness.
 "What do I want with them? I want no one but
Petya," she thought.


At the end of August the Rostovs received another letter from Nicholas.

He wrote from the province of Voronezh where he had been sent to procure
remounts, but that letter did not set the countess at ease.
 Knowing that
one son was out of danger she became the more anxious about Petya.


Though by the twentieth of August nearly all the Rostovs' acquaintances
had left Moscow, and though everybody tried to persuade the countess to
get away as quickly as possible, she would not hear of leaving before
her treasure, her adored Petya, returned.
 The passionate tenderness with which his mother received him
did not please the sixteen-year-old officer.


Owing to the count's customary carelessness nothing was ready for their
departure by the twenty-eighth of August and the carts that were to
come from their Ryazan and Moscow estates to remove their household
belongings did not arrive till the thirtieth.


From the twenty-eighth till the thirty-first all Moscow was in a bustle
and commotion.
 Some said that no one was to be allowed
to leave the city, others on the contrary said that all the icons had
been taken out of the churches and everybody was to be ordered to leave.
 But all this was only talk; in reality
(though the Council of Fili, at which it was decided to abandon Moscow,
had not yet been held) both those who went away and those who remained
behind felt, though they did not show it, that Moscow would certainly
be abandoned, and that they ought to get away as quickly as possible and
save their belongings.
 It was felt that everything would suddenly break
up and change, but up to the first of September nothing had done so.

As a criminal who is being led to execution knows that he must die
immediately, but yet looks about him and straightens the cap that is
awry on his head, so Moscow involuntarily continued its wonted life,
though it knew that the time of its destruction was near when the
conditions of life to which its people were accustomed to submit would
be completely upset.
 The head of the
family, Count Ilya Rostov, continually drove about the city collecting
the current rumors from all sides and gave superficial and hasty orders
at home about the preparations for their departure.


The countess watched the things being packed, was dissatisfied with
everything, was constantly in pursuit of Petya who was always running
away from her, and was jealous of Natasha with whom he spent all his
time.
 But of late Sonya had been particularly sad and silent.
 What a good thing it would be!"

Sonya felt that this was true: that the only possibility of retrieving
the Rostovs' affairs was by Nicholas marrying a rich woman, and that the
princess was a good match.
 They laughed and were
gay not because there was any reason to laugh, but because gaiety and
mirth were in their hearts and so everything that happened was a cause
for gaiety and laughter to them.
 Petya was in high spirits because
having left home a boy he had returned (as everybody told him) a fine
young man, because he was at home, because he had left Belaya Tserkov
where there was no hope of soon taking part in a battle and had come to
Moscow where there was to be fighting in a few days, and chiefly because
Natasha, whose lead he always followed, was in high spirits.
 Natasha was
gay because she had been sad too long and now nothing reminded her of
the cause of her sadness, and because she was feeling well.
 She was also
happy because she had someone to adore her: the adoration of others
was a lubricant the wheels of her machine needed to make them run
freely--and Petya adored her.
 Above all, they were gay because there was
a war near Moscow, there would be fighting at the town gates, arms were
being given out, everybody was escaping--going away somewhere, and
in general something extraordinary was happening, and that is always
exciting, especially to the young.






CHAPTER XIII


On Saturday, the thirty-first of August, everything in the Rostovs'
house seemed topsy-turvy.
 There were trunks in the rooms, and hay, wrapping paper, and
ropes were scattered about.
 The peasants and house serfs carrying out
the things were treading heavily on the parquet floors.
 The yard was
crowded with peasant carts, some loaded high and already corded up,
others still empty.


The voices and footsteps of the many servants and of the peasants who
had come with the carts resounded as they shouted to one another in
the yard and in the house.
 The count had been out since morning.
 Sonya was in
the ballroom looking after the packing of the glass and china.


Natasha was ashamed of doing nothing when everyone else was so busy, and
several times that morning had tried to set to work, but her heart was
not in it, and she could not and did not know how to do anything except
with all her heart and all her might.
 For a while she had stood beside
Sonya while the china was being packed and tried to help, but soon gave
it up and went to her room to pack her own things.
 At first she found it
amusing to give away dresses and ribbons to the maids, but when that was
done and what was left had still to be packed, she found it dull.


"Dunyasha, you pack! You will, won't you, dear?" And when Dunyasha
willingly promised to do it all for her, Natasha sat down on the floor,
took her old ball dress, and fell into a reverie quite unrelated to what
ought to have occupied her thoughts now.
 Natasha got
up and looked out of the window.
 An enormously long row of carts full of
wounded men had stopped in the street.


The former housekeeper, old Mavra Kuzminichna, had stepped out of the
crowd by the gate, gone up to a cart with a hood constructed of bast
mats, and was speaking to a pale young officer who lay inside.


"Then you have nobody in Moscow?" she was saying.
 "You would be more
comfortable somewhere in a house.
.
 in ours, for instance.
.
"

"I don't know if it would be allowed," replied the officer in a weak
voice.
.


The major raised his hand to his cap with a smile.


"Which one do you want, Ma'am'selle?" said he, screwing up his eyes and
smiling.


"Oh yes, why not? They may," he said.


With a slight inclination of her head, Natasha stepped back quickly to
Mavra Kuzminichna, who stood talking compassionately to the officer.


"They may.
 He says they may!" whispered Natasha.


The cart in which the officer lay was turned into the Rostovs' yard,
and dozens of carts with wounded men began at the invitation of the
townsfolk to turn into the yards and to draw up at the entrances of the
houses in Povarskaya Street.
 Natasha was evidently pleased to be dealing
with new people outside the ordinary routine of her life.
 They can have all our half of the house.
"

"Well, I'll ask.
"

Natasha ran into the house and went on tiptoe through the half-open door
into the sitting room, where there was a smell of vinegar and Hoffman's
drops.


Natasha laughed, and the countess too smiled slightly.


"I knew you'd give permission.
 so I'll tell them," and, having kissed
her mother, Natasha got up and went to the door.
 "The
Club is closed and the police are leaving.


"Of course it is," he answered absently.
 "That's not the point.
 I beg
you not to indulge in trifles now, but to help to pack, and tomorrow we
must go, go, go!.
.
.
.
"

And the count gave a similar order to the major-domo and the servants.

He said the people had been getting arms in the Kremlin, and that though
Rostopchin's broadsheet had said that he would sound a call two or three
days in advance, the order had certainly already been given for everyone
to go armed to the Three Hills tomorrow, and that there would be a big
battle there.


The countess looked with timid horror at her son's eager, excited face
as he said this.
 With a woman's involuntary loving cunning
she, who till then had not shown any alarm, said that she would die of
fright if they did not leave that very night.






CHAPTER XIV


Madame Schoss, who had been out to visit her daughter, increased the
countess' fears still more by telling what she had seen at a spirit
dealer's in Myasnitski Street.
 She had taken a cab and driven home by a side street and the
cabman had told her that the people were breaking open the barrels at
the drink store, having received orders to do so.


After dinner the whole Rostov household set to work with enthusiastic
haste packing their belongings and preparing for their departure.
 Petya directed things in the
yard.
 Sonya, owing to the count's contradictory orders, lost her head
and did not know what to do.
 Everybody expected
some prank from her and did not wish to obey her; but she resolutely
and passionately demanded obedience, grew angry and nearly cried because
they did not heed her, and at last succeeded in making them believe her.

Her first exploit, which cost her immense effort and established her
authority, was the packing of the carpets.
 The count had valuable
Gobelin tapestries and Persian carpets in the house.
 When Natasha set
to work two cases were standing open in the ballroom, one almost full
up with crockery, the other with carpets.
 There was also much china
standing on the tables, and still more was being brought in from the
storeroom.
 A third case was needed and servants had gone to fetch it.


"Sonya, wait a bit--we'll pack everything into these," said Natasha.


"You can't, Miss, we have tried to," said the butler's assistant.
"

And Natasha began rapidly taking out of the case dishes and plates
wrapped in paper.


"Why, it's a mercy if we can get the carpets alone into three cases,"
said the butler's assistant.


"Don't, Natasha! Leave it alone! We'll get it all packed," urged Sonya
reproachfully.


"What a young lady she is!" remarked the major-domo.


But Natasha would not give in.
 She turned everything out and began
quickly repacking, deciding that the inferior Russian carpets and
unnecessary crockery should not be taken at all.
 Only
the lid of the case containing the carpets would not shut down.
 A few
more things might have been taken out, but Natasha insisted on having
her own way.
 She packed, repacked, pressed, made the butler's assistant
and Petya--whom she had drawn into the business of packing--press on the
lid, and made desperate efforts herself.


"That's enough, Natasha," said Sonya.
 "I see you were right, but just
take out the top one.
 "Now press, Petya! Press, Vasilich, press hard!" she cried.
 But this only
lasted a moment.
 She at once set to work afresh and they now trusted her
completely.


Sonya and Natasha slept in the sitting room without undressing.
 Mavra Kuzminichna concluded that he was a very important
man.
 A doctor and two soldiers followed the carriage in a
cart.


"Please come in here.
 The masters are going away and the whole house
will be empty," said the old woman to the old attendant.
 "We don't expect to get him home
alive! We have a house of our own in Moscow, but it's a long way from
here, and there's nobody living in it.
"

"Do us the honor to come in, there's plenty of everything in the
master's house.
 "Is he very ill?" she
asked.


"We don't expect to get him home! We must ask the doctor.


"The masters won't object.
.
.






CHAPTER XV


Moscow's last day had come.
 It was a clear bright autumn day, a Sunday.

The church bells everywhere were ringing for service, just as usual on
Sundays.


Only two things indicated the social condition of Moscow--the rabble,
that is the poor people, and the price of commodities.
 An enormous crowd
of factory hands, house serfs, and peasants, with whom some officials,
seminarists, and gentry were mingled, had gone early that morning to
the Three Hills.
 Having waited there for Rostopchin who did not turn
up, they became convinced that Moscow would be surrendered, and then
dispersed all about the town to the public houses and cookshops.
 Prices
too that day indicated the state of affairs.
 The price of weapons, of
gold, of carts and horses, kept rising, but the value of paper money and
city articles kept falling, so that by midday there were instances of
carters removing valuable goods, such as cloth, and receiving in payment
a half of what they carted, while peasant horses were fetching five
hundred rubles each, and furniture, mirrors, and bronzes were being
given away for nothing.


In the Rostovs' staid old-fashioned house the dissolution of former
conditions of life was but little noticeable.
 As to the serfs the only
indication was that three out of their huge retinue disappeared
during the night, but nothing was stolen; and as to the value of their
possessions, the thirty peasant carts that had come in from their
estates and which many people envied proved to be extremely valuable and
they were offered enormous sums of money for them.
 The major-domo to whom these entreaties were
addressed, though he was sorry for the wounded, resolutely refused,
saying that he dare not even mention the matter to the count.
 So thought the major-domo on his master's behalf.


On waking up that morning Count Ilya Rostov left his bedroom softly, so
as not to wake the countess who had fallen asleep only toward morning,
and came out to the porch in his lilac silk dressing gown.
 In the yard
stood the carts ready corded.
 The carriages were at the front porch.
 On seeing the count the
major-domo made a significant and stern gesture to them both to go away.
 (He liked to see new faces.
)

"We can harness at once, your excellency.
 As soon as the countess wakes we'll be off, God
willing! What is it, gentlemen?" he added, turning to the officer.
 "Are
you staying in my house?"

The officer came nearer and suddenly his face flushed crimson.
.
 for God's sake, to get into some
corner of one of your carts! I have nothing here with me.
.
.
 I shall be
all right on a loaded cart.
.
.
"

Before the officer had finished speaking the orderly made the same
request on behalf of his master.


"Oh, yes, yes, yes!" said the count hastily.
 Vasilich, you'll see to it.

Well, what of it.
.
 do what's necessary.
.
 The count looked around him.
 They were all looking at the count and
moving toward the porch.


"Please step into the gallery, your excellency," said the major-domo.

"What are your orders about the pictures?"

The count went into the house with him, repeating his order not to
refuse the wounded who asked for a lift.


"Well, never mind, some of the things can be unloaded," he added in a
soft, confidential voice, as though afraid of being overheard.
 The countess sent for her husband.
"

"You know, love, I wanted to tell you.
.
.
.
 an officer
came to me to ask for a few carts for the wounded.
.
 Really now, in our own yard--we asked them in ourselves and
there are officers among them.
.
.
 You know, I think, my dear.
 let them
be taken.
.
.

The countess was accustomed to this tone as a precursor of news of
something detrimental to the children's interests, such as the building
of a new gallery or conservatory, the inauguration of a private theater
or an orchestra.
 She was accustomed always to oppose anything announced
in that timid tone and considered it her duty to do so.


She assumed her dolefully submissive manner and said to her husband:
"Listen to me, Count, you have managed matters so that we are getting
nothing for the house, and now you wish to throw away all our--all the
children's property! You said yourself that we have a hundred thousand
rubles' worth of things in the house.
 That's what other people do.
 It's only
we who are such fools.
"

Flourishing his arms in despair the count left the room without
replying.


"Papa, what are you doing that for?" asked Natasha, who had followed him
into her mother's room.


"Nothing! What business is it of yours?" muttered the count angrily.
 "Why does Mamma object?"

"What business is it of yours?" cried the count.


Natasha stepped up to the window and pondered.


"Papa! Here's Berg coming to see us," said she, looking out of the
window.






CHAPTER XVI


Berg, the Rostovs' son-in-law, was already a colonel wearing the orders
of Vladimir and Anna, and he still filled the quiet and agreeable post
of assistant to the head of the staff of the assistant commander of the
first division of the Second Army.


On the first of September he had come to Moscow from the army.


Berg drove up to his father-in-law's house in his spruce little trap
with a pair of sleek roans, exactly like those of a certain prince.


From the anteroom Berg ran with smooth though impatient steps into the
drawing room, where he embraced the count, kissed the hands of Natasha
and Sonya, and hastened to inquire after "Mamma's" health.
 "Come, tell us the news!
Is the army retreating or will there be another battle?"

"God Almighty alone can decide the fate of our fatherland, Papa," said
Berg.
 No one knows what is coming.
 But
in general I can tell you, Papa, that such a heroic spirit, the truly
antique valor of the Russian army, which they--which it" (he
corrected himself) "has shown or displayed in the battle of the
twenty-sixth--there are no words worthy to do it justice! I tell you,
Papa" (he smote himself on the breast as a general he had heard speaking
had done, but Berg did it a trifle late for he should have struck his
breast at the words "Russian army"), "I tell you frankly that we, the
commanders, far from having to urge the men on or anything of that kind,
could hardly restrain those.
.
.
.
.
 You can imagine!"

And Berg related all that he remembered of the various tales he had
heard those days.
 Natasha watched him with an intent gaze that confused
him, as if she were trying to find in his face the answer to some
question.


"Altogether such heroism as was displayed by the Russian warriors
cannot be imagined or adequately praised!" said Berg, glancing round
at Natasha, and as if anxious to conciliate her, replying to her intent
look with a smile.
 "'Russia is not in Moscow, she lives in the hearts of
her sons!' Isn't it so, Papa?" said he.


Just then the countess came in from the sitting room with a weary and
dissatisfied expression.
 Berg hurriedly jumped up, kissed her hand,
asked about her health, and, swaying his head from side to side to
express sympathy, remained standing beside her.


"Yes, Mamma, I tell you sincerely that these are hard and sad times for
every Russian.
.
.
.
 "I have just been told that nothing is ready yet.

Somebody after all must see to things.
"

The count was about to say something, but evidently restrained himself.

He got up from his chair and went to the door.


At that moment Berg drew out his handkerchief as if to blow his nose
and, seeing the knot in it, pondered, shaking his head sadly and
significantly.
" said the count, and stopped.


"I was driving past Yusupov's house just now," said Berg with a laugh,
"when the steward, a man I know, ran out and asked me whether I wouldn't
buy something.
) "And it's
such a beauty! It pulls out and has a secret English drawer, you know!
And dear Vera has long wanted one.
 I saw so many of those peasant carts in your yard.
.
"

The count frowned and coughed.
"

"Oh, go to the devil, all of you! To the devil, the devil, the devil.
.
.
"
cried the old count.
 "My head's in a whirl!"

And he left the room.
 The countess began to cry.


"Yes, Mamma! Yes, these are very hard times!" said Berg.


Natasha left the room with her father and, as if finding it difficult to
reach some decision, first followed him and then ran downstairs.


Petya was in the porch, engaged in giving out weapons to the servants
who were to leave Moscow.
 Two of them had been uncorded and a wounded officer was climbing
into one of them helped by an orderly.


"Do you know what it's about?" Petya asked Natasha.


"It's because Papa wanted to give up all the carts to the wounded," said
Petya.
.
.
 I don't know what.


Berg was sitting beside the countess consoling her with the respectful
attention of a relative.
 The count, pipe in hand, was pacing up and down
the room, when Natasha, her face distorted by anger, burst in like a
tempest and approached her mother with rapid steps.


"It's horrid! It's abominable!" she screamed.
 "You can't possibly have
ordered it!"

Berg and the countess looked at her, perplexed and frightened.


"Mamma, it's impossible: see what is going on in the yard!" she cried.
 It's monstrous!.
.
 No, Mamma
darling, it's not the thing.
.
 Mamma, what
does it matter what we take away? Only look what is going on in the
yard.
.
.
 Mamma!.
.
 It's impossible!"

The count stood by the window and listened without turning round.

Suddenly he sniffed and put his face closer to the window.


The countess glanced at her daughter, saw her face full of shame for her
mother, saw her agitation, and understood why her husband did not turn
to look at her now, and she glanced round quite disconcerted.


"Oh, do as you like! Am I hindering anyone?" she said, not surrendering
at once.


"Mamma, darling, forgive me!"

But the countess pushed her daughter away and went up to her husband.


"My dear, you order what is right.
.
 You know I don't understand about
it," said she, dropping her eyes shamefacedly.


"The eggs.
.
 the eggs are teaching the hen," muttered the count through
tears of joy, and he embraced his wife who was glad to hide her look of
shame on his breast.
.
" asked Natasha.
"

The count nodded affirmatively, and Natasha, at the rapid pace at which
she used to run when playing at tag, ran through the ballroom to the
anteroom and downstairs into the yard.


The whole household, as if to atone for not having done it sooner, set
eagerly to work at the new task of placing the wounded in the carts.
 Many of the wounded asked them not to unload the carts
but only to let them sit on the top of the things.
 But the work of
unloading, once started, could not be arrested.
 It seemed not to matter
whether all or only half the things were left behind.
 Cases full of
china, bronzes, pictures, and mirrors that had been so carefully
packed the night before now lay about the yard, and still they went on
searching for and finding possibilities of unloading this or that and
letting the wounded have another and yet another cart.


"We can take four more men," said the steward.
 "They can have my trap,
or else what is to become of them?"

"Let them have my wardrobe cart," said the countess.
 The whole household, servants included, was bright
and animated.
 Natasha was in a state of rapturous excitement such as she
had not known for a long time.
"

"What's in it?" asked Natasha.
"

"Leave it, Vasilich will put it away.
 It's not wanted.
"

The phaeton was full of people and there was a doubt as to where Count
Peter could sit.
 You'll sit on the box, won't you, Petya?" cried Natasha.


Sonya too was busy all this time, but the aim of her efforts was quite
different from Natasha's.
 She was putting away the things that had to
be left behind and making a list of them as the countess wished, and she
tried to get as much taken away with them as possible.
 One by one
the carts with the wounded had moved out of the yard.


The caleche in which Prince Andrew was being taken attracted Sonya's
attention as it passed the front porch.
 With the help of a maid she was
arranging a seat for the countess in the huge high coach that stood at
the entrance.


"Whose caleche is that?" she inquired, leaning out of the carriage
window.
 "The wounded prince: he
spent the night in our house and is going with us.
"

"But who is it? What's his name?"

"It's our intended that was--Prince Bolkonski himself! They say he is
dying," replied the maid with a sigh.


Sonya jumped out of the coach and ran to the countess.
 The countess,
tired out and already dressed in shawl and bonnet for her journey,
was pacing up and down the drawing room, waiting for the household to
assemble for the usual silent prayer with closed doors before starting.


"Mamma," said Sonya, "Prince Andrew is here, mortally wounded.
 He is
going with us.


"Natasha?" she murmured.


At that moment this news had only one significance for both of them.

They knew their Natasha, and alarm as to what would happen if she heard
this news stifled all sympathy for the man they both liked.


"Well, Mamma? Everything is ready.
 What's the matter?" asked Natasha, as
with animated face she ran into the room.


"Nothing," answered the countess.
"

And the countess bent over her reticule to hide her agitated face.
 Sonya
embraced Natasha and kissed her.


Natasha looked at her inquiringly.
.
"

"Is it something very bad for me? What is it?" persisted Natasha with
her quick intuition.


The count was the first to rise, and with a loud sigh crossed himself
before the icon.
 The
countess went into the oratory and there Sonya found her on her knees
before the icons that had been left here and there hanging on the wall.
)

In the porch and in the yard the men whom Petya had armed with swords
and daggers, with trousers tucked inside their high boots and with belts
and girdles tightened, were taking leave of those remaining behind.


As is always the case at a departure, much had been forgotten or put in
the wrong place, and for a long time two menservants stood one on
each side of the open door and the carriage steps waiting to help the
countess in, while maids rushed with cushions and bundles from the house
to the carriages, the caleche, the phaeton, and back again.


"Oh, those servants!" said the count, swaying his head.


Efim, the old coachman, who was the only one the countess trusted to
drive her, sat perched up high on the box and did not so much as glance
round at what was going on behind him.
 He knew
all this and therefore waited calmly for what would happen, with more
patience than the horses, especially the near one, the chestnut Falcon,
who was pawing the ground and champing his bit.
 Then Efim deliberately doffed his hat and
began crossing himself.
 The postilion and all the other servants did the
same.
 "Off, in God's name!" said Efim, putting on his hat.
 The footman
sprang onto the box of the moving coach which jolted as it passed out
of the yard onto the uneven roadway; the other vehicles jolted in
their turn, and the procession of carriages moved up the street.


Rarely had Natasha experienced so joyful a feeling as now, sitting in
the carriage beside the countess and gazing at the slowly receding
walls of forsaken, agitated Moscow.
 Almost at the head of the line she could see
the raised hood of Prince Andrew's caleche.
 She did not know who was
in it, but each time she looked at the procession her eyes sought that
caleche.


In Kudrino, from the Nikitski, Presnya, and Podnovinsk Streets came
several other trains of vehicles similar to the Rostovs', and as they
passed along the Sadovaya Street the carriages and carts formed two rows
abreast.


"Yes, it really is Bezukhov in a coachman's coat, with a queer-looking
old boy.
 That old man
noticed a face thrust out of the carriage window gazing at them, and
respectfully touching Pierre's elbow said something to him and pointed
to the carriage.
 At length when he had understood and looked in the
direction the old man indicated, he recognized Natasha, and following
his first impulse stepped instantly and rapidly toward the coach.
 But
having taken a dozen steps he seemed to remember something and stopped.


Natasha's face, leaning out of the window, beamed with quizzical
kindliness.
 "What are you doing?
Why are you like this?"

Pierre took her outstretched hand and kissed it awkwardly as he walked
along beside her while the coach still moved on.


"What? What? Why? Don't ask me," said Pierre, and looked round at
Natasha whose radiant, happy expression--of which he was conscious
without looking at her--filled him with enchantment.


"Are you remaining in Moscow, then?"

Pierre hesitated.


"In Moscow?" he said in a questioning tone.
 Good-by!"

"Ah, if only I were a man? I'd certainly stay with you.
 How splendid!"
said Natasha.
 "Mamma, if you'll let me, I'll stay!"

Pierre glanced absently at Natasha and was about to say something, but
the countess interrupted him.
 "There will be another battle
tomorrow.
.
.
" he began, but Natasha interrupted him.


"But what is the matter with you, Count? You are not like yourself.
.
.
"

"Oh, don't ask me, don't ask me! I don't know myself.
 Tomorrow.
.
 But
no! Good-by, good-by!" he muttered.
 "It's an awful time!" and dropping
behind the carriage he stepped onto the pavement.


Natasha continued to lean out of the window for a long time, beaming at
him with her kindly, slightly quizzical, happy smile.






CHAPTER XVIII


For the last two days, ever since leaving home, Pierre had been living
in the empty house of his deceased benefactor, Bazdeev.
 This is how it
happened.
 When he was informed that
among others awaiting him in his reception room there was a Frenchman
who had brought a letter from his wife, the Countess Helene, he felt
suddenly overcome by that sense of confusion and hopelessness to which
he was apt to succumb.
 He felt that everything was now at an end, all
was in confusion and crumbling to pieces, that nobody was right or
wrong, the future held nothing, and there was no escape from this
position.
 His major-domo came in a second time to
say that the Frenchman who had brought the letter from the countess
was very anxious to see him if only for a minute, and that someone from
Bazdeev's widow had called to ask Pierre to take charge of her husband's
books, as she herself was leaving for the country.
.
.
.


But as soon as the man had left the room Pierre took up his hat which
was lying on the table and went out of his study by the other door.
 He went along the whole length of this
passage to the stairs and, frowning and rubbing his forehead with
both hands, went down as far as the first landing.
 The hall porter was
standing at the front door.
 From the landing where Pierre stood there
was a second staircase leading to the back entrance.
 He went down that
staircase and out into the yard.
 No one had seen him.
 When he felt he was being looked at he behaved like an ostrich
which hides its head in a bush in order not to be seen: he hung his head
and quickening his pace went down the street.


Of all the affairs awaiting Pierre that day the sorting of Joseph
Bazdeev's books and papers appeared to him the most necessary.


Continually turning round to look at the rows of loaded carts that were
making their way from all sides out of Moscow, and balancing his bulky
body so as not to slip out of the ramshackle old vehicle, Pierre,
experiencing the joyful feeling of a boy escaping from school, began to
talk to his driver.


The man told him that arms were being distributed today at the Kremlin
and that tomorrow everyone would be sent out beyond the Three Hills
gates and a great battle would be fought there.


"At home?" asked Pierre.


"Owing to the present state of things Sophia Danilovna has gone to the
Torzhok estate with the children, your excellency.
"

"I will come in all the same, I have to look through the books," said
Pierre.


"Be so good as to step in.
 Makar Alexeevich, the brother of my late
master--may the kingdom of heaven be his--has remained here, but he is
in a weak state as you know," said the old servant.


"Yes, yes, I know.
 Let us go in.
.
.
" said Pierre and entered the house.


A tall, bald-headed old man with a red nose, wearing a dressing gown and
with galoshes on his bare feet, stood in the anteroom.
 On seeing Pierre
he muttered something angrily and went away along the passage.


"He was a very clever man but has now grown quite feeble, as your honor
sees," said Gerasim.
 The room, dusty and untouched
since the death of Joseph Bazdeev was now even gloomier.
 Pierre
went round the study, approached the cupboard in which the manuscripts
were kept, and took out what had once been one of the most important,
the holy of holies of the order.
 This was the authentic Scotch Acts
with Bazdeev's notes and explanations.
 He sat down at the dusty writing
table, and, having laid the manuscripts before him, opened them out,
closed them, finally pushed them away, and resting his head on his hand
sank into meditation.


More than two hours passed and Gerasim took the liberty of making a
slight noise at the door to attract his attention, but Pierre did not
hear him.


"I beg you not to tell anyone who I am, and to do what I ask you.
"

"Yes, your excellency," replied Gerasim.


"Yes, your excellency," said Gerasim after thinking for a moment.
 And he spent the night on a bed made up for him
there.


Gerasim, being a servant who in his time had seen many strange things,
accepted Pierre's taking up his residence in the house without
surprise, and seemed pleased to have someone to wait on.
 That same
evening--without even asking himself what they were wanted for--he
procured a coachman's coat and cap for Pierre, and promised to get him
the pistol next day.
 But as soon as Pierre turned toward him he
wrapped his dressing gown around him with a shamefaced and angry look
and hurried away.
 It was when Pierre (wearing the coachman's coat which
Gerasim had procured for him and had disinfected by steam) was on his
way with the old man to buy the pistol at the Sukharev market that he
met the Rostovs.






CHAPTER XIX


Kutuzov's order to retreat through Moscow to the Ryazan road was issued
at night on the first of September.


The first troops started at once, and during the night they marched
slowly and steadily without hurry.
 At daybreak, however, those nearing
the town at the Dorogomilov bridge saw ahead of them masses of soldiers
crowding and hurrying across the bridge, ascending on the opposite side
and blocking the streets and alleys, while endless masses of troops were
bearing down on them from behind, and an unreasoning hurry and alarm
overcame them.


By ten o'clock in the morning of the second of September, only the rear
guard remained in the Dorogomilov suburb, where they had ample room.
 From the twenty-sixth of August
to the second of September, that is from the battle of Borodino to the
entry of the French into Moscow, during the whole of that agitating,
memorable week, there had been the extraordinary autumn weather that
always comes as a surprise, when the sun hangs low and gives more heat
than in spring, when everything shines so brightly in the rare clear
atmosphere that the eyes smart, when the lungs are strengthened and
refreshed by inhaling the aromatic autumn air, when even the nights
are warm, and when in those dark warm nights, golden stars startle and
delight us continually by falling from the sky.


At ten in the morning of the second of September this weather still
held.


The brightness of the morning was magical.


The view of the strange city with its peculiar architecture, such as
he had never seen before, filled Napoleon with the rather envious and
uneasy curiosity men feel when they see an alien form of life that has
no knowledge of them.
 This city was evidently living with the full force
of its own life.
 By the indefinite signs which, even at a distance,
distinguish a living body from a dead one, Napoleon from the Poklonny
Hill perceived the throb of life in the town and felt, as it were, the
breathing of that great and beautiful body.


Every Russian looking at Moscow feels her to be a mother; every
foreigner who sees her, even if ignorant of her significance as the
mother city, must feel her feminine character, and Napoleon felt it.
 It was
     high time.


"But could it be otherwise?" he thought.
 "Here is this capital at my
feet.
 "One word from me, one movement of my hand, and that ancient
capital of the Tsars would perish.
 But my clemency is always ready to
descend upon the vanquished.
 I must be magnanimous and truly great.
 But
no, it can't be true that I am in Moscow," he suddenly thought.
 But I shall spare her.
.
 It is just this which Alexander will
feel most painfully, I know him.
" (It seemed to Napoleon that the chief
import of what was taking place lay in the personal struggle between
himself and Alexander.
) "From the height of the Kremlin--yes, there
is the Kremlin, yes--I will give them just laws; I will teach them the
meaning of true civilization, I will make generations of boyars remember
their conqueror with love.
 'Boyars,' I will say to them, 'I do not desire war, I desire
the peace and welfare of all my subjects.
' However, I know their
presence will inspire me, and I shall speak to them as I always do:
clearly, impressively, and majestically.
 But can it be true that I am in
Moscow? Yes, there she lies.



    * "Bring the boyars to me.


Two hours passed.
 Napoleon had lunched and was again standing in the
same place on the Poklonny Hill awaiting the deputation.
 That
speech was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon understood it.


He was himself carried away by the tone of magnanimity he intended to
adopt toward Moscow.
 In his imagination he appointed days for assemblies
at the palace of the Tsars, at which Russian notables and his own would
mingle.
 Having learned that there were many charitable
institutions in Moscow he mentally decided that he would shower favors
on them all.
 He thought that, as in Africa he had to put on a burnoose
and sit in a mosque, so in Moscow he must be beneficent like the Tsars.

And in order finally to touch the hearts of the Russians--and being like
all Frenchmen unable to imagine anything sentimental without a reference
to ma chere, ma tendre, ma pauvre mere * --he decided that he would
place an inscription on all these establishments in large letters:
"This establishment is dedicated to my dear mother.
 "But am I really in
Moscow? Yes, here it lies before me, but why is the deputation from the
city so long in appearing?" he wondered.
"

     * (2) "House of my Mother.
 Those sent to
fetch the deputation had returned with the news that Moscow was empty,
that everyone had left it.
 Some said that a deputation of some sort must
be scraped together, others disputed that opinion and maintained that
the Emperor should first be carefully and skillfully prepared, and then
told the truth.


"He will have to be told, all the same," said some gentlemen of the
suite.
 "But, gentlemen.
.
.


"But it's impossible.
.
" declared the gentlemen of the suite, shrugging
their shoulders but not venturing to utter the implied word--le
ridicule.
.


At last the Emperor, tired of futile expectation, his actor's instinct
suggesting to him that the sublime moment having been too long drawn out
was beginning to lose its sublimity, gave a sign with his hand.
 A single
report of a signaling gun followed, and the troops, who were already
spread out on different sides of Moscow, moved into the city through
Tver, Kaluga, and Dorogomilov gates.






CHAPTER XX


Meanwhile Moscow was empty.
 There were still people in it, perhaps a
fiftieth part of its former inhabitants had remained, but it was empty.

It was empty in the sense that a dying queenless hive is empty.


The bees circle round a queenless hive in the hot beams of the midday
sun as gaily as around the living hives; from a distance it smells of
honey like the others, and bees fly in and out in the same way.
 But one
has only to observe that hive to realize that there is no longer any
life in it.
 The bees do not fly in the same way, the smell and the sound
that meet the beekeeper are not the same.
 To the beekeeper's tap on the
wall of the sick hive, instead of the former instant unanimous
humming of tens of thousands of bees with their abdomens threateningly
compressed, and producing by the rapid vibration of their wings an
aerial living sound, the only reply is a disconnected buzzing from
different parts of the deserted hive.
 They do not sting, but crawl away from
danger.
 Formerly only bees laden with honey flew into the hive, and they
flew out empty; now they fly out laden.
 The beekeeper opens the lower
part of the hive and peers in.
 Instead of black, glossy bees--tamed by
toil, clinging to one another's legs and drawing out the wax, with a
ceaseless hum of labor--that used to hang in long clusters down to
the floor of the hive, drowsy shriveled bees crawl about separately
in various directions on the floor and walls of the hive.
 Black robber bees are swiftly and stealthily prowling about
the combs, and the short home bees, shriveled and listless as if they
were old, creep slowly about without trying to hinder the robbers,
having lost all motive and all sense of life.
 Drones, bumblebees, wasps,
and butterflies knock awkwardly against the walls of the hive in their
flight.
 Here and there among the cells containing dead brood and honey
an angry buzzing can sometimes be heard.
 Here and there a couple of
bees, by force of habit and custom cleaning out the brood cells, with
efforts beyond their strength laboriously drag away a dead bee or
bumblebee without knowing why they do it.
 The keeper opens the two center partitions to examine
the brood cells.
 In place of the former close dark circles formed by
thousands of bees sitting back to back and guarding the high mystery
of generation, he sees hundreds of dull, listless, and sleepy shells of
bees.
 They have almost all died unawares, sitting in the sanctuary they
had guarded and which is now no more.
 They reek of decay and death.
 Only
a few of them still move, rise, and feebly fly to settle on the enemy's
hand, lacking the spirit to die stinging him; the rest are dead and fall
as lightly as fish scales.
 The beekeeper closes the hive, chalks a mark
on it, and when he has time tears out its contents and burns it clean.


So in the same way Moscow was empty when Napoleon, weary, uneasy, and
morose, paced up and down in front of the Kammer-Kollezski rampart,
awaiting what to his mind was a necessary, if but formal, observance of
the proprieties--a deputation.


In various corners of Moscow there still remained a few people aimlessly
moving about, following their old habits and hardly aware of what they
were doing.
 "Moscow deserted!" he said to himself.






CHAPTER XXI


The Russian troops were passing through Moscow from two o'clock at night
till two in the afternoon and bore away with them the wounded and the
last of the inhabitants who were leaving.


The greatest crush during the movement of the troops took place at the
Stone, Moskva, and Yauza bridges.
 But there were no
dealers with voices of ingratiating affability inviting customers to
enter; there were no hawkers, nor the usual motley crowd of female
purchasers--but only soldiers, in uniforms and overcoats though without
muskets, entering the Bazaar empty-handed and silently making their way
out through its passages with bundles.
 On the
square in front of the Bazaar were drummers beating the muster call.
 A third officer galloped up to them.

This is outrageous! Half the men have dispersed.
.
.
.
 "Stop, you rascals!"

"But how are you going to stop them?" replied another officer.
 "There is
no getting them together.
 The army should push on before the rest bolt,
that's all!"

"How can one push on? They are stuck there, wedged on the bridge, and
don't move.
 Shouldn't we put a cordon round to prevent the rest from
running away?"

"Come, go in there and drive them out!" shouted the senior officer.
 Some soldiers started running away in a group.


"Your honor!" said he.
.

I'll fetch a piece of cloth at once for such an honorable gentleman,
or even two pieces with pleasure.
 For we feel how it is; but what's all
this--sheer robbery! If you please, could not guards be placed if only
to let us close the shop.
.
.


"It's all very well for you, Ivan Sidorych, to talk," said the first
tradesman angrily.


The officer stood perplexed and his face showed indecision.


From one open shop came the sound of blows and vituperation, and just
as the officer came up to it a man in a gray coat with a shaven head was
flung out violently.


This man, bent double, rushed past the tradesman and the officer.
 When he reached the
bridge he saw two unlimbered guns, the infantry crossing the bridge,
several overturned carts, and frightened and laughing faces among the
troops.

The cart was loaded high, and at the very top, beside a child's chair
with its legs in the air, sat a peasant woman uttering piercing and
desperate shrieks.
 The crowd, crushing one another, upsetting carts, and shouting
and squeezing desperately, had cleared off the bridge and the troops
were now moving forward.






CHAPTER XXII


Meanwhile, the city itself was deserted.
 There was hardly anyone in the
streets.
 The gates and shops were all closed, only here and there round
the taverns solitary shouts or drunken songs could be heard.
 Nobody
drove through the streets and footsteps were rarely heard.
 In the great drawing
room of the house, which had been left with all it contained, were
two people.
 They were the yard porter Ignat, and the page boy Mishka,
Vasilich's grandson who had stayed in Moscow with his grandfather.

Mishka had opened the clavichord and was strumming on it with
one finger.
 The yard porter, his arms akimbo, stood smiling with
satisfaction before the large mirror.


"Isn't it fine, eh, Uncle Ignat?" said the boy, suddenly beginning to
strike the keyboard with both hands.


"Impudence! Impudence!" they heard behind them the voice of Mavra
Kuzminichna who had entered silently.
 Just you wait a bit!"

Ignat left off smiling, adjusted his belt, and went out of the room with
meekly downcast eyes.


She heard the sound of quick footsteps in the quiet street.


"Who do you want?"

"The count--Count Ilya Andreevich Rostov.
"

"And who are you?"

"An officer, I have to see him," came the reply in a pleasant, well-bred
Russian voice.


Mavra Kuzminichna opened the gate and an officer of eighteen, with the
round face of a Rostov, entered the yard.


"They have gone away, sir.
 Went away yesterday at vespertime," said
Mavra Kuzminichna cordially.


"Ah, how annoying!" he muttered.
 "I should have come yesterday.
.
"

Meanwhile, Mavra Kuzminichna was attentively and sympathetically
examining the familiar Rostov features of the young man's face, his
tattered coat and trodden-down boots.


"What did you want to see the count for?" she asked.


"Oh well.
.


He again paused in indecision.
 As you see" (he glanced with an amused air and
good-natured smile at his coat and boots) "my things are worn out and I
have no money, so I was going to ask the count.
.
.
"

Mavra Kuzminichna did not let him finish.


"Just wait a minute, sir.


And as soon as the officer let go of the gate handle she turned and,
hurrying away on her old legs, went through the back yard to the
servants' quarters.


While Mavra Kuzminichna was running to her room the officer walked about
the yard gazing at his worn-out boots with lowered head and a faint
smile on his lips.
 "What a pity I've missed Uncle! What a nice old
woman! Where has she run off to? And how am I to find the nearest way
to overtake my regiment, which must by now be getting near the Rogozhski
gate?" thought he.
 While still a few steps from
the officer she unfolded the kerchief and took out of it a white
twenty-five-ruble assignat and hastily handed it to him.


"If his excellency had been at home, as a kinsman he would of course.
.

but as it is.
.
 The officer did not
decline, but took the note quietly and thanked her.
.
" Mavra Kuzminichna went on
apologetically.


But Mavra Kuzminichna stood at the closed gate for some time with moist
eyes, pensively swaying her head and feeling an unexpected flow of
motherly tenderness and pity for the unknown young officer.






CHAPTER XXIII


From an unfinished house on the Varvarka, the ground floor of which was
a dramshop, came drunken shouts and songs.
 On benches round the tables
in a dirty little room sat some ten factory hands.
 Tipsy and perspiring,
with dim eyes and wide-open mouths, they were all laboriously singing
some song or other.
 They were singing discordantly, arduously, and with
great effort, evidently not because they wished to sing, but because
they wanted to show they were drunk and on a spree.
 Evidently possessed by some idea, he stood over those who were
singing, and solemnly and jerkily flourished above their heads his white
arm with the sleeve turned up to the elbow, trying unnaturally to spread
out his dirty fingers.
 The tall lad waved his arm.
 "There's a fight, lads!" And,
still rolling up his sleeve, he went out to the porch.


The factory hands followed him.
 These men, who under the leadership of
the tall lad were drinking in the dramshop that morning, had brought the
publican some skins from the factory and for this had had drink served
them.
 The blacksmiths from a neighboring smithy, hearing the sounds of
revelry in the tavern and supposing it to have been broken into, wished
to force their way in too and a fight in the porch had resulted.


The publican was fighting one of the smiths at the door, and when the
workmen came out the smith, wrenching himself free from the tavern
keeper, fell face downward on the pavement.
.
.
.
" screamed a woman
coming out of a gate close by.


A crowd gathered round the bloodstained smith.


"Haven't you robbed people enough--taking their last shirts?" said a
voice addressing the publican.
 "What have you killed a man for, you
thief?"

The tall lad, standing in the porch, turned his bleared eyes from the
publican to the smith and back again as if considering whom he ought to
fight now.
 "Bind him, lads!"

"I daresay you would like to bind me!" shouted the publican, pushing
away the men advancing on him, and snatching his cap from his head he
flung it on the ground.


As if this action had some mysterious and menacing significance, the
workmen surrounding the publican paused in indecision.


"I know the law very well, mates! I'll take the matter to the captain
of police.
 You think I won't get to him? Robbery is not permitted to
anybody now a days!" shouted the publican, picking up his cap.


"Come along then! Come along then!" the publican and the tall young
fellow repeated one after the other, and they moved up the street
together.


At the corner of the Moroseyka, opposite a large house with closed
shutters and bearing a bootmaker's signboard, stood a score of thin,
worn-out, gloomy-faced bootmakers, wearing overalls and long tattered
coats.


"But he's sucked our blood and now he thinks he's quit of us.
 He's been
misleading us all the week and now that he's brought us to this pass
he's made off.
"

Questions and answers were heard.
 The publican, taking advantage of the
increased crowd, dropped behind and returned to his tavern.


"He must keep order, keep the law, that's what the government is there
for.
 "He thinks there's no government! How can
one do without government? Or else there would be plenty who'd rob us.
"

"Why talk nonsense?" rejoined voices in the crowd.
 "Will they give
up Moscow like this? They told you that for fun, and you believed it!
Aren't there plenty of troops on the march? Let him in, indeed! That's
what the government is for.
 You'd better listen to what people are
saying," said some of the mob pointing to the tall youth.


By the wall of China-Town a smaller group of people were gathered round
a man in a frieze coat who held a paper in his hand.


"An ukase, they are reading an ukase! Reading an ukase!" cried voices in
the crowd, and the people rushed toward the reader.


The man in the frieze coat was reading the broadsheet of August 31 When
the crowd collected round him he seemed confused, but at the demand
of the tall lad who had pushed his way up to him, he began in a rather
tremulous voice to read the sheet from the beginning.


"Early tomorrow I shall go to his Serene Highness," he read ("Sirin
Highness," said the tall fellow with a triumphant smile on his lips and
a frown on his brow), "to consult with him to act, and to aid the army
to exterminate these scoundrels.
 We too will take part.
.
.
"), "in destroying
them, and will send these visitors to the devil.
 I will come back to
dinner, and we'll set to work.
"

The last words were read out in the midst of complete silence.
 The tall
lad hung his head gloomily.
 It was evident that no one had understood
the last part.
 In particular, the words "I will come back to dinner,"
evidently displeased both reader and audience.


They all stood despondent and silent.


"We should ask him.
.
 that's he himself?".
.
 "Yes, ask him indeed!.
.
.


"What people are these?" he shouted to the men, who were moving singly
and timidly in the direction of his trap.
.
" replied the shopman in the frieze coat, "your honor, in
accord with the proclamation of his highest excellency the count, they
desire to serve, not sparing their lives, and it is not any kind of
riot, but as his highest excellence said.
.
.
"

"The count has not left, he is here, and an order will be issued
concerning you," said the superintendent of police.


The crowd halted, pressing around those who had heard what the
superintendent had said, and looking at the departing trap.


The superintendent of police turned round at that moment with a scared
look, said something to his coachman, and his horses increased their
speed.


"It's a fraud, lads! Lead the way to him, himself!" shouted the tall
youth.


Following the superintendent of police and talking loudly the crowd went
in the direction of the Lubyanka Street.






CHAPTER XXIV


On the evening of the first of September, after his interview with
Kutuzov, Count Rostopchin had returned to Moscow mortified and offended
because he had not been invited to attend the council of war, and
because Kutuzov had paid no attention to his offer to take part in the
defense of the city; amazed also at the novel outlook revealed to him
at the camp, which treated the tranquillity of the capital and its
patriotic fervor as not merely secondary but quite irrelevant and
unimportant matters.
 Distressed, offended, and surprised by all this,
Rostopchin had returned to Moscow.
 After supper he lay down on a sofa
without undressing, and was awakened soon after midnight by a courier
bringing him a letter from Kutuzov.
 He had known that Moscow would be abandoned not merely since
his interview the previous day with Kutuzov on the Poklonny Hill but
ever since the battle of Borodino, for all the generals who came to
Moscow after that battle had said unanimously that it was impossible to
fight another battle, and since then the government property had been
removed every night, and half the inhabitants had left the city
with Rostopchin's own permission.
 Yet all the same this information
astonished and irritated the count, coming as it did in the form of a
simple note with an order from Kutuzov, and received at night, breaking
in on his beauty sleep.


When later on in his memoirs Count Rostopchin explained his actions at
this time, he repeatedly says that he was then actuated by two important
considerations: to maintain tranquillity in Moscow and expedite the
departure of the inhabitants.
 "Why were the holy relics,
the arms, ammunition, gunpowder, and stores of corn not removed? Why
were thousands of inhabitants deceived into believing that Moscow would
not be given up--and thereby ruined?" "To preserve the tranquillity
of the city," explains Count Rostopchin.
 "Why were bundles of useless
papers from the government offices, and Leppich's balloon and other
articles removed?" "To leave the town empty," explains Count Rostopchin.
 Why should that cause the masses to
riot?

Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia did anything resembling an
insurrection ever occur when the enemy entered a town.
 More than
ten thousand people were still in Moscow on the first and second of
September, and except for a mob in the governor's courtyard, assembled
there at his bidding, nothing happened.
 Ever since the enemy's entry into Smolensk he had in
imagination been playing the role of director of the popular feeling
of "the heart of Russia.
" Not only did it seem to him (as to all
administrators) that he controlled the external actions of Moscow's
inhabitants, but he also thought he controlled their mental attitude by
means of his broadsheets and posters, written in a coarse tone which the
people despise in their own class and do not understand from those in
authority.
 Though he knew
it was coming, he did not till the last moment wholeheartedly believe
that Moscow would be abandoned, and did not prepare for it.
 If the government offices were
removed, this was only done on the demand of officials to whom the count
yielded reluctantly.
 He was absorbed in the role he had created
for himself.
 He unexpectedly felt himself ridiculous,
weak, and alone, with no ground to stand on.


When, awakened from his sleep, he received that cold, peremptory note
from Kutuzov, he felt the more irritated the more he felt himself
to blame.


"Who is to blame for it? Who has let things come to such a pass?" he
ruminated.
 "Not I, of course.


All that night Count Rostopchin issued orders, for which people came to
him from all parts of Moscow.


"Your excellency, the Director of the Registrar's Department has sent
for instructions.
.
.
 From the Consistory, from the Senate, from the
University, from the Foundling Hospital, the Suffragan has sent.

asking for information.
.
.
 What are your orders about the Fire Brigade?
From the governor of the prison.
.
 from the superintendent of the
lunatic asylum.
.
.
" All night long such announcements were continually
being received by the count.


"Oh, tell that blockhead," he said in reply to the question from the
Registrar's Department, "that he should remain to guard his documents.
"

"Your excellency, the superintendent of the lunatic asylum has come:
what are your commands?"

"My commands? Let them go away, that's all.
.
 And let the lunatics
out into the town.
"

In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in the prison, Count
Rostopchin shouted angrily at the governor:

"Do you expect me to give you two battalions--which we have not got--for
a convoy? Release them, that's all about it!"

"Your excellency, there are some political prisoners, Meshkov,
Vereshchagin.
.
 "Bring
him to me!"





CHAPTER XXV


Toward nine o'clock in the morning, when the troops were already moving
through Moscow, nobody came to the count any more for instructions.

Those who were able to get away were going of their own accord, those
who remained behind decided for themselves what they must do.
 But as soon as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave and
the ship to move, such a delusion is no longer possible.


Rostopchin felt this, and it was this which exasperated him.


The superintendent of police, whom the crowd had stopped, went in to
see him at the same time as an adjutant who informed the count that the
horses were harnessed.
 They were both pale, and the superintendent of
police, after reporting that he had executed the instructions he had
received, informed the count that an immense crowd had collected in the
courtyard and wished to see him.
 The blood
stained smith stood beside him with a gloomy face.


Rostopchin went again to the balcony door.


"But what do they want?" he asked the superintendent of police.
 Your excellency, I venture to suggest.
.
 I don't need you to tell me what to do!" exclaimed
Rostopchin angrily.


"This is what they have done with Russia! This is what they have done
with me!" thought he, full of an irrepressible fury that welled up
within him against the someone to whom what was happening might be
attributed.
 As often happens with passionate people, he was mastered by
anger but was still seeking an object on which to vent it.
 "Here is
that mob, the dregs of the people," he thought as he gazed at the crowd:
"this rabble they have roused by their folly! They want a victim,"
he thought as he looked at the tall lad flourishing his arm.


"Is the carriage ready?" he asked again.


"Ah!" exclaimed Rostopchin, as if struck by an unexpected recollection.


And rapidly opening the door he went resolutely out onto the balcony.

The talking instantly ceased, hats and caps were doffed, and all eyes
were raised to the count.


A murmur of approbation and satisfaction ran through the crowd.
.
.


A few minutes later an officer came hurriedly out of the front door,
gave an order, and the dragoons formed up in line.
 Rostopchin, coming out there
with quick angry steps, looked hastily around as if seeking someone.


"Where is he?" he inquired.
 He had a long thin
neck, and his head, that had been half shaved, was again covered by
short hair.
 This young man was dressed in a threadbare blue cloth coat
lined with fox fur, that had once been smart, and dirty hempen convict
trousers, over which were pulled his thin, dirty, trodden-down boots.

On his thin, weak legs were heavy chains which hampered his irresolute
movements.


"Ah!" said Rostopchin, hurriedly turning away his eyes from the young
man in the fur-lined coat and pointing to the bottom step of the porch.


"Lads!" said he, with a metallic ring in his voice.
 "This man,
Vereshchagin, is the scoundrel by whose doing Moscow is perishing.
 His emaciated young
face, disfigured by the half-shaven head, hung down hopelessly.
 A vein in the young man's long thin neck swelled like a
cord and went blue behind the ear, and suddenly his face flushed.
 He alone of all the Russians has disgraced the Russian name,
he has caused Moscow to perish," said Rostopchin in a sharp, even voice,
but suddenly he glanced down at Vereshchagin who continued to stand in
the same submissive attitude.
 As if inflamed by the sight, he raised his
arm and addressed the people, almost shouting:

"Deal with him as you think fit! I hand him over to you.
 To keep one another back, to breathe in that stifling
atmosphere, to be unable to stir, and to await something unknown,
uncomprehended, and terrible, was becoming unbearable.
 Those standing
in front, who had seen and heard what had taken place before them, all
stood with wide open eyes and mouths, straining with all their strength,
and held back the crowd that was pushing behind them.


"Beat him!.
.
" He lifted his head and again the thick vein in his thin neck
filled with blood and the color rapidly came and went in his face.


He did not finish what he wished to say.
.


Another still stronger wave flowed through the crowd and reaching the
front ranks carried it swaying to the very steps of the porch.


"Saber him!" the dragoon officer almost whispered.


"Ah!" cried Vereshchagin in meek surprise, looking round with a
frightened glance as if not understanding why this was done to him.
 "O Lord!"
exclaimed a sorrowful voice.
 The barrier
of human feeling, strained to the utmost, that had held the crowd in
check suddenly broke.
 The crime had begun and must now be completed.
 The dragoon was
about to repeat his blow.
 The tall youth,
against whom he stumbled, seized his thin neck with his hands and,
yelling wildly, fell with him under the feet of the pressing, struggling
crowd.
.
 Crushed?.
.
.
.
.
 tenacious.
 serves him right! Torture serves a thief
right.
.
 What--still alive?"

Only when the victim ceased to struggle and his cries changed to a
long-drawn, measured death rattle did the crowd around his prostrate,
bleeding corpse begin rapidly to change places.
 Each one came
up, glanced at what had been done, and with horror, reproach, and
astonishment pushed back again.
.
.
 What men!.
.
.
.
 O Lord! And there's another has been
beaten too--they say he's nearly done for.
.
.
.
.
.

Two dragoons took it by its distorted legs and dragged it along the
ground.
 The gory, dust-stained, half-shaven head with its long neck
trailed twisting along the ground.
 The crowd shrank back from it.


At the moment when Vereshchagin fell and the crowd closed in with savage
yells and swayed about him, Rostopchin suddenly turned pale and, instead
of going to the back entrance where his carriage awaited him, went
with hurried steps and bent head, not knowing where and why, along the
passage leading to the rooms on the ground floor.
 The count's face was
white and he could not control the feverish twitching of his lower jaw.
.
.
 This way,
please.
" said a trembling, frightened voice behind him.
 At the back entrance stood his caleche.
 "They are like wolves whom nothing but flesh can appease.
"
"Count! One God is above us both!"--Vereshchagin's words suddenly
recurred to him, and a disagreeable shiver ran down his back.
 "Had I been
simply Theodore Vasilyevich my course of action would have been quite
different, but it was my duty to safeguard my life and dignity as
commander in chief.
 The
thought which tranquillized Rostopchin was not a new one.
 Since the
world began and men have killed one another no one has ever committed
such a crime against his fellow man without comforting himself with
this same idea.


To a man not swayed by passion that welfare is never certain, but he
who commits such a crime always knows just where that welfare lies.
 And
Rostopchin now knew it.


Not only did his reason not reproach him for what he had done, but
he even found cause for self-satisfaction in having so successfully
contrived to avail himself of a convenient opportunity to punish a
criminal and at the same time pacify the mob.


"Vereshchagin was tried and condemned to death," thought Rostopchin
(though the Senate had only condemned Vereshchagin to hard labor), "he
was a traitor and a spy.
 I could not let him go unpunished and so I have
killed two birds with one stone: to appease the mob I gave them a victim
and at the same time punished a miscreant.
"

Having reached his country house and begun to give orders about domestic
arrangements, the count grew quite tranquil.


Half an hour later he was driving with his fast horses across the
Sokolniki field, no longer thinking of what had occurred but considering
what was to come.
 He was driving to the Yauza bridge where he had heard
that Kutuzov was.
 Count Rostopchin was mentally preparing the angry and
stinging reproaches he meant to address to Kutuzov for his deception.
 He
would make that foxy old courtier feel that the responsibility for all
the calamities that would follow the abandonment of the city and the
ruin of Russia (as Rostopchin regarded it) would fall upon his doting
old head.
 Planning beforehand what he would say to Kutuzov, Rostopchin
turned angrily in his caleche and gazed sternly from side to side.


One of these was running to cross the path of Count Rostopchin's
carriage, and the count himself, his coachman, and his dragoons
looked with vague horror and curiosity at these released lunatics and
especially at the one running toward them.


Swaying from side to side on his long, thin legs in his fluttering
dressing gown, this lunatic was running impetuously, his gaze fixed on
Rostopchin, shouting something in a hoarse voice and making signs to him
to stop.
 The lunatic's solemn, gloomy face was thin and yellow, with
its beard growing in uneven tufts.
 His black, agate pupils with
saffron-yellow whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids.


Coming abreast of the caleche he ran beside it.


"Thrice have they slain me, thrice have I risen from the dead.
.
 I shall rise.
.
 shall rise.
.
.
 The kingdom of God will be overthrown.
.
 Thrice
will I overthrow it and thrice re-establish it!" he cried, raising his
voice higher and higher.


Count Rostopchin suddenly grew pale as he had done when the crowd closed
in on Vereshchagin.
 He turned away.
 "Go fas.
.
.


Recent as that mental picture was, Rostopchin already felt that it had
cut deep into his heart and drawn blood.
 Even now he felt clearly that
the gory trace of that recollection would not pass with time, but that
the terrible memory would, on the contrary, dwell in his heart ever more
cruelly and painfully to the end of his life.
 He seemed still to hear
the sound of his own words: "Cut him down! I command it.
.
.
.
"

"Why did I utter those words? It was by some accident I said them.
.
.
 "And then nothing would have
happened.
 "But I did not do it for my own
sake.
 I was bound to act that way.
.
.
.


Troops were still crowding at the Yauza bridge.
 It was hot.
 Kutuzov,
dejected and frowning, sat on a bench by the bridge toying with his
whip in the sand when a caleche dashed up noisily.
 It was Count Rostopchin.
 He told Kutuzov that he had come
because Moscow, the capital, was no more and only the army remained.


Kutuzov looked at Rostopchin as if, not grasping what was said to him,
he was trying to read something peculiar written at that moment on the
face of the man addressing him.
 In front rode a detachment of Wurttemberg hussars and behind
them rode the King of Naples himself accompanied by a numerous suite.


About the middle of the Arbat Street, near the Church of the Miraculous
Icon of St.


Around Murat gathered a group of those who had remained in Moscow.
 They
all stared in timid bewilderment at the strange, long-haired commander
dressed up in feathers and gold.


"Is that their Tsar himself? He's not bad!" low voices could be heard
saying.


An interpreter rode up to the group.


"Take off your cap.
.


Murat approached the interpreter and told him to ask where the Russian
army was.
 One of the Russians understood what was asked and several
voices at once began answering the interpreter.
 A French officer,
returning from the advanced detachment, rode up to Murat and reported
that the gates of the citadel had been barricaded and that there was
probably an ambuscade there.


The guns emerged at a trot from the column following Murat and advanced
up the Arbat.
 They imagined it to be a call to arms.


One shot struck a French soldier's foot, and from behind the screens
came the strange sound of a few voices shouting.
 Instantly as at a
word of command the expression of cheerful serenity on the faces of
the French general, officers, and men changed to one of determined
concentrated readiness for strife and suffering.
 To all of them from
the marshal to the least soldier, that place was not the Vozdvizhenka,
Mokhavaya, or Kutafyev Street, nor the Troitsa Gate (places familiar in
Moscow), but a new battlefield which would probably prove sanguinary.
 The shot rattled against
the stone of the gate and upon the wooden beams and screens, and two
wavering clouds of smoke rose over the Square.


A few instants after the echo of the reports resounding over the
stone-built Kremlin had died away the French heard a strange sound above
their head.
 Thousands of crows rose above the walls and circled in the
air, cawing and noisily flapping their wings.
 Together with that sound
came a solitary human cry from the gateway and amid the smoke appeared
the figure of a bareheaded man in a peasant's coat.
 "Fire!" repeated the officer once more,
and the reports of a musket and of two cannon shots were heard
simultaneously.


Nothing more stirred behind the screens and the French infantry soldiers
and officers advanced to the gate.
 In the gateway lay three wounded and
four dead.
 Two men in peasant coats ran away at the foot of the wall,
toward the Znamenka.


"Clear that away!" said the officer, pointing to the beams and the
corpses, and the French soldiers, after dispatching the wounded, threw
the corpses over the parapet.


Who these men were nobody knew.
 "Clear that away!" was all that was said
of them, and they were thrown over the parapet and removed later on that
they might not stink.
 Thiers alone dedicates a few eloquent lines to
their memory: "These wretches had occupied the sacred citadel, having
supplied themselves with guns from the arsenal, and fired" (the
wretches) "at the French.
"

Murat was informed that the way had been cleared.
 The French entered
the gates and began pitching their camp in the Senate Square.
 Out of the
windows of the Senate House the soldiers threw chairs into the Square
for fuel and kindled fires there.


Other detachments passed through the Kremlin and encamped along
the Moroseyka, the Lubyanka, and Pokrovka Streets.
 Others quartered
themselves along the Vozdvizhenka, the Nikolski, and the Tverskoy
Streets.


Though tattered, hungry, worn out, and reduced to a third of their
original number, the French entered Moscow in good marching order.
 It
was a weary and famished, but still a fighting and menacing army.
 But
it remained an army only until its soldiers had dispersed into their
different lodgings.
 The aim of each man when he left
Moscow was no longer, as it had been, to conquer, but merely to keep
what he had acquired.
 Men in military uniforms
and Hessian boots could be seen through the windows, laughing and
walking through the rooms.
 But despite all these measures the men, who had
till then constituted an army, flowed all over the wealthy, deserted
city with its comforts and plentiful supplies.
 As a hungry herd of
cattle keeps well together when crossing a barren field, but gets out
of hand and at once disperses uncontrollably as soon as it reaches rich
pastures, so did the army disperse all over the wealthy city.


No residents were left in Moscow, and the soldiers--like water
percolating through sand--spread irresistibly through the city in all
directions from the Kremlin into which they had first marched.
 Before they had
had time to secure quarters the soldiers ran out into the streets to
see the city and, hearing that everything had been abandoned, rushed
to places where valuables were to be had for the taking.
 In Carriage Row carriages had been left in the shops, and
generals flocked there to select caleches and coaches for themselves.

The few inhabitants who had remained invited commanding officers to
their houses, hoping thereby to secure themselves from being plundered.

There were masses of wealth and there seemed no end to it.

And Moscow engulfed the army ever deeper and deeper.
 When water is
spilled on dry ground both the dry ground and the water disappear and
mud results; and in the same way the entry of the famished army into the
rich and deserted city resulted in fires and looting and the destruction
of both the army and the wealthy city.
 In reality,
however, it was not, and could not be, possible to explain the burning
of Moscow by making any individual, or any group of people, responsible
for it.
 A town built of wood,
where scarcely a day passes without conflagrations when the house owners
are in residence and a police force is present, cannot help burning when
its inhabitants have left it and it is occupied by soldiers who smoke
pipes, make campfires of the Senate chairs in the Senate Square, and
cook themselves meals twice a day.
 In peacetime it is only necessary to
billet troops in the villages of any district and the number of fires in
that district immediately increases.
 How much then must the probability
of fire be increased in an abandoned, wooden town where foreign troops
are quartered.
 "Le patriotisme feroce de Rostopchine" and the barbarity
of the French were not to blame in the matter.
 Even if there was any
arson (which is very doubtful, for no one had any reason to burn the
houses--in any case a troublesome and dangerous thing to do), arson
cannot be regarded as the cause, for the same thing would have happened
without any incendiarism.



However tempting it might be for the French to blame Rostopchin's
ferocity and for Russians to blame the scoundrel Bonaparte, or later
on to place an heroic torch in the hands of their own people, it is
impossible not to see that there could be no such direct cause of the
fire, for Moscow had to burn as every village, factory, or house must
burn which is left by its owners and in which strangers are allowed to
live and cook their porridge.
 Moscow when occupied by the enemy did not remain intact like
Berlin, Vienna, and other towns, simply because its inhabitants
abandoned it and did not welcome the French with bread and salt, nor
bring them the keys of the city.






CHAPTER XXVII


The absorption of the French by Moscow, radiating starwise as it did,
only reached the quarter where Pierre was staying by the evening of the
second of September.


After the last two days spent in solitude and unusual circumstances,
Pierre was in a state bordering on insanity.
 He was completely obsessed
by one persistent thought.
 He did not know how or when this thought had
taken such possession of him, but he remembered nothing of the past,
understood nothing of the present, and all he saw and heard appeared to
him like a dream.


He had left home only to escape the intricate tangle of life's demands
that enmeshed him, and which in his present condition he was unable
to unravel.
 He sought a quiet refuge, and in Joseph Alexeevich's study he
really found it.
 When he sat with his elbows on the dusty writing table
in the deathlike stillness of the study, calm and significant memories
of the last few days rose one after another in his imagination,
particularly of the battle of Borodino and of that vague sense of his
own insignificance and insincerity compared with the truth, simplicity,
and strength of the class of men he mentally classed as they.
 And
with that object he had asked Gerasim to get him a peasant's coat and
a pistol, confiding to him his intentions of remaining in Joseph
Alexeevich's house and keeping his name secret.
 Then during the first
day spent in inaction and solitude (he tried several times to fix his
attention on the Masonic manuscripts, but was unable to do so) the idea
that had previously occurred to him of the cabalistic significance of
his name in connection with Bonaparte's more than once vaguely presented
itself.
 But the idea that he, L'russe Besuhof, was destined to set a
limit to the power of the Beast was as yet only one of the fancies that
often passed through his mind and left no trace behind.


When, having bought the coat merely with the object of taking part among
the people in the defense of Moscow, Pierre had met the Rostovs and
Natasha had said to him: "Are you remaining in Moscow?.
.
.
 How splendid!"
the thought flashed into his mind that it really would be a good thing,
even if Moscow were taken, for him to remain there and do what he was
predestined to do.
 But when he
returned to the house convinced that Moscow would not be defended, he
suddenly felt that what before had seemed to him merely a possibility
had now become absolutely necessary and inevitable.
 He must remain in
Moscow, concealing his name, and must meet Napoleon and kill him, and
either perish or put an end to the misery of all Europe--which it seemed
to him was solely due to Napoleon.


Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte's life in 1809
by a German student in Vienna, and knew that the student had been shot.

The first was a feeling of the necessity of sacrifice and suffering in
view of the common calamity, the same feeling that had caused him to go
to Mozhaysk on the twenty-fifth and to make his way to the very thick
of the battle and had now caused him to run away from his home and, in
place of the luxury and comfort to which he was accustomed, to sleep
on a hard sofa without undressing and eat the same food as Gerasim.


From the very day Pierre had experienced this feeling for the first time
at the Sloboda Palace he had been continuously under its influence, but
only now found full satisfaction for it.
 If he were now to leave Moscow like
everyone else, his flight from home, the peasant coat, the pistol, and
his announcement to the Rostovs that he would remain in Moscow would all
become not merely meaningless but contemptible and ridiculous, and to
this Pierre was very sensitive.


Pierre's physical condition, as is always the case, corresponded to his
mental state.
 The unaccustomed coarse food, the vodka he drank during
those days, the absence of wine and cigars, his dirty unchanged linen,
two almost sleepless nights passed on a short sofa without bedding--all
this kept him in a state of excitement bordering on insanity.


It was two o'clock in the afternoon.
 The French had already entered
Moscow.

"Yes, I will approach.
.
.
 "Well then, take me and execute me!" he went on,
speaking to himself and bowing his head with a sad but firm expression.
 He
was obviously drunk.


"They're frightened," he said confidentially in a hoarse voice.
.
 Pierre, coming
out into the corridor, looked with pity and repulsion at the half-crazy
old man.
 Makar Alexeevich, frowning with exertion, held on to the pistol
and screamed hoarsely, evidently with some heroic fancy in his head.


"To arms! Board them! No, you shan't get it," he yelled.


"That will do, please, that will do.
 Have the goodness--please, sir, to
let go! Please, sir.
.
.
.


"That's not right, sir.


"It's them! Gracious heavens! O Lord, four of them, horsemen!" she
cried.


Gerasim and the porter let Makar Alexeevich go, and in the now silent
corridor the sound of several hands knocking at the front door could be
heard.
 But the French entered and still Pierre did not
retire--an irresistible curiosity kept him there.
 The officer walked in
front, leaning on a stick and slightly limping.
 Having done
that, the officer, lifting his elbow with a smart gesture, stroked his
mustache and lightly touched his hat.


"Bonjour, la compagnie!" * said he gaily, smiling and looking about him.


"Vous etes le bourgeois?" * the officer asked Gerasim.
 Que diable! Voyons! Ne nous fachons pas, mon
vieux!" * added he, clapping the scared and silent Gerasim on the
shoulder.
 Pierre
moved away from the door.
 What the devil! There, don't let us be cross, old
     fellow!"


Again the officer turned to Gerasim and asked him to show him the rooms
in the house.


"Master, not here--don't understand.
.
 me, you.
" said Gerasim, trying
to render his words more comprehensible by contorting them.


Still smiling, the French officer spread out his hands before Gerasim's
nose, intimating that he did not understand him either, and moved,
limping, to the door at which Pierre was standing.
 Pierre wished to go
away and conceal himself, but at that moment he saw Makar Alexeevich
appearing at the open kitchen door with the pistol in his hand.


"Board them!" yelled the tipsy man, trying to press the trigger.
 Hearing
the yell the officer turned round, and at the same moment Pierre threw
himself on the drunkard.
 The
Frenchman turned pale and rushed to the door.


"You are not wounded?" he asked.
 "Who is that man?" said he, looking sternly at Pierre.
 "He is an unfortunate
madman who did not know what he was doing.
"

The officer went up to Makar Alexeevich and took him by the collar.


"Brigand! You shall pay for this," said the Frenchman, letting go
of him.


Pierre continued, in French, to persuade the officer not to hold that
drunken imbecile to account.
 The Frenchman listened in silence with the
same gloomy expression, but suddenly turned to Pierre with a smile.


"You have saved my life.
 You are French," said he.
 Ramballe,
captain of the 13th Light Regiment--was undoubtedly a very great deed.


But however indubitable that conclusion and the officer's conviction
based upon it, Pierre felt it necessary to disillusion him.


"I am Russian," he said quickly.


"Tut, tut, tut! Tell that to others," said the officer, waving his
finger before his nose and smiling.
 "You shall tell me all about that
presently.
 I am delighted to meet a compatriot.


Even if Pierre were not a Frenchman, having once received that loftiest
of human appellations he could not renounce it, said the officer's look
and tone.
 In reply to his last question Pierre again explained who Makar
Alexeevich was and how just before their arrival that drunken imbecile
had seized the loaded pistol which they had not had time to recover from
him, and begged the officer to let the deed go unpunished.
 You ask his pardon? I grant it
you.
 Lead that man away!" said he quickly and energetically, and taking
the arm of Pierre whom he had promoted to be a Frenchman for saving his
life, he went with him into the room.


The soldiers in the yard, hearing the shot, came into the passage asking
what had happened, and expressed their readiness to punish the culprits,
but the officer sternly checked them.


"You will be called in when you are wanted," he said.


The soldiers went out again, and the orderly, who had meanwhile had time
to visit the kitchen, came up to his officer.


"Captain, there is soup and a leg of mutton in the kitchen," said he.

"Shall I serve them up?"

"Yes, and some wine," answered the captain.






CHAPTER XXIX


When the French officer went into the room with Pierre the latter again
thought it his duty to assure him that he was not French and wished to
go away, but the officer would not hear of it.
 He was so very polite,
amiable, good-natured, and genuinely grateful to Pierre for saving his
life that Pierre had not the heart to refuse, and sat down with him in
the parlor--the first room they entered.

"I owe my life to you and offer you my friendship.
 I offer you my friendship.
 That
is all I can say.
"

There was so much good nature and nobility (in the French sense of the
word) in the officer's voice, in the expression of his face and in
his gestures, that Pierre, unconsciously smiling in response to the
Frenchman's smile, pressed the hand held out to him.
 "Will you now be so good as to tell me with whom I have
the honor of conversing so pleasantly, instead of being in the ambulance
with that maniac's bullet in my body?"

Pierre replied that he could not tell him his name and, blushing,
began to try to invent a name and to say something about his reason for
concealing it, but the Frenchman hastily interrupted him.


"Oh, please!" said he.
 "I understand your reasons.
.
.

a superior officer perhaps.
 You have borne arms against us.
 That's not
my business.
 I owe you my life.
 That is enough for me.
 Pierre bent his head.
 "Your baptismal name, if you
please.
 That is all I ask.
.
.
 That's all I
want to know.
 He also brought a bottle of kvass,
taken from the kitchen for them to try.
 He wrapped the bottle up
to its neck in a table napkin and poured out wine for himself and for
Pierre.


"Yes, my dear Monsieur Pierre, I owe you a fine votive candle for
saving me from that maniac.
.
.
.
 Here is one I got at Wagram" (he touched his side) "and a
second at Smolensk"--he showed a scar on his cheek--"and this leg which
as you see does not want to march, I got that on the seventh at the
great battle of la Moskowa.
 I pity those who did not see
it.
 Three times we reached the guns and three times we were thrown
back like cardboard figures.
 Oh, it was beautiful, Monsieur Pierre! Your
grenadiers were splendid, by heaven! I saw them close up their ranks six
times in succession and march as if on parade.
 Fine fellows! Our King of
Naples, who knows what's what, cried 'Bravo!' Ha, ha! So you are one of
us soldiers!" he added, smiling, after a momentary pause.
.
.
 with the fair" (he winked and smiled), "that's what the
French are, Monsieur Pierre, aren't they?"

The captain was so naively and good-humoredly gay, so real, and so
pleased with himself that Pierre almost winked back as he looked merrily
at him.


"Apropos, tell me please, is it true that the women have all left
Moscow? What a queer idea! What had they to be afraid of?"

"Would not the French ladies leave Paris if the Russians entered it?"
asked Pierre.
 "What a thing to say!" he exclaimed.
.

But Paris, Paris.
"

"Paris--the capital of the world," Pierre finished his remark for him.


The captain looked at Pierre.


"Well, if you hadn't told me you were Russian, I should have wagered
that you were Parisian! You have that.
.
.
.
" and
having uttered this compliment, he again gazed at him in silence.


"I have been in Paris.
 I spent years there," said Pierre.
 Paris!.
.
 You can tell a Parisian two leagues off.
 Paris is Talma, la
Duchenois, Potier, the Sorbonne, the boulevards," and noticing that
his conclusion was weaker than what had gone before, he added quickly:
"There is only one Paris in the world.
 Well, I don't esteem you the less for it.
"

Under the influence of the wine he had drunk, and after the days he had
spent alone with his depressing thoughts, Pierre involuntarily enjoyed
talking with this cheerful and good-natured man.


"To return to your ladies--I hear they are lovely.
 What a wretched idea
to go and bury themselves in the steppes when the French army is
in Moscow.
 What a chance those girls have missed! Your peasants,
now--that's another thing; but you civilized people, you ought to know
us better than that.
 We took Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, Naples, Rome,
Warsaw, all the world's capitals.
.
 We are feared, but we are loved.
 And then the Emperor.
" he began, but Pierre
interrupted him.
.
?"

"The Emperor? He is generosity, mercy, justice, order, genius--that's
what the Emperor is! It is I, Ramballe, who tell you so.
.
 My father was an emigrant count.
.
 But
that man has vanquished me.
 He has taken hold of me.
 I could not resist
the sight of the grandeur and glory with which he has covered France.
"

"Is he in Moscow?" Pierre stammered with a guilty look.


"No, he will make his entry tomorrow," he replied, and continued his
talk.


Their conversation was interrupted by the cries of several voices at
the gate and by Morel, who came to say that some Wurttemberg hussars had
come and wanted to put up their horses in the yard where the captain's
horses were.
 The German who knew little French, answered the two first
questions by giving the names of his regiment and of his commanding
officer, but in reply to the third question which he did not understand
said, introducing broken French into his own German, that he was the
quartermaster of the regiment and his commander had ordered him to
occupy all the houses one after another.
 Pierre, who knew German,
translated what the German said to the captain and gave the captain's
reply to the Wurttemberg hussar in German.
 When he had understood what
was said to him, the German submitted and took his men elsewhere.


When he returned to the room Pierre was sitting in the same place as
before, with his head in his hands.
 When the captain went out and he
was left alone, suddenly he came to himself and realized the position
he was in.
 Painful as
that was it was not that which tormented Pierre at the moment.
 The few glasses of
wine he had drunk and the conversation with this good-natured man had
destroyed the mood of concentrated gloom in which he had spent the last
few days and which was essential for the execution of his design.
 He struggled against the confession of his
weakness but dimly felt that he could not overcome it and that his
former gloomy frame of mind, concerning vengeance, killing, and
self-sacrifice, had been dispersed like dust by contact with the first
man he met.


The captain returned to the room, limping slightly and whistling a tune.
 The tune he was whistling, his gait, and the gesture with which
he twirled his mustache, all now seemed offensive.
 "I will go away
immediately.
 A strange feeling of
weakness tied him to the spot; he wished to get up and go away, but
could not do so.
 His eyes shone and his mustache twitched as if he
were smiling to himself at some amusing thought.


"The colonel of those Wurttembergers is delightful," he suddenly said.

"He's a German, but a nice fellow all the same.
.
 But he's a German.
"
He sat down facing Pierre.
 "By the way, you know German, then?"

Pierre looked at him in silence.


"What is the German for 'shelter'?"

"Shelter?" Pierre repeated.


"Unterkunft," Pierre repeated.


"Onterkoff," said the captain and looked at Pierre for some seconds with
laughing eyes.
 "These Germans are first-rate fools, don't you think so,
Monsieur Pierre?" he concluded.


"Well, let's have another bottle of this Moscow Bordeaux, shall we?
Morel will warm us up another little bottle.
 Morel!" he called out
gaily.


"There now, we're sad," said he, touching Pierre's hand.

"Perhaps it's the state of affairs?"

Pierre did not answer, but looked cordially into the Frenchman's eyes
whose expression of sympathy was pleasing to him.
 Can I do anything for you? Dispose of me.
 It is for life and death.

I say it with my hand on my heart!" said he, striking his chest.


The captain gazed intently at him as he had done when he learned that
"shelter" was Unterkunft in German, and his face suddenly brightened.


"Well, in that case, I drink to our friendship!" he cried gaily, filling
two glasses with wine.


Pierre took one of the glasses and emptied it.
 Ramballe emptied his too,
again pressed Pierre's hand, and leaned his elbows on the table in a
pensive attitude.
 Who would
have said that I should be a soldier and a captain of dragoons in the
service of Bonaparte, as we used to call him? Yet here I am in Moscow
with him.
"

And with a Frenchman's easy and naive frankness the captain told Pierre
the story of his ancestors, his childhood, youth, and manhood, and all
about his relations and his financial and family affairs, "ma pauvre
mere" playing of course an important part in the story.


"But all that is only life's setting, the real thing is love--love! Am I
not right, Monsieur Pierre?" said he, growing animated.
 "Another glass?"

Pierre again emptied his glass and poured himself out a third.


"Oh, women, women!" and the captain, looking with glistening eyes at
Pierre, began talking of love and of his love affairs.
 Though all Ramballe's love
stories had the sensual character which Frenchmen regard as the special
charm and poetry of love, yet he told his story with such sincere
conviction that he alone had experienced and known all the charm of love
and he described women so alluringly that Pierre listened to him with
curiosity.


It was plain that l'amour which the Frenchman was so fond of was not
that low and simple kind that Pierre had once felt for his wife, nor
was it the romantic love stimulated by himself that he experienced for
Natasha.
 (Ramballe despised both these kinds of love equally: the one
he considered the "love of clodhoppers" and the other the "love
of simpletons.
") L'amour which the Frenchman worshiped consisted
principally in the unnaturalness of his relation to the woman and in a
combination of incongruities giving the chief charm to the feeling.


Thus the captain touchingly recounted the story of his love for a
fascinating marquise of thirty-five and at the same time for a charming,
innocent child of seventeen, daughter of the bewitching marquise.
 The
conflict of magnanimity between the mother and the daughter, ending in
the mother's sacrificing herself and offering her daughter in marriage
to her lover, even now agitated the captain, though it was the memory of
a distant past.
 Then he recounted an episode in which the husband
played the part of the lover, and he--the lover--assumed the role of the
husband, as well as several droll incidents from his recollections of
Germany, where "shelter" is called Unterkunft and where the husbands eat
sauerkraut and the young girls are "too blonde.
"

Finally, the latest episode in Poland still fresh in the captain's
memory, and which he narrated with rapid gestures and glowing face, was
of how he had saved the life of a Pole (in general, the saving of
life continually occurred in the captain's stories) and the Pole had
entrusted to him his enchanting wife (parisienne de coeur) while himself
entering the French service.


Listening to the captain's tales, Pierre--as often happens late in the
evening and under the influence of wine--followed all that was told him,
understood it all, and at the same time followed a train of personal
memories which, he knew not why, suddenly arose in his mind.
 While
listening to these love stories his own love for Natasha unexpectedly
rose to his mind, and going over the pictures of that love in his
imagination he mentally compared them with Ramballe's tales.
 At the time of that meeting it had
not produced an effect upon him--he had not even once recalled it.
 But
now it seemed to him that that meeting had had in it something very
important and poetic.
.
.


Challenged by this question Pierre raised his head and felt a need to
express the thoughts that filled his mind.
 He said that in all
his life he had loved and still loved only one woman, and that she could
never be his.


"Tiens!" said the captain.


Pierre then explained that he had loved this woman from his earliest
years, but that he had not dared to think of her because she was too
young, and because he had been an illegitimate son without a name.


The captain made a gesture signifying that even if he did not understand
it he begged Pierre to continue.


"Platonic love, clouds.
.


Whether it was the wine he had drunk, or an impulse of frankness, or the
thought that this man did not, and never would, know any of those who
played a part in his story, or whether it was all these things together,
something loosened Pierre's tongue.
 Urged on by Ramballe's questions
he also told what he had at first concealed--his own position and even
his name.


When it was late at night they went out together into the street.
 To the
right and high up in the sky was the sickle of the waning moon and
opposite to it hung that bright comet which was connected in Pierre's
heart with his love.
 At the gate stood Gerasim, the cook, and two
Frenchmen.
 Their laughter and their mutually incomprehensible remarks in
two languages could be heard.
 They were looking at the glow seen in the
town.
 "There now,
how good it is, what more does one need?" thought he.


Without taking leave of his new friend, Pierre left the gate with
unsteady steps and returning to his room lay down on the sofa and
immediately fell asleep.






CHAPTER XXX


The glow of the first fire that began on the second of September was
watched from the various roads by the fugitive Muscovites and by the
retreating troops, with many different feelings.


The Rostov party spent the night at Mytishchi, fourteen miles from
Moscow.
 They had started so late on the first of September, the road
had been so blocked by vehicles and troops, so many things had been
forgotten for which servants were sent back, that they had decided to
spend that night at a place three miles out of Moscow.
 At ten o'clock that evening the Rostov family and
the wounded traveling with them were all distributed in the yards and
huts of that large village.
 He had
spent the first night in the same yard as the Rostovs.
 One glow had long been visible and everybody knew that it was
Little Mytishchi burning--set on fire by Mamonov's Cossacks.


"But look here, brothers, there's another fire!" remarked an orderly.


All turned their attention to the glow.


"But they told us Little Mytishchi had been set on fire by Mamonov's
Cossacks.
"

"But that's not Mytishchi, it's farther away.
"

"Look, it must be in Moscow!"

Two of the gazers went round to the other side of the coach and sat down
on its steps.


"It's more to the left, why, Little Mytishchi is over there, and this is
right on the other side.
"

Several men joined the first two.
 "That's a fire in Moscow: either in
the Sushchevski or the Rogozhski quarter.
"

No one replied to this remark and for some time they all gazed silently
at the spreading flames of the second fire in the distance.
.
.
 The count will be
calling and there's nobody there; go and gather the clothes together.
"

"I only ran out to get some water," said Mishka.


Daniel Terentich made no reply, and again for a long time they were all
silent.


"God have mercy.
.
.
" said another voice.
 Lord have mercy on us sinners!"

"They'll put it out, no fear!"

"Who's to put it out?" Daniel Terentich, who had hitherto been silent,
was heard to say.
 "Moscow it is,
brothers," said he.
.
.
" his voice faltered,
and he gave way to an old man's sob.


And it was as if they had all only waited for this to realize the
significance for them of the glow they were watching.
 Sighs were heard,
words of prayer, and the sobbing of the count's old valet.
 Petya was no longer
with the family, he had gone on with his regiment which was making for
Troitsa.
 "I believe the whole of Moscow will burn, there's an awful
glow! Natasha, do look! You can see it from the window," she said to her
cousin, evidently wishing to distract her mind.


But Natasha looked at her as if not understanding what was said to her
and again fixed her eyes on the corner of the stove.
 The countess had seldom been so angry with anyone as
she was with Sonya.
 Sonya had cried and begged to be forgiven and now,
as if trying to atone for her fault, paid unceasing attention to her
cousin.


"What's burning?" asked Natasha.
 "Oh, yes, Moscow.


"But you didn't see it!"

"Yes, really I did," Natasha replied in a voice that pleaded to be left
in peace.


Both the countess and Sonya understood that, naturally, neither Moscow
nor the burning of Moscow nor anything else could seem of importance to
Natasha.


The count returned and lay down behind the partition.
 The countess went
up to her daughter and touched her head with the back of her hand as she
was wont to do when Natasha was ill, then touched her forehead with her
lips as if to feel whether she was feverish, and finally kissed her.


"You are cold.
 You'd better lie down," said
the countess.


"Lie down? All right, I will.


"Natasha, undress, darling; lie down on my bed.
 Madame Schoss
and the two girls were to sleep on some hay on the floor.
 Through the open
window the moans of the adjutant could be heard more distinctly.
 She put
her head out into the damp night air, and the countess saw her slim neck
shaking with sobs and throbbing against the window frame.
 Natasha knew
it was not Prince Andrew who was moaning.
 She knew Prince Andrew was in
the same yard as themselves and in a part of the hut across the passage;
but this dreadful incessant moaning made her sob.


"Lie down, darling; lie down, my pet," said the countess, softly
touching Natasha's shoulders.
 "Come, lie down.
.
.
 I'll lie down at once," said Natasha, and began hurriedly
undressing, tugging at the tapes of her petticoat.


When she had thrown off her dress and put on a dressing jacket, she sat
down with her foot under her on the bed that had been made up on the
floor, jerked her thin and rather short plait of hair to the front,
and began replaiting it.
 Her long, thin, practiced fingers rapidly
unplaited, replaited, and tied up her plait.
 Her head moved from side
to side from habit, but her eyes, feverishly wide, looked fixedly before
her.


"Natasha, you'd better lie in the middle," said Sonya.


"I'll stay here," muttered Natasha.


The countess, Madame Schoss, and Sonya undressed hastily and lay down.


For a long time Natasha listened attentively to the sounds that reached
her from inside and outside the room and did not move.
 First she heard
her mother praying and sighing and the creaking of her bed under
her, then Madame Schoss' familiar whistling snore and Sonya's gentle
breathing.
 Then the countess called to Natasha.


"I think she's asleep, Mamma," said Sonya softly.


After a short silence the countess spoke again but this time no one
replied.


As if to celebrate a victory over everybody, a cricket chirped in a
crack in the wall.
 A cock crowed far off and another replied near
by.
 Natasha sat up.


"Sonya, are you asleep? Mamma?" she whispered.


No one replied.
 Natasha rose slowly and carefully, crossed herself, and
stepped cautiously on the cold and dirty floor with her slim, supple,
bare feet.


It seemed to her that something heavy was beating rhythmically against
all the walls of the room: it was her own heart, sinking with alarm and
terror and overflowing with love.
 It was dark
in there.
 In the farthest corner, on a bench beside a bed on which
something was lying, stood a tallow candle with a long, thick, and
smoldering wick.


From the moment she had been told that morning of Prince Andrew's wound
and his presence there, Natasha had resolved to see him.
 She did not
know why she had to, she knew the meeting would be painful, but felt the
more convinced that it was necessary.


All day she had lived only in hope of seeing him that night.
 How was he maimed? What was left of him? Was he like that incessant
moaning of the adjutant's? Yes, he was altogether like that.
 When she saw an
indistinct shape in the corner, and mistook his knees raised under the
quilt for his shoulders, she imagined a horrible body there, and stood
still in terror.
 She
cautiously took one step and then another, and found herself in the
middle of a small room containing baggage.
 Another man--Timokhin--was
lying in a corner on the benches beneath the icons, and two others--the
doctor and a valet--lay on the floor.


The valet sat up and whispered something.
 Timokhin, kept awake by the
pain in his wounded leg, gazed with wide-open eyes at this strange
apparition of a girl in a white chemise, dressing jacket, and nightcap.

The valet's sleepy, frightened exclamation, "What do you want? What's
the matter?" made Natasha approach more swiftly to what was lying in the
corner.
 Horribly unlike a man as that body looked, she must see him.

She passed the valet, the snuff fell from the candle wick, and she saw
Prince Andrew clearly with his arms outside the quilt, and such as she
had always seen him.


He was the same as ever, but the feverish color of his face, his
glittering eyes rapturously turned toward her, and especially his neck,
delicate as a child's, revealed by the turn-down collar of his shirt,
gave him a peculiarly innocent, childlike look, such as she had never
seen on him before.
 She went up to him and with a swift, flexible,
youthful movement dropped on her knees.
 His feverish state and the
inflammation of his bowels, which were injured, were in the doctor's
opinion sure to carry him off.
 But on the seventh day he ate with
pleasure a piece of bread with some tea, and the doctor noticed that his
temperature was lower.
 He had regained consciousness that morning.
 The pain caused by his removal into
the hut had made him groan aloud and again lose consciousness.
 When he
had been placed on his camp bed he lay for a long time motionless with
closed eyes.
 He was dissatisfied because he
knew by experience that if his patient did not die now, he would do so
a little later with greater suffering.


They gave Prince Andrew some tea.
 Is Timokhin here?" he asked.
"

"How's your wound?"

"Mine, sir? All right.
 But how about you?"

Prince Andrew again pondered as if trying to remember something.
 I haven't one.
 Prince Andrew answered all his questions reluctantly but
reasonably, and then said he wanted a bolster placed under him as he was
uncomfortable and in great pain.
 The doctor and valet lifted the cloak
with which he was covered and, making wry faces at the noisome smell of
mortifying flesh that came from the wound, began examining that dreadful
place.
 The doctor was very much displeased about something and made a
change in the dressings, turning the wounded man over so that he groaned
again and grew unconscious and delirious from the agony.
 He kept asking
them to get him the book and put it under him.


"What trouble would it be to you?" he said.


The doctor went into the passage to wash his hands.


"You fellows have no conscience," said he to the valet who was pouring
water over his hands.
 "For just one moment I didn't look after you.
.
.

It's such pain, you know, that I wonder how he can bear it.

After growing confused from pain while being carried into the hut he
again regained consciousness, and while drinking tea once more recalled
all that had happened to him, and above all vividly remembered the
moment at the ambulance station when, at the sight of the sufferings of
a man he disliked, those new thoughts had come to him which promised him
happiness.
 He remembered that he had now a new source of
happiness and that this happiness had something to do with the Gospels.

That was why he asked for a copy of them.
 A healthy man usually thinks of,
feels, and remembers innumerable things simultaneously, but has the
power and will to select one sequence of thoughts or events on which to
fix his whole attention.
 But Prince Andrew's mind was not
in a normal state in that respect.
 All the powers of his mind were more
active and clearer than ever, but they acted apart from his will.
 At times his
brain suddenly began to work with a vigor, clearness, and depth it had
never reached when he was in health, but suddenly in the midst of its
work it would turn to some unexpected idea and he had not the strength
to turn it back again.


"Yes, a new happiness was revealed to me of which man cannot be
deprived," he thought as he lay in the semidarkness of the quiet hut,
gazing fixedly before him with feverish wide open eyes.
 But how did God enjoin that law? And why was the Son.


"But perhaps that's my shirt on the table," he thought, "and that's my
legs, and that is the door, but why is it always stretching and drawing
itself out, and 'piti-piti-piti' and 'ti-ti' and 'piti-piti-piti'.
.
.
 And suddenly thoughts and feelings again swam to the surface of
his mind with peculiar clearness and force.


"Yes--love," he thought again quite clearly.
 "But not love which loves
for something, for some quality, for some purpose, or for some reason,
but the love which I--while dying--first experienced when I saw my enemy
and yet loved him.
 I experienced that feeling of love which is the very
essence of the soul and does not require an object.
 To love one's neighbors, to love one's enemies, to love
everything, to love God in all His manifestations.
 It is possible to
love someone dear to you with human love, but an enemy can only be loved
by divine love.
 What has become of him? Is he alive?.


"When loving with human love one may pass from love to hatred, but
divine love cannot change.
 No, neither death nor anything else can
destroy it.
 He now understood for the
first time all the cruelty of his rejection of her, the cruelty of his
rupture with her.
 "If only it were possible for me to see her once more!
Just once, looking into those eyes to say.
.
.
"


"Piti-piti-piti and ti-ti and piti-piti-piti boom!" flopped the fly.
.

And his attention was suddenly carried into another world, a world of
reality and delirium in which something particular was happening.
 And that sphinx had
the pale face and shining eyes of the very Natasha of whom he had just
been thinking.
 Prince Andrew
wished to return to that former world of pure thought, but he could not,
and delirium drew him back into its domain.
 The soft whispering voice
continued its rhythmic murmur, something oppressed him and stretched
out, and the strange face was before him.
 Prince Andrew collected all
his strength in an effort to recover his senses, he moved a little, and
suddenly there was a ringing in his ears, a dimness in his eyes, and
like a man plunged into water he lost consciousness.
 When he came to
himself, Natasha, that same living Natasha whom of all people he most
longed to love with this new pure divine love that had been revealed to
him, was kneeling before him.
 He realized that it was the real living
Natasha, and he was not surprised but quietly happy.
 Natasha, motionless
on her knees (she was unable to stir), with frightened eyes riveted on
him, was restraining her sobs.
 Her face was pale and rigid.


"You?" he said.
 "How fortunate!"

With a rapid but careful movement Natasha drew nearer to him on her
knees and, taking his hand carefully, bent her face over it and began
kissing it, just touching it lightly with her lips.


"Forgive me!" she whispered, raising her head and glancing at him.

"Forgive me!"

"I love you," said Prince Andrew.
.
!"

"Forgive what?" he asked.


"I love you more, better than before," said Prince Andrew, lifting her
face with his hand so as to look into her eyes.


Those eyes, filled with happy tears, gazed at him timidly,
compassionately, and with joyous love.
 Natasha's thin pale face, with
its swollen lips, was more than plain--it was dreadful.
 But Prince
Andrew did not see that, he saw her shining eyes which were beautiful.

They heard the sound of voices behind them.


Peter the valet, who was now wide awake, had roused the doctor.


"What's this?" said the doctor, rising from his bed.


Like a somnambulist aroused from her sleep Natasha went out of the room
and, returning to her hut, fell sobbing on her bed.



From that time, during all the rest of the Rostovs' journey, at every
halting place and wherever they spent a night, Natasha never left the
wounded Bolkonski, and the doctor had to admit that he had not expected
from a young girl either such firmness or such skill in nursing a
wounded man.
 That something shameful was his yesterday's
conversation with Captain Ramballe.


It was eleven by the clock, but it seemed peculiarly dark out of doors.
 "No, probably he won't make his entry
into Moscow before noon.
 It was difficult
to hide such a big pistol even under his wide coat.
 "No matter, dagger
will do," he said to himself, though when planning his design he had
more than once come to the conclusion that the chief mistake made by the
student in 1809 had been to try to kill Napoleon with a dagger.


Having tied a girdle over his coat and pulled his cap low on his head,
Pierre went down the corridor, trying to avoid making a noise or meeting
the captain, and passed out into the street.


The conflagration, at which he had looked with so much indifference the
evening before, had greatly increased during the night.
 Moscow was on
fire in several places.
 Nicholas on the Arbat, where he had long before
decided that the deed should be done.
 The streets and lanes were deserted.

The air was full of smoke and the smell of burning.
 Besides his
height and stoutness, and the strange morose look of suffering in his
face and whole figure, the Russians stared at Pierre because they could
not make out to what class he could belong.
 At the gate of one house three Frenchmen, who were
explaining something to some Russians who did not understand them,
stopped Pierre asking if he did not know French.
 In another side street a sentinel
standing beside a green caisson shouted at him, but only when the shout
was threateningly repeated and he heard the click of the man's musket as
he raised it did Pierre understand that he had to pass on the other side
of the street.
 He carried his resolution within himself in terror and haste, like
something dreadful and alien to him, for, after the previous night's
experience, he was afraid of losing it.
 But he was not destined to bring
his mood safely to his destination.
 But Pierre did not know this; he was entirely absorbed
in what lay before him, and was tortured--as those are who obstinately
undertake a task that is impossible for them not because of its
difficulty but because of its incompatibility with their natures--by the
fear of weakening at the decisive moment and so losing his self-esteem.


As Pierre approached that street the smoke became denser and denser--he
even felt the heat of the fire.
 Occasionally curly tongues of flame rose
from under the roofs of the houses.
 As he was going along a foot path across a
wide-open space adjoining the Povarskoy on one side and the gardens
of Prince Gruzinski's house on the other, Pierre suddenly heard the
desperate weeping of a woman close to him.
 He stopped as if awakening
from a dream and lifted his head.
 Two
girls of about ten and twelve, dressed in dirty short frocks and cloaks,
were staring at their mother with a look of stupefaction on their pale
frightened faces.
 A dirty, barefooted maid was sitting on a trunk,
and, having undone her pale-colored plait, was pulling it straight
and sniffing at her singed hair.
.
 "My girl.
.
 She's burned! Ooh! Was it for this
I nursed you.
.
.
.
 "Sister must have
taken her, or else where can she be?" he added.


"Monster! Villain!" shouted the woman angrily, suddenly ceasing to weep.
 But this is a monster and neither a
man nor a father! You, honored sir, are a noble man," she went on,
addressing Pierre rapidly between her sobs.
 "The fire broke out
alongside, and blew our way, the maid called out 'Fire!' and we rushed
to collect our things.
 We ran out just as we were.
.
.
.
 This is what we
have brought away.
.
.
 The icons, and my dowry bed, all the rest is lost.

We seized the children.
 But not Katie! Ooh! O Lord!.
" and again she
began to sob.
 "My child, my dear one! Burned, burned!"

"But where was she left?" asked Pierre.


From the expression of his animated face the woman saw that this man
might help her.
.
.
 Aniska, go, you horrid girl, show him the way!" she
cried to the maid, angrily opening her mouth and still farther exposing
her long teeth.


"Show me the way, show me, I.
.
 I'll do it," gasped Pierre rapidly.
 The
whole street was full of clouds of black smoke.
 Tongues of flame here
and there broke through that cloud.
 A great number of people crowded in
front of the conflagration.
 In the middle of the street stood a French
general saying something to those around him.
 Pierre, accompanied by the
maid, was advancing to the spot where the general stood, but the French
soldiers stopped him.


"On ne passe pas!" * cried a voice.

She ran across the street, turned down a side street to the left, and,
passing three houses, turned into a yard on the right.


As Pierre passed through the fence gate, he was enveloped by hot air and
involuntarily stopped.


"Ooh!" wailed the girl, pointing to the wing.
 "That's it, that was our
lodging.
 You've burned to death, our treasure, Katie, my precious little
missy! Ooh!" lamented Aniska, who at the sight of the fire felt that she
too must give expression to her feelings.
 He felt
young, bright, adroit, and resolute.
 He ran round to the other side of
the lodge and was about to dash into that part of it which was still
standing, when just above his head he heard several voices shouting
and then a cracking sound and the ring of something heavy falling close
beside him.
 Haven't you seen a child?" cried Pierre.


"A child?" shouted a Frenchman from above.
 "I did hear something
squealing in the garden.
 Perhaps it's his brat that the fellow is
looking for.
 After all, one must be human, you know.
.
.
.
 "Wait a bit--I'm coming down.
"

And a minute or two later the Frenchman, a black-eyed fellow with a spot
on his cheek, in shirt sleeves, really did jump out of a window on the
ground floor, and clapping Pierre on the shoulder ran with him into the
garden.


"Hurry up, you others!" he called out to his comrades.
 "It's getting
hot.


"There is your child! Oh, a girl, so much the better!" said the
Frenchman.


Breathless with joy, Pierre ran to the little girl and was going to take
her in his arms.
 But seeing a stranger the sickly, scrofulous-looking
child, unattractively like her mother, began to yell and run away.

Pierre, however, seized her and lifted her in his arms.
 She screamed
desperately and angrily and tried with her little hands to pull Pierre's
hands away and to bite them with her slobbering mouth.
 Pierre was seized
by a sense of horror and repulsion such as he had experienced when
touching some nasty little animal.
 It was now, however,
impossible to get back the way he had come; the maid, Aniska, was no
longer there, and Pierre with a feeling of pity and disgust pressed the
wet, painfully sobbing child to himself as tenderly as he could and ran
with her through the garden seeking another way out.






CHAPTER XXXIV


Having run through different yards and side streets, Pierre got back
with his little burden to the Gruzinski garden at the corner of the
Povarskoy.
 Glowing with the
heat and from running, he felt at that moment more strongly than ever
the sense of youth, animation, and determination that had come on him
when he ran to save the child.
 She had now become quiet and, clinging
with her little hands to Pierre's coat, sat on his arm gazing about
her like some little wild animal.
 He glanced at her occasionally with a
slight smile.


He did not find the civil servant or his wife where he had left them.
 He
walked among the crowd with rapid steps, scanning the various faces he
met.
 Involuntarily he noticed a Georgian or Armenian family
consisting of a very handsome old man of Oriental type, wearing a new,
cloth-covered, sheepskin coat and new boots, an old woman of similar
type, and a young woman.
 That very young woman seemed to Pierre the
perfection of Oriental beauty, with her sharply outlined, arched,
black eyebrows and the extraordinarily soft, bright color of her long,
beautiful, expressionless face.
 Amid the scattered property and the
crowd on the open space, she, in her rich satin cloak with a bright
lilac shawl on her head, suggested a delicate exotic plant thrown out
onto the snow.
 She was sitting on some bundles a little behind the old
woman, and looked from under her long lashes with motionless, large,
almond-shaped eyes at the ground before her.
 Evidently she was aware
of her beauty and fearful because of it.
 Her face struck Pierre and,
hurrying along by the fence, he turned several times to look at her.

When he had reached the fence, still without finding those he sought, he
stopped and looked about him.


With the child in his arms his figure was now more conspicuous than
before, and a group of Russians, both men and women, gathered about him.


"Have you lost anyone, my dear fellow? You're of the gentry yourself,
aren't you? Whose child is it?" they asked him.
 "They left in the morning.


"That's Mary Nikolievna! They went inside the garden when these wolves
swooped down," said the woman, pointing to the French soldiers.


"Go over that way, they're there.
 "It's she.
 Here, this way!"

But Pierre was not listening to the woman.
 He had for some seconds been
intently watching what was going on a few steps away.
 He wore a woman's loose gown
of frieze, blue trousers, and large torn Hessian boots.
 "Give her back to them, give her
back!" he almost shouted, putting the child, who began screaming, on the
ground, and again looking at the Frenchman and the Armenian family.


The old man was already sitting barefoot.
 The little Frenchman had
secured his second boot and was slapping one boot against the other.


While Pierre was running the few steps that separated him from the
Frenchman, the tall marauder in the frieze gown was already tearing
from her neck the necklace the young Armenian was wearing, and the young
woman, clutching at her neck, screamed piercingly.


"Let that woman alone!" exclaimed Pierre hoarsely in a furious voice,
seizing the soldier by his round shoulders and throwing him aside.


The soldier fell, got up, and ran away.
 He rushed at the barefooted Frenchman
and, before the latter had time to draw his sword, knocked him off his
feet and hammered him with his fists.
 Shouts of approval were heard
from the crowd around, and at the same moment a mounted patrol of French
Uhlans appeared from round the corner.
 The Uhlans came up at a trot to
Pierre and the Frenchman and surrounded them.


"Ah, a weapon?" said the officer and turned to the barefooted soldier
who had been arrested with Pierre.
 "Do you speak French?"

Pierre looked around him with bloodshot eyes and did not reply.


"Do you speak French?" the officer asked again, keeping at a distance
from Pierre.
 "Call the interpreter.
"

A little man in Russian civilian clothes rode out from the ranks, and
by his clothes and manner of speaking Pierre at once knew him to be a
French salesman from one of the Moscow shops.


"He does not look like a common man," said the interpreter, after a
searching look at Pierre.


"Who are you?" asked the interpreter in poor Russian.
 "You must answer
the chief.
"

"I will not tell you who I am.


"Ah, ah!" muttered the officer with a frown.
 "Well then, march!"

A crowd had collected round the Uhlans.
 Nearest to Pierre stood the
pockmarked peasant woman with the little girl, and when the patrol
started she moved forward.


"Where are they taking you to, you poor dear?" said she.
 "And the little
girl, the little girl, what am I to do with her if she's not theirs?"
said the woman.


Pierre was as if intoxicated.
 "She is bringing me my daughter whom
I have just saved from the flames," said he.
 "Good-by!" And without
knowing how this aimless lie had escaped him, he went along with
resolute and triumphant steps between the French soldiers.
 After marching through a number
of streets the patrol arrested five more Russian suspects: a small
shopkeeper, two seminary students, a peasant, and a house serf, besides
several looters.
 But of all these various suspected characters, Pierre
was considered to be the most suspicious of all.
 When they had all been
brought for the night to a large house on the Zubov Rampart that was
being used as a guardhouse, Pierre was placed apart under strict guard.
 But the calm,
luxurious life of Petersburg, concerned only about phantoms and
reflections of real life, went on in its old way and made it hard,
except by a great effort, to realize the danger and the difficult
position of the Russian people.
 There were the same receptions and
balls, the same French theater, the same court interests and service
interests and intrigues as usual.
 Only in the very highest circles were
attempts made to keep in mind the difficulties of the actual position.

Stories were whispered of how differently the two Empresses behaved
in these difficult circumstances.
 The Empress Marya, concerned for
the welfare of the charitable and educational institutions under her
patronage, had given directions that they should all be removed to
Kazan, and the things belonging to these institutions had already been
packed up.


At Anna Pavlovna's on the twenty-sixth of August, the very day of the
battle of Borodino, there was a soiree, the chief feature of which was
to be the reading of a letter from His Lordship the Bishop when sending
the Emperor an icon of the Venerable Sergius.
 It was regarded as a model
of ecclesiastical, patriotic eloquence.
 (He used to read at the Empress'.
 This reading,
as was always the case at Anna Pavlovna's soirees, had a political
significance.
 A good many people had already arrived, but Anna
Pavlovna, not yet seeing all those whom she wanted in her drawing room,
did not let the reading begin but wound up the springs of a general
conversation.

She had fallen ill unexpectedly a few days previously, had missed
several gatherings of which she was usually ornament, and was said to be
receiving no one, and instead of the celebrated Petersburg doctors who
usually attended her had entrusted herself to some Italian doctor who
was treating her in some new and unusual way.


They all knew very well that the enchanting countess' illness arose from
an inconvenience resulting from marrying two husbands at the same time,
and that the Italian's cure consisted in removing such inconvenience;
but in Anna Pavlovna's presence no one dared to think of this or even
appear to know it.


"They say the poor countess is very ill.
 The doctor says it is angina
pectoris.
.
" and
the word angina was repeated with great satisfaction.


"The count is pathetic, they say.
 He cried like a child when the doctor
told him the case was dangerous.
"

"Oh, it would be a terrible loss, she is an enchanting woman.
 Oh, she is certainly the most charming woman in the world," she
went on, with a smile at her own enthusiasm.
 She
is very unfortunate!" added Anna Pavlovna.


"Your information maybe better than mine," Anna Pavlovna suddenly and
venomously retorted on the inexperienced young man, "but I know on good
authority that this doctor is a very learned and able man.
 He is private
physician to the Queen of Spain.
"

And having thus demolished the young man, Anna Pavlovna turned to
another group where Bilibin was talking about the Austrians: having
wrinkled up his face he was evidently preparing to smooth it out again
and utter one of his mots.


And Bilibin repeated the actual words of the diplomatic dispatch, which
he had himself composed.


"The path to Warsaw, perhaps," Prince Hippolyte remarked loudly and
unexpectedly.

Prince Hippolyte himself glanced around with amused surprise.
 He knew no
more than the others what his words meant.
 During his diplomatic career
he had more than once noticed that such utterances were received as very
witty, and at every opportunity he uttered in that way the first words
that entered his head.
 "It may turn out very well," he thought, "but
if not, they'll know how to arrange matters.
" And really, during the
awkward silence that ensued, that insufficiently patriotic person
entered whom Anna Pavlovna had been waiting for and wished to convert,
and she, smiling and shaking a finger at Hippolyte, invited Prince
Vasili to the table and bringing him two candles and the manuscript
begged him to begin.
 Everyone became silent.



"Most Gracious Sovereign and Emperor!" Prince Vasili sternly declaimed,
looking round at his audience as if to inquire whether anyone had
anything to say to the contrary.
 But no one said anything.
 "Moscow, our
ancient capital, the New Jerusalem, receives her Christ"--he placed a
sudden emphasis on the word her--"as a mother receives her zealous sons
into her arms, and through the gathering mists, foreseeing the brilliant
glory of thy rule, sings in exultation, 'Hosanna, blessed is he that
cometh!'"


Prince Vasili pronounced these last words in a tearful voice.


Bilibin attentively examined his nails, and many of those present
appeared intimidated, as if asking in what they were to blame.
 Anna
Pavlovna whispered the next words in advance, like an old woman
muttering the prayer at Communion: "Let the bold and insolent
Goliath.
.
.
" she whispered.


Prince Vasili continued.
 I grieve that my waning strength prevents rejoicing
in the sight of your most gracious presence.
 I raise fervent prayers to
Heaven that the Almighty may exalt the race of the just, and mercifully
fulfill the desires of Your Majesty.
"


"What force! What a style!" was uttered in approval both of reader and
of author.


Animated by that address Anna Pavlovna's guests talked for a long time
of the state of the fatherland and offered various conjectures as to the
result of the battle to be fought in a few days.


"You will see," said Anna Pavlovna, "that tomorrow, on the Emperor's
birthday, we shall receive news.
 I have a favorable presentiment!"





CHAPTER II


Anna Pavlovna's presentiment was in fact fulfilled.
 It was Kutuzov's report, written from Tatarinova on the
day of the battle.
 It followed that there must have been a victory.
 And at
once, without leaving the church, thanks were rendered to the Creator
for His help and for the victory.
 Everyone believed the victory
to have been complete, and some even spoke of Napoleon's having been
captured, of his deposition, and of the choice of a new ruler for
France.


It is very difficult for events to be reflected in their real strength
and completeness amid the conditions of court life and far from the
scene of action.
 So now the courtiers' pleasure was based as
much on the fact that the news had arrived on the Emperor's birthday as
on the fact of the victory itself.
 Mention was made in Kutuzov's report of the Russian losses,
among which figured the names of Tuchkov, Bagration, and Kutaysov.
 In
the Petersburg world this sad side of the affair again involuntarily
centered round a single incident: Kutaysov's death.
 That day
everyone met with the words:

"What a wonderful coincidence! Just during the service.
 But what a loss
Kutaysov is! How sorry I am!"

"What did I tell about Kutuzov?" Prince Vasili now said with a
prophet's pride.
 "I always said he was the only man capable of defeating
Napoleon.
"

But next day no news arrived from the army and the public mood grew
anxious.
 The courtiers suffered because of the suffering the suspense
occasioned the Emperor.


"Fancy the Emperor's position!" said they, and instead of extolling
Kutuzov as they had done the day before, they condemned him as the cause
of the Emperor's anxiety.
 That day Prince Vasili no longer boasted of
his protege Kutuzov, but remained silent when the commander in chief was
mentioned.
 Moreover, toward evening, as if everything conspired to make
Petersburg society anxious and uneasy, a terrible piece of news was
added.
 Countess Helene Bezukhova had suddenly died of that terrible
malady it had been so agreeable to mention.
 Officially, at large
gatherings, everyone said that Countess Bezukhova had died of a
terrible attack of angina pectoris, but in intimate circles details
were mentioned of how the private physician of the Queen of Spain had
prescribed small doses of a certain drug to produce a certain effect;
but Helene, tortured by the fact that the old count suspected her and
that her husband to whom she had written (that wretched, profligate
Pierre) had not replied, had suddenly taken a very large dose of the
drug, and had died in agony before assistance could be rendered her.

It was said that Prince Vasili and the old count had turned upon the
Italian, but the latter had produced such letters from the unfortunate
deceased that they had immediately let the matter drop.


On the third day after Kutuzov's report a country gentleman arrived from
Moscow, and news of the surrender of Moscow to the French spread through
the whole town.
 This was terrible! What a position for the Emperor to
be in! Kutuzov was a traitor, and Prince Vasili during the visits of
condolence paid to him on the occasion of his daughter's death said of
Kutuzov, whom he had formerly praised (it was excusable for him in his
grief to forget what he had said), that it was impossible to expect
anything else from a blind and depraved old man.
"

As long as this news remained unofficial it was possible to doubt it,
but the next day the following communication was received from Count
Rostopchin:


Prince Kutuzov's adjutant has brought me a letter in which he demands
police officers to guide the army to the Ryazan road.
 He writes that
he is regretfully abandoning Moscow.
 Sire! Kutuzov's action decides the
fate of the capital and of your empire! Russia will shudder to learn of
the abandonment of the city in which her greatness is centered and in
which lie the ashes of your ancestors! I shall follow the army.
 I have
had everything removed, and it only remains for me to weep over the fate
of my fatherland.



On receiving this dispatch the Emperor sent Prince Volkonski to Kutuzov
with the following rescript:


Prince Michael Ilarionovich! Since the twenty-ninth of August I have
received no communication from you, yet on the first of September I
received from the commander in chief of Moscow, via Yaroslavl, the sad
news that you, with the army, have decided to abandon Moscow.
 I am sending this by Adjutant-General Prince
Volkonski, to hear from you the situation of the army and the reasons
that have induced you to take this melancholy decision.






CHAPTER III


Nine days after the abandonment of Moscow, a messenger from Kutuzov
reached Petersburg with the official announcement of that event.
 This
messenger was Michaud, a Frenchman who did not know Russian, but who was
quoique etranger, russe de coeur et d'ame, * as he said of himself.
 Michaud, who had never seen Moscow before the campaign
and who did not know Russian, yet felt deeply moved (as he wrote) when
he appeared before notre tres gracieux souverain * with the news of the
burning of Moscow, dont les flammes eclairaient sa route.
 "The
abandonment of Moscow.
"

"Have they surrendered my ancient capital without a battle?" asked the
Emperor quickly, his face suddenly flushing.


The Emperor listened in silence, not looking at Michaud.


"Has the enemy entered the city?" he asked.


"Yes, sire, and Moscow is now in ashes.
 I left it all in flames,"
replied Michaud in a decided tone, but glancing at the Emperor he was
frightened by what he had done.


The Emperor began to breathe heavily and rapidly, his lower lip
trembled, and tears instantly appeared in his fine blue eyes.
.
.
 I am ready to submit myself in all things to
His will; but tell me, Michaud, how did you leave the army when it
saw my ancient capital abandoned without a battle? Did you not notice
discouragement?.
.
"

Seeing that his most gracious ruler was calm once more, Michaud also
grew calm, but was not immediately ready to reply to the Emperor's
direct and relevant question which required a direct answer.


"Sire, will you allow me to speak frankly as befits a loyal soldier?" he
asked to gain time.


"Colonel, I always require it," replied the Emperor.
"

"Sire!" said Michaud with a subtle, scarcely perceptible smile on his
lips, having now prepared a well-phrased reply, "sire, I left the
whole army, from its chiefs to the lowest soldier, without exception in
desperate and agonized terror.
.
.
"

"How is that?" the Emperor interrupted him, frowning sternly.
.
 Never!"

Michaud had only waited for this to bring out the phrase he had
prepared.
.
.
 "You set me at ease, Colonel.
 The Emperor's mild and handsome face was
flushed and his eyes gleamed with resolution and anger.


"Colonel Michaud, do not forget what I say to you here, perhaps we may
recall it with pleasure someday.
.
.
 Napoleon or I," said the Emperor,
touching his breast.
 "We can no longer both reign together.
 I have
learned to know him, and he will not deceive me any more.
.
.
.


When he heard these words and saw the expression of firm resolution
in the Emperor's eyes, Michaud--quoique etranger, russe de coeur et
d'ame--at that solemn moment felt himself enraptured by all that he had
heard (as he used afterwards to say), and gave expression to his
own feelings and those of the Russian people whose representative he
considered himself to be, in the following words:

"Sire!" said he, "Your Majesty is at this moment signing the glory of
the nation and the salvation of Europe!"

With an inclination of the head the Emperor dismissed him.






CHAPTER IV


It is natural for us who were not living in those days to imagine that
when half Russia had been conquered and the inhabitants were fleeing to
distant provinces, and one levy after another was being raised for the
defense of the fatherland, all Russians from the greatest to the least
were solely engaged in sacrificing themselves, saving their fatherland,
or weeping over its downfall.
 Most of the people at
that time paid no attention to the general progress of events but were
guided only by their private interests, and they were the very people
whose activities at that period were most useful.


Those who tried to understand the general course of events and to take
part in it by self-sacrifice and heroism were the most useless members
of society, they saw everything upside down, and all they did for the
common good turned out to be useless and foolish--like Pierre's and
Mamonov's regiments which looted Russian villages, and the lint the
young ladies prepared and that never reached the wounded, and so on.
 In historic events the rule
forbidding us to eat of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge is specially
applicable.
 Only unconscious action bears fruit, and he who plays a part
in an historic event never understands its significance.
 If he tries to
realize it his efforts are fruitless.
 In Petersburg and
in the provinces at a distance from Moscow, ladies, and gentlemen in
militia uniforms, wept for Russia and its ancient capital and talked of
self-sacrifice and so on; but in the army which retired beyond Moscow
there was little talk or thought of Moscow, and when they caught sight
of its burned ruins no one swore to be avenged on the French, but they
thought about their next pay, their next quarters, of Matreshka the
vivandiere, and like matters.


As the war had caught him in the service, Nicholas Rostov took a close
and prolonged part in the defense of his country, but did so casually,
without any aim at self-sacrifice, and he therefore looked at what was
going on in Russia without despair and without dismally racking his
brains over it.
 Had he been asked what he thought of the state of
Russia, he would have said that it was not his business to think about
it, that Kutuzov and others were there for that purpose, but that he had
heard that the regiments were to be made up to their full strength, that
fighting would probably go on for a long time yet, and that things being
so it was quite likely he might be in command of a regiment in a couple
of years' time.


A few days before the battle of Borodino, Nicholas received the
necessary money and warrants, and having sent some hussars on in
advance, he set out with post horses for Voronezh.
 When--free
from soldiers, wagons, and the filthy traces of a camp--he saw villages
with peasants and peasant women, gentlemen's country houses, fields
where cattle were grazing, posthouses with stationmasters asleep in
them, he rejoiced as though seeing all this for the first time.
 What for
a long while specially surprised and delighted him were the women, young
and healthy, without a dozen officers making up to each of them; women,
too, who were pleased and flattered that a passing officer should joke
with them.


In the highest spirits Nicholas arrived at night at a hotel in Voronezh,
ordered things he had long been deprived of in camp, and next day, very
clean-shaven and in a full-dress uniform he had not worn for a long
time, went to present himself to the authorities.
 Nicholas was in such good spirits that this merely amused him.


From the commander of the militia he drove to the governor.
 He indicated the stud
farms at which Nicholas might procure horses, recommended to him a horse
dealer in the town and a landowner fourteen miles out of town who had
the best horses, and promised to assist him in every way.
 We are at home on Thursdays--today is Thursday, so please come
and see us quite informally," said the governor, taking leave of him.


Immediately on leaving the governor's, Nicholas hired post horses and,
taking his squadron quartermaster with him, drove at a gallop to the
landowner, fourteen miles away, who had the stud.


The landowner to whom Nicholas went was a bachelor, an old cavalryman, a
horse fancier, a sportsman, the possessor of some century-old brandy
and some old Hungarian wine, who had a snuggery where he smoked, and who
owned some splendid horses.


In very few words Nicholas bought seventeen picked stallions for six
thousand rubles--to serve, as he said, as samples of his remounts.

After dining and taking rather too much of the Hungarian wine,
Nicholas--having exchanged kisses with the landowner, with whom he was
already on the friendliest terms--galloped back over abominable roads,
in the brightest frame of mind, continually urging on the driver so as
to be in time for the governor's party.


When he had changed, poured water over his head, and scented himself,
Nicholas arrived at the governor's rather late, but with the phrase
"better late than never" on his lips.


It was not a ball, nor had dancing been announced, but everyone knew
that Catherine Petrovna would play valses and the ecossaise on the
clavichord and that there would be dancing, and so everyone had come as
to a ball.


Provincial life in 1812 went on very much as usual, but with this
difference, that it was livelier in the towns in consequence of the
arrival of many wealthy families from Moscow, and as in everything that
went on in Russia at that time a special recklessness was noticeable, an
"in for a penny, in for a pound--who cares?" spirit, and the inevitable
small talk, instead of turning on the weather and mutual acquaintances,
now turned on Moscow, the army, and Napoleon.


The society gathered together at the governor's was the best in
Voronezh.
 George, the hussar remount officer, the good-natured
and well-bred Count Rostov.
 Among the men was an Italian prisoner, an
officer of the French army; and Nicholas felt that the presence of that
prisoner enhanced his own importance as a Russian hero.
 At posting stations, at inns, and in the
landowner's snuggery, maidservants had been flattered by his notice, and
here too at the governor's party there were (as it seemed to Nicholas)
an inexhaustible number of pretty young women, married and unmarried,
impatiently awaiting his notice.
 The women and girls flirted with him
and, from the first day, the people concerned themselves to get this
fine young daredevil of an hussar married and settled down.
"

Catherine Petrovna did actually play valses and the ecossaise, and
dancing began in which Nicholas still further captivated the provincial
society by his agility.
 His particularly free manner of dancing even
surprised them all.
 Nicholas was himself rather surprised at the way he
danced that evening.
 He had never danced like that in Moscow and would
even have considered such a very free and easy manner improper and in
bad form, but here he felt it incumbent on him to astonish them all by
something unusual, something they would have to accept as the regular
thing in the capital though new to them in the provinces.

With the naive conviction of young men in a merry mood that other men's
wives were created for them, Rostov did not leave the lady's side and
treated her husband in a friendly and conspiratorial style, as if,
without speaking of it, they knew how capitally Nicholas and the lady
would get on together.
 But the
latter's good-natured naivete was so boundless that sometimes even he
involuntarily yielded to Nicholas' good humor.






CHAPTER V


Nicholas sat leaning slightly forward in an armchair, bending closely
over the blonde lady and paying her mythological compliments with a
smile that never left his face.
 Her eyes" (Nicholas looked at his
partner) "are blue, her mouth coral and ivory; her figure" (he glanced
at her shoulders) "like Diana's.
.
"

The husband came up and sullenly asked his wife what she was talking
about.


"Ah, Nikita Ivanych!" cried Nicholas, rising politely, and as if wishing
Nikita Ivanych to share his joke, he began to tell him of his intention
to elope with a blonde lady.
 The governor's good-natured
wife came up with a look of disapproval.


"Anna Ignatyevna wants to see you, Nicholas," said she, pronouncing the
name so that Nicholas at once understood that Anna Ignatyevna was a very
important person.
 Who is she?"

"Anna Ignatyevna Malvintseva.
 She has heard from her niece how you
rescued her.
 Can you guess?"

"I rescued such a lot of them!" said Nicholas.


"Her niece, Princess Bolkonskaya.
 She is here in Voronezh with her aunt.
 Why, are.
.
?"

"Not a bit! Please don't, Aunt!"

"Very well, very well!.
.
 This was Malvintseva, Princess Mary's
aunt on her mother's side, a rich, childless widow who always lived in
Voronezh.
 She looked at him and, screwing up her eyes sternly, continued
to upbraid the general who had won from her.
"

After a few words about Princess Mary and her late father, whom
Malvintseva had evidently not liked, and having asked what Nicholas
knew of Prince Andrew, who also was evidently no favorite of hers, the
important old lady dismissed Nicholas after repeating her invitation to
come to see her.


Nicholas promised to come and blushed again as he bowed.
 At the mention
of Princess Mary he experienced a feeling of shyness and even of fear,
which he himself did not understand.


When he had parted from Malvintseva Nicholas wished to return to the
dancing, but the governor's little wife placed her plump hand on his
sleeve and, saying that she wanted to have a talk with him, led him to
her sitting room, from which those who were there immediately withdrew
so as not to be in her way.


"I will make a match for you with the princess.
 Catherine Petrovna
speaks of Lily, but I say, no--the princess! Do you want me to do it? I
am sure your mother will be grateful to me.
"

"Not at all," replied Nicholas as if offended at the idea.
 "But,
my dear boy, among other things you are too attentive to the other, the
blonde.
.
"

"Oh no, we are good friends with him," said Nicholas in the simplicity
of his heart; it did not enter his head that a pastime so pleasant to
himself might not be pleasant to someone else.
.
.


"But see here, to tell the truth, Aunt.
.
"

"What is it, my dear? Come, let's sit down here," said she.


Nicholas suddenly felt a desire and need to tell his most intimate
thoughts (which he would not have told to his mother, his sister, or
his friend) to this woman who was almost a stranger.
 When he afterwards
recalled that impulse to unsolicited and inexplicable frankness which
had very important results for him, it seemed to him--as it seems to
everyone in such cases--that it was merely some silly whim that seized
him: yet that burst of frankness, together with other trifling events,
had immense consequences for him and for all his family.
"

"Oh yes, I understand," said the governor's wife.
 In the first place I like her very much, I feel drawn to her; and
then, after I met her under such circumstances--so strangely, the idea
often occurred to me: 'This is fate.
' Especially if you remember that
Mamma had long been thinking of it; but I had never happened to meet her
before, somehow it had always happened that we did not meet.
 And as long
as my sister Natasha was engaged to her brother it was of course out of
the question for me to think of marrying her.
.
 and then everything.
.
 I never told this to anyone
and never will, only to you.
.
.
 So you see there can be no question about-" said Nicholas
incoherently and blushing.


"My dear boy, what a way to look at it! You know Sonya has nothing and
you yourself say your Papa's affairs are in a very bad way.
 And what
about your mother? It would kill her, that's one thing.
 And what sort of
life would it be for Sonya--if she's a girl with a heart? Your mother
in despair, and you all ruined.
.
"

Nicholas remained silent.
 It comforted him to hear these arguments.


"All the same, Aunt, it is impossible," he rejoined with a sigh, after
a short pause.
 "Besides, would the princess have me? And besides, she is
now in mourning.


"What a matchmaker you are, Aunt.
.
" said Nicholas, kissing her plump
little hand.






CHAPTER VI


On reaching Moscow after her meeting with Rostov, Princess Mary had
found her nephew there with his tutor, and a letter from Prince Andrew
giving her instructions how to get to her Aunt Malvintseva at Voronezh.

That feeling akin to temptation which had tormented her during her
father's illness, since his death, and especially since her meeting with
Rostov was smothered by arrangements for the journey, anxiety about her
brother, settling in a new house, meeting new people, and attending to
her nephew's education.
 Now, after a month passed in quiet
surroundings, she felt more and more deeply the loss of her father which
was associated in her mind with the ruin of Russia.
 Malvintseva expressed approval, and the
governor's wife began to speak of Rostov in Mary's presence, praising
him and telling how he had blushed when Princess Mary's name was
mentioned.
 But Princess Mary experienced a painful rather than a joyful
feeling--her mental tranquillity was destroyed, and desires, doubts,
self-reproach, and hopes reawoke.


During the two days that elapsed before Rostov called, Princess Mary
continually thought of how she ought to behave to him.


"You have met him, Aunt?" said she in a calm voice, unable herself to
understand that she could be outwardly so calm and natural.


When Rostov entered the room, the princess dropped her eyes for an
instant, as if to give the visitor time to greet her aunt, and then
just as Nicholas turned to her she raised her head and met his look with
shining eyes.


"Either black is particularly becoming to her or she really has greatly
improved without my having noticed it.
 From the time Rostov entered, her
face became suddenly transformed.
 It was as if a light had been kindled
in a carved and painted lantern and the intricate, skillful, artistic
work on its sides, that previously seemed dark, coarse, and meaningless,
was suddenly shown up in unexpected and striking beauty.
 All her inward labor, her dissatisfaction
with herself, her sufferings, her strivings after goodness, her
meekness, love, and self-sacrifice--all this now shone in those radiant
eyes, in her delicate smile, and in every trait of her gentle face.


Rostov saw all this as clearly as if he had known her whole life.
 He
felt that the being before him was quite different from, and better
than, anyone he had met before, and above all better than himself.


Their conversation was very simple and unimportant.
 They spoke of the
war, and like everyone else unconsciously exaggerated their sorrow about
it; they spoke of their last meeting--Nicholas trying to change
the subject--they talked of the governor's kind wife, of Nicholas'
relations, and of Princess Mary's.


She did not talk about her brother, diverting the conversation as soon
as her aunt mentioned Andrew.
 Nicholas
noticed this, as he noticed every shade of Princess Mary's character
with an observation unusual to him, and everything confirmed his
conviction that she was a quite unusual and extraordinary being.

Nicholas blushed and was confused when people spoke to him about the
princess (as she did when he was mentioned) and even when he thought of
her, but in her presence he felt quite at ease, and said not at all what
he had prepared, but what, quite appropriately, occurred to him at the
moment.


When a pause occurred during his short visit, Nicholas, as is usual when
there are children, turned to Prince Andrew's little son, caressing him
and asking whether he would like to be an hussar.
 He took the boy on
his knee, played with him, and looked round at Princess Mary.
 With a
softened, happy, timid look she watched the boy she loved in the arms
of the man she loved.
 For this
purpose she arranged a meeting between the young people at the bishop's
house before Mass.


As at Tilsit Rostov had not allowed himself to doubt that what everybody
considered right was right, so now, after a short but sincere struggle
between his effort to arrange his life by his own sense of justice, and
in obedient submission to circumstances, he chose the latter and yielded
to the power he felt irresistibly carrying him he knew not where.
 And he knew that he would never
act basely.
 But he also knew (or rather felt at the bottom of his heart)
that by resigning himself now to the force of circumstances and to those
who were guiding him, he was not only doing nothing wrong, but was doing
something very important--more important than anything he had ever done
in his life.
 But he never thought about her as he
had thought of all the young ladies without exception whom he had met
in society, nor as he had for a long time, and at one time rapturously,
thought about Sonya.
 But with Princess
Mary, to whom they were trying to get him engaged, he could never
picture anything of future married life.






CHAPTER VII


The dreadful news of the battle of Borodino, of our losses in killed and
wounded, and the still more terrible news of the loss of Moscow reached
Voronezh in the middle of September.


When he received the news of the battle of Borodino and the abandonment
of Moscow, Rostov was not seized with despair, anger, the desire for
vengeance, or any feeling of that kind, but everything in Voronezh
suddenly seemed to him dull and tiresome, and he experienced an
indefinite feeling of shame and awkwardness.
 He made haste to finish buying the horses, and often became
unreasonably angry with his servant and squadron quartermaster.


A few days before his departure a special thanksgiving, at which
Nicholas was present, was held in the cathedral for the Russian victory.

He stood a little behind the governor and held himself with military
decorum through the service, meditating on a great variety of subjects.


"Have you seen the princess?" she asked, indicating with a movement of
her head a lady standing on the opposite side, beyond the choir.
 Princess Mary, evidently engrossed
by her thoughts, was crossing herself for the last time before leaving
the church.


Nicholas looked at her face with surprise.
 As had occurred
before when she was present, Nicholas went up to her without waiting to
be prompted by the governor's wife and not asking himself whether or not
it was right and proper to address her here in church, and told her he
had heard of her trouble and sympathized with his whole soul.
 As soon as
she heard his voice a vivid glow kindled in her face, lighting up both
her sorrow and her joy.
 "It
is that if your brother, Prince Andrew Nikolievich, were not living, it
would have been at once announced in the Gazette, as he is a colonel.
"

The princess looked at him, not grasping what he was saying, but cheered
by the expression of regretful sympathy on his face.
 "We must hope for the best, and I am sure.
.
"

Princess Mary interrupted him.


"Oh, that would be so dread.
.
.


That evening Nicholas did not go out, but stayed at home to settle some
accounts with the horse dealers.
 When he had finished that business it
was already too late to go anywhere but still too early to go to bed,
and for a long time he paced up and down the room, reflecting on his
life, a thing he rarely did.


Princess Mary had made an agreeable impression on him when he had met
her in Smolensk province.
 His having encountered her in such exceptional
circumstances, and his mother having at one time mentioned her to him as
a good match, had drawn his particular attention to her.
 Nicholas had been struck by the peculiar moral beauty he
observed in her at this time.
 He was, however, preparing to go away and
it had not entered his head to regret that he was thus depriving himself
of chances of meeting her.
 In men Rostov could not bear to
see the expression of a higher spiritual life (that was why he did not
like Prince Andrew) and he referred to it contemptuously as philosophy
and dreaminess, but in Princess Mary that very sorrow which revealed
the depth of a whole spiritual world foreign to him was an irresistible
attraction.


"She must be a wonderful woman.
 A real angel!" he said to himself.

"Why am I not free? Why was I in such a hurry with Sonya?" And he
involuntarily compared the two: the lack of spirituality in the one and
the abundance of it in the other--a spirituality he himself lacked and
therefore valued most highly.
 He felt awed, and no clear picture
presented itself to his mind.


Reveries about Sonya had had something merry and playful in them, but to
dream of Princess Mary was always difficult and a little frightening.
 "It was plain that her whole soul was in
her prayer.
 "What do I want? To be free, released from Sonya.
.
.

She was right," he thought, remembering what the governor's wife had
said: "Nothing but misfortune can come of marrying Sonya.
.
.
.

No, but I am not praying for trifles now," he thought as he put his pipe
down in a corner, and folding his hands placed himself before the icon.


"Blockhead! Why do you come in without being called?" cried Nicholas,
quickly changing his attitude.


"From the governor," said Lavrushka in a sleepy voice.
 "A courier has
arrived and there's a letter for you.
"

"Well, all right, thanks.
 You can go!"

Nicholas took the two letters, one of which was from his mother and
the other from Sonya.


"No, it's not possible!" he cried aloud.


Unable to sit still he paced up and down the room holding the letter and
reading it.
 The other, from the countess,
described their last days in Moscow, their departure, the fire, and
the destruction of all their property.
 Sonya and Natasha were nursing him.
 Neither he nor she said a word about what "Natasha nursing him"
might mean, but thanks to this letter Nicholas suddenly became almost as
intimate with the princess as if they were relations.


The following day he saw Princess Mary off on her journey to Yaroslavl,
and a few days later left to rejoin his regiment.






CHAPTER VIII


Sonya's letter written from Troitsa, which had come as an answer to
Nicholas' prayer, was prompted by this: the thought of getting Nicholas
married to an heiress occupied the old countess' mind more and more.
 She
knew that Sonya was the chief obstacle to this happening, and Sonya's
life in the countess' house had grown harder and harder, especially
after they had received a letter from Nicholas telling of his meeting
with Princess Mary in Bogucharovo.
"

Sonya burst into hysterical tears and replied through her sobs that
she would do anything and was prepared for anything, but gave no actual
promise and could not bring herself to decide to do what was demanded
of her.
 She must sacrifice herself for the family that had reared and
brought her up.
 To sacrifice herself for others was Sonya's habit.
 But in all her
former acts of self-sacrifice she had been happily conscious that they
raised her in her own esteem and in that of others, and so made her more
worthy of Nicholas whom she loved more than anything in the world.
 But
now they wanted her to sacrifice the very thing that constituted the
whole reward for her self-sacrifice and the whole meaning of her life.


The bustle and terror of the Rostovs' last days in Moscow stifled the
gloomy thoughts that oppressed Sonya.
 She was glad to find escape
from them in practical activity.
 She
knew that being thrown together again under such terrible circumstances
they would again fall in love with one another, and that Nicholas would
then not be able to marry Princess Mary as they would be within the
prohibited degrees of affinity.
 Despite all the terror of what had
happened during those last days and during the first days of their
journey, this feeling that Providence was intervening in her personal
affairs cheered Sonya.


At the Troitsa monastery the Rostovs first broke their journey for a
whole day.


Three large rooms were assigned to them in the monastery hostelry, one
of which was occupied by Prince Andrew.
 The wounded man was much better
that day and Natasha was sitting with him.

Sonya was there too, tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew and
Natasha were talking about.
 She heard the sound of their voices through
the door.


Natasha went up to the monk for his blessing, and he advised her to pray
for aid to God and His saint.


"Sonya, will he live?" she asked.
.
 Sonya, dovey, everything is as it used to be.
 If only he
lives! He cannot.
.
.
.
.
 because.
.
 of" and Natasha burst into
tears.

Sobbing, she kissed and comforted Natasha.
 "If only he lives!" she
thought.
 Having wept, talked, and wiped away their tears, the two
friends went together to Prince Andrew's door.


Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows.
 His pale face was
calm, his eyes closed, and they could see his regular breathing.


"O, Natasha!" Sonya suddenly almost screamed, catching her companion's
arm and stepping back from the door.


"What? What is it?" asked Natasha.
.
.

"You remember when I looked in the mirror for you.
.
 at Otradnoe at
Christmas? Do you remember what I saw?"

"Yes, yes!" cried Natasha opening her eyes wide, and vaguely recalling
that Sonya had told her something about Prince Andrew whom she had seen
lying down.


"You remember?" Sonya went on.
 I saw him lying on a bed," said she, making a gesture with
her hand and a lifted finger at each detail, "and that he had his eyes
closed and was covered just with a pink quilt, and that his hands were
folded," she concluded, convincing herself that the details she had just
seen were exactly what she had seen in the mirror.


She had in fact seen nothing then but had mentioned the first thing that
came into her head, but what she had invented then seemed to her now
as real as any other recollection.


"Yes, yes, it really was pink!" cried Natasha, who now thought she
too remembered the word pink being used, and saw in this the most
extraordinary and mysterious part of the prediction.


"But what does it mean?" she added meditatively.


"Oh, I don't know, it is all so strange," replied Sonya, clutching at
her head.


A few minutes later Prince Andrew rang and Natasha went to him, but
Sonya, feeling unusually excited and touched, remained at the window
thinking about the strangeness of what had occurred.



They had an opportunity that day to send letters to the army, and the
countess was writing to her son.


"Sonya!" said the countess, raising her eyes from her letter as her
niece passed, "Sonya, won't you write to Nicholas?" She spoke in a soft,
tremulous voice, and in the weary eyes that looked over her spectacles
Sonya read all that the countess meant to convey with these words.


Sonya went up to the countess and, kneeling down, kissed her hand.


Sonya was softened, excited, and touched by all that had occurred that
day, especially by the mysterious fulfillment she had just seen of her
vision.
 So with a joyful
consciousness of performing a magnanimous deed--interrupted several
times by the tears that dimmed her velvety black eyes--she wrote that
touching letter the arrival of which had so amazed Nicholas.






CHAPTER IX


The officer and soldiers who had arrested Pierre treated him with
hostility but yet with respect, in the guardhouse to which he was taken.

In their attitude toward him could still be felt both uncertainty as
to who he might be--perhaps a very important person--and hostility as a
result of their recent personal conflict with him.
 17 of the captured Russians, arrested and detained for some reason
by order of the Higher Command.
 If they noticed anything remarkable
about Pierre, it was only his unabashed, meditative concentration
and thoughtfulness, and the way he spoke French, which struck them as
surprisingly good.


All the Russians confined with Pierre were men of the lowest class and,
recognizing him as a gentleman, they all avoided him, more especially as
he spoke French.
 Pierre felt sad at hearing them making fun of him.
 On the third day he was taken
with the others to a house where a French general with a white mustache
sat with two colonels and other Frenchmen with scarves on their arms.

With the precision and definiteness customary in addressing prisoners,
and which is supposed to preclude human frailty, Pierre like the others
was questioned as to who he was, where he had been, with what object,
and so on.


These questions, like questions put at trials generally, left the
essence of the matter aside, shut out the possibility of that essence's
being revealed, and were designed only to form a channel through which
the judges wished the answers of the accused to flow so as to lead to
the desired result, namely a conviction.
 He had a feeling that it was only out of condescension or a
kind of civility that this device of placing a channel was employed.
 He
knew he was in these men's power, that only by force had they brought
him there, that force alone gave them the right to demand answers
to their questions, and that the sole object of that assembly was to
inculpate him.
 And so, as they had the power and wish to inculpate
him, this expedient of an inquiry and trial seemed unnecessary.
 When asked what he
was doing when he was arrested, Pierre replied in a rather tragic manner
that he was restoring to its parents a child he had saved from the
flames.
.
.
" They interrupted him, for this
was not to the point.
 Why was he in the yard of a burning house where
witnesses had seen him? He replied that he had gone out to see what
was happening in Moscow.
 Again they interrupted him: they had not asked
where he was going, but why he was found near the fire? Who was he? they
asked, repeating their first question, which he had declined to answer.

Again he replied that he could not answer it.


"Put that down, that's bad.
.
.
 very bad," sternly remarked the general
with the white mustache and red flushed face.



On the fourth day fires broke out on the Zubovski rampart.
 On his way through the streets Pierre
felt stifled by the smoke which seemed to hang over the whole
city.
 Fires were visible on all sides.


He passed four days in the coach house near the Crimean bridge and
during that time learned, from the talk of the French soldiers, that all
those confined there were awaiting a decision which might come any day
from the marshal.
 What marshal this was, Pierre could not learn from the
soldiers.
 Evidently for them "the marshal" represented a very high and
rather mysterious power.






CHAPTER X


On the eighth of September an officer--a very important one judging by
the respect the guards showed him--entered the coach house where the
prisoners were.
 This officer, probably someone on the staff, was holding
a paper in his hand, and called over all the Russians there, naming
Pierre as "the man who does not give his name.
 It was a fine day, sunny
after rain, and the air was unusually pure.
 The smoke did not hang low
as on the day when Pierre had been taken from the guardhouse on the
Zubovski rampart, but rose through the pure air in columns.
 On all sides there were
waste spaces with only stoves and chimney stacks still standing, and
here and there the blackened walls of some brick houses.
 Pierre gazed
at the ruins and did not recognize districts he had known well.
 The domes of the New Convent of the Virgin
glittered brightly and its bells were ringing particularly clearly.

These bells reminded Pierre that it was Sunday and the feast of the
Nativity of the Virgin.
 He felt it in the merry sounds of regimental
music he heard from the left side of the field, and felt and realized
it especially from the list of prisoners the French officer had read out
when he came that morning.
 But no: the answers he had given when questioned had come
back to him in his designation as "the man who does not give his name,"
and under that appellation, which to Pierre seemed terrible, they were
now leading him somewhere with unhesitating assurance on their faces
that he and all the other prisoners were exactly the ones they wanted
and that they were being taken to the proper place.
 Pierre felt himself
to be an insignificant chip fallen among the wheels of a machine whose
action he did not understand but which was working well.
 This was Prince Shcherbitov's house, where Pierre had often
been in other days, and which, as he learned from the talk of the
soldiers, was now occupied by the marshal, the Duke of Eckmuhl (Davout).

Pierre was the sixth to enter.
 Without raising his eyes,
he said in a low voice:

"Who are you?"

Pierre was silent because he was incapable of uttering a word.
 To him
Davout was not merely a French general, but a man notorious for his
cruelty.
 Looking at his cold face, as he sat like a stern schoolmaster
who was prepared to wait awhile for an answer, Pierre felt that every
instant of delay might cost him his life; but he did not know what
to say.
 He did not venture to repeat what he had said at his first
examination, yet to disclose his rank and position was dangerous and
embarrassing.
 So he was silent.


The chill that had been running down Pierre's back now seized his head
as in a vise.
.
"

"He is a Russian spy," Davout interrupted, addressing another general
who was present, but whom Pierre had not noticed.


"Bezukhov.
"

"What proof have I that you are not lying?"

"Monseigneur!" exclaimed Pierre, not in an offended but in a pleading
voice.
 Apart from conditions of war
and law, that look established human relations between the two men.


At the first glance, when Davout had only raised his head from the
papers where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers, Pierre
was merely a circumstance, and Davout could have shot him without
burdening his conscience with an evil deed, but now he saw in him a
human being.


"How can you show me that you are telling the truth?" said Davout
coldly.


"You are not what you say," returned Davout.


In a trembling, faltering voice Pierre began adducing proofs of the
truth of his statements.
 It seemed that he had quite forgotten Pierre.


When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner, he jerked his head in
Pierre's direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away.
 But
where they were to take him Pierre did not know: back to the coach house
or to the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him as
they crossed the Virgin's Field.


"Yes, of course!" replied Davout, but what this "yes" meant, Pierre did
not know.


Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went, whether it was far, or
in which direction.
 His faculties were quite numbed, he was stupefied,
and noticing nothing around him went on moving his legs as the others
did till they all stopped and he stopped too.
 In another moment
Davout would have realized that he was doing wrong, but just then
the adjutant had come in and interrupted him.
 Then who was executing him, killing him, depriving him of life--him,
Pierre, with all his memories, aspirations, hopes, and thoughts? Who was
doing this? And Pierre felt that it was no one.


It was a system--a concurrence of circumstances.


A system of some sort was killing him--Pierre--depriving him of life, of
everything, annihilating him.






CHAPTER XI


From Prince Shcherbatov's house the prisoners were led straight down the
Virgin's Field, to the left of the nunnery, as far as a kitchen garden
in which a post had been set up.
 Beyond that post a fresh pit had been
dug in the ground, and near the post and the pit a large crowd stood
in a semicircle.
 To the right and left of the post
stood rows of French troops in blue uniforms with red epaulets and high
boots and shakos.


The prisoners were placed in a certain order, according to the list
(Pierre was sixth), and were led to the post.
 Several drums suddenly
began to beat on both sides of them, and at that sound Pierre felt as
if part of his soul had been torn away.
 And he had only one
wish--that the frightful thing that had to happen should happen quickly.


The two first were convicts with shaven heads.
 One was tall and thin,
the other dark, shaggy, and sinewy, with a flat nose.
 The third was
a domestic serf, about forty-five years old, with grizzled hair and a
plump, well-nourished body.
 The fourth was a peasant, a very handsome
man with a broad, light-brown beard and black eyes.
 The fifth was a
factory hand, a thin, sallow-faced lad of eighteen in a loose coat.


Pierre heard the French consulting whether to shoot them separately or
two at a time.
 "In couples," replied the officer in command in a calm
voice.
 There was a stir in the ranks of the soldiers and it was evident
that they were all hurrying--not as men hurry to do something they
understand, but as people hurry to finish a necessary but unpleasant and
incomprehensible task.


A French official wearing a scarf came up to the right of the row of
prisoners and read out the sentence in Russian and in French.


Then two pairs of Frenchmen approached the criminals and at the
officer's command took the two convicts who stood first in the row.
 One crossed himself continually, the other scratched his back
and made a movement of the lips resembling a smile.
 With hurried hands
the soldiers blindfolded them, drawing the sacks over their heads, and
bound them to the post.
 Pierre turned away
to avoid seeing what was going to happen.
 Suddenly a crackling, rolling
noise was heard which seemed to him louder than the most terrific
thunder, and he looked round.
 There was some smoke, and the Frenchmen
were doing something near the pit, with pale faces and trembling hands.
 They could not believe it because they
alone knew what their life meant to them, and so they neither understood
nor believed that it could be taken from them.


Again Pierre did not wish to look and again turned away; but again the
sound as of a frightful explosion struck his ear, and at the same moment
he saw smoke, blood, and the pale, scared faces of the Frenchmen who
were again doing something by the post, their trembling hands impeding
one another.
 Pierre, breathing heavily, looked around as if asking what
it meant.


On the faces of all the Russians and of the French soldiers and officers
without exception, he read the same dismay, horror, and conflict that
were in his own heart.
 "But who, after all, is doing this? They are all
suffering as I am.
 Who then is it? Who?" flashed for an instant through
his mind.
 With ever-growing horror, and no
sense of joy or relief, he gazed at what was taking place.
 (Pierre shuddered
and shook himself free.
 They dragged him
along, holding him up under the arms, and he screamed.

Whether he understood that screaming was useless or whether he thought
it incredible that men should kill him, at any rate he took his stand at
the post, waiting to be blindfolded like the others, and like a wounded
animal looked around him with glittering eyes.


When they began to blindfold him he himself adjusted the knot which
hurt the back of his head; then when they propped him against the
bloodstained post, he leaned back and, not being comfortable in that
position, straightened himself, adjusted his feet, and leaned back again
more comfortably.
 Pierre did not take his eyes from him and did not miss
his slightest movement.


Probably a word of command was given and was followed by the reports of
eight muskets; but try as he would Pierre could not afterwards remember
having heard the slightest sound of the shots.
 No one hindered
him.

The lower jaw of an old Frenchman with a thick mustache trembled as he
untied the ropes.
 The body collapsed.
 The soldiers dragged it awkwardly
from the post and began pushing it into the pit.


Pierre glanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lying with
his knees close up to his head and one shoulder higher than the other.

That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively, but spadefuls
of earth were already being thrown over the whole body.


When the pit had been filled up a command was given.


Pierre gazed now with dazed eyes at these sharpshooters who ran in
couples out of the circle.
 All but one rejoined their companies.
 This
one, a young soldier, his face deadly pale, his shako pushed back, and
his musket resting on the ground, still stood near the pit at the spot
from which he had fired.
 An old, noncommissioned
officer ran out of the ranks and taking him by the elbow dragged him to
his company.


"That will teach them to start fires," said one of the Frenchmen.


Pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier who
was trying to find some relief after what had been done, but was not
able to do so.
 Without finishing what he had begun to say he made a
hopeless movement with his arm and went away.


Toward evening a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiers and
told him that he had been pardoned and would now go to the barracks for
the prisoners of war.
 Without understanding what was said to him, Pierre
got up and went with the soldiers.
 They took him to the upper end of the
field, where there were some sheds built of charred planks, beams,
and battens, and led him into one of them.
 In the darkness some twenty
different men surrounded Pierre.
 He heard
what they said, but did not understand the meaning of the words and
made no kind of deduction from or application of them.
 He replied to
questions they put to him, but did not consider who was listening to his
replies, nor how they would understand them.
 He looked at their faces
and figures, but they all seemed to him equally meaningless.


From the moment Pierre had witnessed those terrible murders committed by
men who did not wish to commit them, it was as if the mainspring of
his life, on which everything depended and which made everything appear
alive, had suddenly been wrenched out and everything had collapsed
into a heap of meaningless rubbish.
 Though he did not acknowledge it to
himself, his faith in the right ordering of the universe, in humanity,
in his own soul, and in God, had been destroyed.
 He had experienced this
before, but never so strongly as now.
 When similar doubts had assailed
him before, they had been the result of his own wrongdoing, and at the
bottom of his heart he had felt that relief from his despair and from
those doubts was to be found within himself.
 But now he felt that
the universe had crumbled before his eyes and only meaningless ruins
remained, and this not by any fault of his own.
 He felt that it was not
in his power to regain faith in the meaning of life.
 Then they led him away somewhere, and at last he
found himself in a corner of the shed among men who were laughing and
talking on all sides.


"Well, then, mates.
.


Sitting silent and motionless on a heap of straw against the wall,
Pierre sometimes opened and sometimes closed his eyes.
 But as soon as
he closed them he saw before him the dreadful face of the factory
lad--especially dreadful because of its simplicity--and the faces of the
murderers, even more dreadful because of their disquiet.
 This man was doing something to his legs in the
darkness, and though Pierre could not see his face he felt that the man
continually glanced at him.
 Then he took out a knife, cut something, closed
the knife, placed it under the head of his bed, and, seating himself
comfortably, clasped his arms round his lifted knees and fixed his eyes
on Pierre.


"You've seen a lot of trouble, sir, eh?" the little man suddenly said.


And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his singsong voice
that Pierre tried to reply, but his jaw trembled and he felt tears
rising to his eyes.
 The little fellow, giving Pierre no time to betray
his confusion, instantly continued in the same pleasant tones:

"Eh, lad, don't fret!" said he, in the tender singsong caressing voice
old Russian peasant women employ.
 "Don't fret, friend--'suffer an hour,
live for an age!' that's how it is, my dear fellow.
 And here we live,
thank heaven, without offense.
 Among these folk, too, there are good
men as well as bad," said he, and still speaking, he turned on his knees
with a supple movement, got up, coughed, and went off to another part of
the shed.


"Eh, you rascal!" Pierre heard the same kind voice saying at the other
end of the shed.
.
.


"Here, eat a bit, sir," said he, resuming his former respectful tone as
he unwrapped and offered Pierre some baked potatoes.
 "You should
do like this.
"

He took a potato, drew out his clasp knife, cut the potato into two
equal halves on the palm of his hand, sprinkled some salt on it from the
rag, and handed it to Pierre.
 "Eat some like that!"

Pierre thought he had never eaten anything that tasted better.
"

"Tss, tt.
!" said the little man.
.
.
 what a sin!" he
added quickly, and as if his words were always waiting ready in his
mouth and flew out involuntarily he went on: "How was it, sir, that you
stayed in Moscow?"

"I didn't think they would come so soon.


"And how did they arrest you, dear lad? At your house?"

"No, I went to look at the fire, and they arrested me there, and tried
me as an incendiary.
"

"Where there's law there's injustice," put in the little man.


"And have you been here long?" Pierre asked as he munched the last of
the potato.


"I? It was last Sunday they took me, out of a hospital in Moscow.
"

"Why, are you a soldier then?"

"Yes, we are soldiers of the Apsheron regiment.
 I was dying of fever.
 We
weren't told anything.
"

"And do you feel sad here?" Pierre inquired.
 "They call me 'little falcon' in the regiment.
 How is one
to help feeling sad? Moscow--she's the mother of cities.
 How can one see
all this and not feel sad? But 'the maggot gnaws the cabbage, yet dies
first'; that's what the old folks used to tell us," he added rapidly.


"What? What did you say?" asked Pierre.


"Who? I?" said Karataev.
 "I say things happen not as we plan but as God
judges," he replied, thinking that he was repeating what he had said
before, and immediately continued:

"Well, and you, have you a family estate, sir? And a house? So you have
abundance, then? And a housewife? And your old parents, are they still
living?" he asked.
 He seemed grieved that Pierre had no parents, especially that
he had no mother.


"A wife for counsel, a mother-in-law for welcome, but there's none as
dear as one's own mother!" said he.


Again Pierre's negative answer seemed to distress him, and he hastened
to add:

"Never mind! You're young folks yet, and please God may still have some.
.


"Ah, my dear fellow!" rejoined Karataev, "never decline a prison or a
beggar's sack!"

He seated himself more comfortably and coughed, evidently preparing to
tell a long story.


"Well, my dear fellow, I was still living at home," he began.
 "We had
a well-to-do homestead, plenty of land, we peasants lived well and our
house was one to thank God for.
 We were real peasants.
.
.
"

And Platon Karataev told a long story of how he had gone into someone's
copse to take wood, how he had been caught by the keeper, had been
tried, flogged, and sent to serve as a soldier.


"Well, lad," and a smile changed the tone of his voice "we thought it
was a misfortune but it turned out a blessing! If it had not been for
my sin, my brother would have had to go as a soldier.
 I come home on leave and I'll tell you how it was, I look and
see that they are living better than before.
 Father, he says, 'All my children are the same to
me: it hurts the same whichever finger gets bitten.
 Fate
looks for a head.
"

And Platon shifted his seat on the straw.


After a short silence he rose.


"Well, I think you must be sleepy," said he, and began rapidly crossing
himself and repeating:

"Lord Jesus Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus
Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus Christ, have
mercy on us and save us!" he concluded, then bowed to the ground, got
up, sighed, and sat down again on his heap of straw.
 "That's the way.


"What prayer was that you were saying?" asked Pierre.


"Eh?" murmured Platon, who had almost fallen asleep.
 "What was I saying?
I was praying.
 Don't you pray?"

"Yes, I do," said Pierre.
 "But what was that you said: Frola and Lavra?"

"Well, of course," replied Platon quickly, "the horses' saints.
 One must
pity the animals too.


Sounds of crying and screaming came from somewhere in the distance
outside, and flames were visible through the cracks of the shed, but
inside it was quiet and dark.
 For a long time Pierre did not sleep, but
lay with eyes open in the darkness, listening to the regular snoring
of Platon who lay beside him, and he felt that the world that had been
shattered was once more stirring in his soul with a new beauty and on
new and unshakable foundations.
 When Pierre saw his neighbor next morning at dawn
the first impression of him, as of something round, was fully confirmed:
Platon's whole figure--in a French overcoat girdled with a cord, a
soldier's cap, and bast shoes--was round.


Platon Karataev must have been fifty, judging by his stories of
campaigns he had been in, told as by an old soldier.
 He did not himself
know his age and was quite unable to determine it.
 But his brilliantly
white, strong teeth which showed in two unbroken semicircles when he
laughed--as he often did--were all sound and good, there was not a gray
hair in his beard or on his head, and his whole body gave an impression
of suppleness and especially of firmness and endurance.
 But the chief
peculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness.
 Every night before lying down, he said: "Lord, lay me
down as a stone and raise me up as a loaf!" and every morning on getting
up, he said: "I lay down and curled up, I get up and shake myself.
 He could
do everything, not very well but not badly.
 He baked, cooked, sewed,
planed, and mended boots.
 He was always busy, and only at night allowed
himself conversation--of which he was fond--and songs.


Having been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to grow, he seemed to
have thrown off all that had been forced upon him--everything military
and alien to himself--and had returned to his former peasant habits.
 When he related anything it was generally
some old and evidently precious memory of his "Christian" life, as he
called his peasant existence.


He would often say the exact opposite of what he had said on a previous
occasion, yet both would be right.
 He liked to talk and he talked well,
adorning his speech with terms of endearment and with folk sayings which
Pierre thought he invented himself, but the chief charm of his talk lay
in the fact that the commonest events--sometimes just such as Pierre
had witnessed without taking notice of them--assumed in Karataev's a
character of solemn fitness.
 He liked to hear the folk tales one of the
soldiers used to tell of an evening (they were always the same), but
most of all he liked to hear stories of real life.


To all the other prisoners Platon Karataev seemed a most ordinary
soldier.
 They called him "little falcon" or "Platosha," chaffed him
good-naturedly, and sent him on errands.


Platon Karataev knew nothing by heart except his prayers.


Sometimes Pierre, struck by the meaning of his words, would ask him to
repeat them, but Platon could never recall what he had said a moment
before, just as he never could repeat to Pierre the words of his
favorite song: native and birch tree and my heart is sick occurred in
it, but when spoken and not sung, no meaning could be got out of it.
 He
did not, and could not, understand the meaning of words apart from
their context.
 Every word and action of his was the manifestation of
an activity unknown to him, which was his life.
 But his life, as he
regarded it, had no meaning as a separate thing.
 It had meaning only as
part of a whole of which he was always conscious.
 He could not understand the value or significance
of any word or deed taken separately.






CHAPTER XIV


When Princess Mary heard from Nicholas that her brother was with the
Rostovs at Yaroslavl she at once prepared to go there, in spite of her
aunt's efforts to dissuade her--and not merely to go herself but to
take her nephew with her.
 Whether it were difficult or easy, possible
or impossible, she did not ask and did not want to know: it was her duty
not only herself to be near her brother who was perhaps dying, but to do
everything possible to take his son to him, and so she prepared to set
off.


In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start.
 Her equipages were the
huge family coach in which she had traveled to Voronezh, a semiopen
trap, and a baggage cart.


The usual route through Moscow could not be thought of, and the
roundabout way Princess Mary was obliged to take through Lipetsk,
Ryazan, Vladimir, and Shuya was very long and, as post horses were not
everywhere obtainable, very difficult, and near Ryazan where the French
were said to have shown themselves was even dangerous.


During this difficult journey Mademoiselle Bourienne, Dessalles, and
Princess Mary's servants were astonished at her energy and firmness of
spirit.
 She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them, and
no difficulties daunted her.


The last days of her stay in Voronezh had been the happiest of her life.
 It filled her
whole soul, had become an integral part of herself, and she no longer
struggled against it.
 She had become convinced of it at her last interview with
Nicholas, when he had come to tell her that her brother was with the
Rostovs.
 Not by a single word had Nicholas alluded to the fact that
Prince Andrew's relations with Natasha might, if he recovered, be
renewed, but Princess Mary saw by his face that he knew and thought of
this.


Yet in spite of that, his relation to her--considerate, delicate, and
loving--not only remained unchanged, but it sometimes seemed to Princess
Mary that he was even glad that the family connection between them
allowed him to express his friendship more freely.
 That feeling was so
strong at the moment of leaving Voronezh that those who saw her off, as
they looked at her careworn, despairing face, felt sure she would fall
ill on the journey.


As always happens when traveling, Princess Mary thought only of the
journey itself, forgetting its object.
 But as she approached Yaroslavl
the thought of what might await her there--not after many days, but that
very evening--again presented itself to her and her agitation increased
to its utmost limit.
"

"Then he is alive," thought Princess Mary, and asked in a low voice:
"How is he?"

"The servants say he is still the same.
"

What "still the same" might mean Princess Mary did not ask, but with an
unnoticed glance at little seven-year-old Nicholas, who was sitting in
front of her looking with pleasure at the town, she bowed her head
and did not raise it again till the heavy coach, rumbling, shaking and
swaying, came to a stop.


The carriage door was opened.
 There were people at the entrance:
servants, and a rosy girl with a large plait of black hair, smiling as
it seemed to Princess Mary in an unpleasantly affected way.
 (This was
Sonya.
 She embraced
Princess Mary and kissed her.


"Mon enfant!" she muttered, "je vous aime et vous connais depuis
longtemps.
" *


    * "My child! I love you and have known you a long time.
 Hardly
knowing how she did it, she contrived to utter a few polite phrases in
French in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her, and
asked: "How is he?"

"The doctor says that he is not in danger," said the countess, but as
she spoke she raised her eyes with a sigh, and her gesture conveyed a
contradiction of her words.


"Where is he? Can I see him--can I?" asked the princess.


"One moment, Princess, one moment, my dear! Is this his son?" said the
countess, turning to little Nicholas who was coming in with Dessalles.

"There will be room for everybody, this is a big house.
 Then he had been a brisk,
cheerful, self-assured old man; now he seemed a pitiful, bewildered
person.
 While talking to Princess Mary he continually looked round as
if asking everyone whether he was doing the right thing.
 After the
destruction of Moscow and of his property, thrown out of his accustomed
groove he seemed to have lost the sense of his own significance and to
feel that there was no longer a place for him in life.


In spite of her one desire to see her brother as soon as possible, and
her vexation that at the moment when all she wanted was to see him they
should be trying to entertain her and pretending to admire her nephew,
the princess noticed all that was going on around her and felt the
necessity of submitting, for a time, to this new order of things which
she had entered.
 She knew it to be necessary, and though it was hard for
her she was not vexed with these people.


"This is my niece," said the count, introducing Sonya--"You don't know
her, Princess?"

Princess Mary turned to Sonya and, trying to stifle the hostile
feeling that arose in her toward the girl, she kissed her.
 But she felt
oppressed by the fact that the mood of everyone around her was so far
from what was in her own heart.


"He is downstairs.
 Natasha is with him," answered Sonya, flushing.
 "We
have sent to ask.
"

Tears of vexation showed themselves in Princess Mary's eyes.
 The princess looked round and saw Natasha coming in, almost
running--that Natasha whom she had liked so little at their meeting in
Moscow long since.


But hardly had the princess looked at Natasha's face before she realized
that here was a real comrade in her grief, and consequently a friend.


As soon as Natasha, sitting at the head of Prince Andrew's bed, heard
of Princess Mary's arrival, she softly left his room and hastened to her
with those swift steps that had sounded buoyant to Princess Mary.


There was only one expression on her agitated face when she ran into the
drawing room--that of love--boundless love for him, for her, and for all
that was near to the man she loved; and of pity, suffering for others,
and passionate desire to give herself entirely to helping them.


Princess Mary, with her acute sensibility, understood all this at the
first glance at Natasha's face, and wept on her shoulder with sorrowful
pleasure.


"Come, come to him, Mary," said Natasha, leading her into the other
room.


Princess Mary raised her head, dried her eyes, and turned to Natasha.

She felt that from her she would be able to understand and learn
everything.
" she began her question but stopped short.


She felt that it was impossible to ask, or to answer, in words.

Natasha's face and eyes would have to tell her all more clearly and
profoundly.


Natasha was gazing at her, but seemed afraid and in doubt whether to say
all she knew or not; she seemed to feel that before those luminous eyes
which penetrated into the very depths of her heart, it was impossible
not to tell the whole truth which she saw.


Princess Mary understood.


But she still hoped, and asked, in words she herself did not trust:

"But how is his wound? What is his general condition?"

"You, you.
.
.


They sat a little while downstairs near his room till they had left off
crying and were able to go to him with calm faces.


Natasha told her that at first there had been danger from his feverish
condition and the pain he suffered, but at Troitsa that had passed
and the doctor had only been afraid of gangrene.
 That danger had also
passed.
 "I don't know why, but you will see what he is like.
"

"Is he weaker? Thinner?" asked the princess.
 You will see.
 O, Mary, he is too good, he
cannot, cannot live, because.
.
"





CHAPTER XV


When Natasha opened Prince Andrew's door with a familiar movement and
let Princess Mary pass into the room before her, the princess felt the
sobs in her throat.


The princess understood what Natasha had meant by the words: "two days
ago this suddenly happened.
" She understood those words to mean that he
had suddenly softened and that this softening and gentleness were signs
of approaching death.
 She was sure he would speak soft, tender
words to her such as her father had uttered before his death, and
that she would not be able to bear it and would burst into sobs in his
presence.
 The sobs
rose higher and higher in her throat as she more and more clearly
distinguished his form and her shortsighted eyes tried to make out his
features, and then she saw his face and met his gaze.
 In one thin, translucently white hand
he held a handkerchief, while with the other he stroked the delicate
mustache he had grown, moving his fingers slowly.


On seeing his face and meeting his eyes Princess Mary's pace suddenly
slackened, she felt her tears dry up and her sobs ceased.
 She suddenly
felt guilty and grew timid on catching the expression of his face and
eyes.


"But in what am I to blame?" she asked herself.
 And his cold, stern look
replied: "Because you are alive and thinking of the living, while I.
.


Had he screamed in agony, that scream would not have struck such horror
into Princess Mary's heart as the tone of his voice.


"And have you brought little Nicholas?" he asked in the same slow, quiet
manner and with an obvious effort to remember.


"How are you now?" said Princess Mary, herself surprised at what she was
saying.


"That, my dear, you must ask the doctor," he replied, and again making
an evident effort to be affectionate, he said with his lips only (his
words clearly did not correspond to his thoughts):

"Merci, chere amie, d'etre venue.
 He was silent, and she did not know what to say.
 In his words, his
tone, and especially in that calm, almost antagonistic look could be
felt an estrangement from everything belonging to this world, terrible
in one who is alive.
 Evidently only with an effort did he understand
anything living; but it was obvious that he failed to understand, not
because he lacked the power to do so but because he understood something
else--something the living did not and could not understand--and which
wholly occupied his mind.
 "She looks after me all
the time.
"

Princess Mary heard him and did not understand how he could say such a
thing.
 He, the sensitive, tender Prince Andrew, how could he say that,
before her whom he loved and who loved him? Had he expected to live he
could not have said those words in that offensively cold tone.
 If he had
not known that he was dying, how could he have failed to pity her and
how could he speak like that in her presence? The only explanation was
that he was indifferent, because something else, much more important,
had been revealed to him.


The conversation was cold and disconnected and continually broke off.


"Mary came by way of Ryazan," said Natasha.


"Really?" he asked.


"They told her that all Moscow has been burned down, and that.
.
.
"

Natasha stopped.
 It was plain that he was
making an effort to listen, but could not do so.


"Yes, they say it's burned," he said.
 "He wrote here that he
took a great liking to you," he went on simply and calmly, evidently
unable to understand all the complex significance his words had for
living people.


Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meaning for her, except as
a proof of how far away he now was from everything living.


Natasha, who felt her glance, did not look at her.
 All three were again
silent.


"Andrew, would you like.
.
" Princess Mary suddenly said in a trembling
voice, "would you like to see little Nicholas? He is always talking
about you!"

Prince Andrew smiled just perceptibly and for the first time, but
Princess Mary, who knew his face so well, saw with horror that he did
not smile with pleasure or affection for his son, but with quiet, gentle
irony because he thought she was trying what she believed to be the last
means of arousing him.


"Yes, I shall be very glad to see him.
 Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not know what to
say to him.


When Nicholas had been led away, Princess Mary again went up to her
brother, kissed him, and unable to restrain her tears any longer began
to cry.


He looked at her attentively.


Princess Mary nodded her head, weeping.


"Mary, you know the Gosp.
.
.


"What did you say?"

"Nothing.
 You mustn't cry here," he said, looking at her with the same
cold expression.
 With
a great effort he tried to return to life and to see things from their
point of view.
 After that day he lived through many things, gaining knowledge,
observation, and experience, but had he possessed all the faculties he
afterwards acquired, he could not have had a better or more profound
understanding of the meaning of the scene he had witnessed between
his father, Mary, and Natasha, than he had then.


After that he avoided Dessalles and the countess who caressed him and
either sat alone or came timidly to Princess Mary, or to Natasha of whom
he seemed even fonder than of his aunt, and clung to them quietly and
shyly.
 She did not speak any more to Natasha of
hopes of saving his life.






CHAPTER XVI


Not only did Prince Andrew know he would die, but he felt that he was
dying and was already half dead.
 He was conscious of an aloofness from
everything earthly and a strange and joyous lightness of existence.

Without haste or agitation he awaited what was coming.
.
.



Formerly he had feared the end.


 He had felt it for the first time when the shell spun like a top
before him, and he looked at the fallow field, the bushes, and the sky,
and knew that he was face to face with death.
 To love everything and everybody and
always to sacrifice oneself for love meant not to love anyone, not
to live this earthly life.
 When during those first days he
remembered that he would have to die, he said to himself: "Well, what of
it? So much the better!"

But after the night in Mytishchi when, half delirious, he had seen her
for whom he longed appear before him and, having pressed her hand to his
lips, had shed gentle, happy tears, love for a particular woman again
crept unobserved into his heart and once more bound him to life.
 And
joyful and agitating thoughts began to occupy his mind.
 And he dared not inquire.
 It was the last spiritual struggle
between life and death, in which death gained the victory.
 It was
the unexpected realization of the fact that he still valued life as
presented to him in the form of his love for Natasha, and a last, though
ultimately vanquished, attack of terror before the unknown.


It was evening.
 As usual after dinner he was slightly feverish, and his
thoughts were preternaturally clear.
 He
began to doze.
 Suddenly a feeling of happiness seized him.


"Ah, she has come!" thought he.


Since she had begun looking after him, he had always experienced this
physical consciousness of her nearness.
 She was sitting in an armchair
placed sideways, screening the light of the candle from him, and was
knitting a stocking.
 She had learned to knit stockings since Prince
Andrew had casually mentioned that no one nursed the sick so well as old
nurses who knit stockings, and that there is something soothing in
the knitting of stockings.
 The needles clicked lightly in her slender,
rapidly moving hands, and he could clearly see the thoughtful profile
of her drooping face.


He looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw a
deep breath after stooping, but refrained from doing so and breathed
cautiously.


At the Troitsa monastery they had spoken of the past, and he had told
her that if he lived he would always thank God for his wound which had
brought them together again, but after that they never spoke of the
future.
 "Can fate have brought
me to her so strangely only for me to die?.
.
.


On hearing that sound Natasha put down the stocking, leaned nearer to
him, and suddenly, noticing his shining eyes, stepped lightly up to him
and bent over him.


"You are not asleep?"

"No, I have been looking at you a long time.
 I felt you come in.
 No one
else gives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do.
 that light.
"

"And I!"--She turned away for an instant.
 "Why too much?" she asked.
.
 Well, what do you, what do you feel in your soul, your
whole soul--shall I live? What do you think?"

"I am sure of it, sure!" Natasha almost shouted, taking hold of both his
hands with a passionate movement.


He remained silent awhile.


"But you have not slept," she said, repressing her joy.
 "Try to sleep.
.

please!"

He pressed her hand and released it, and she went back to the candle and
sat down again in her former position.
 Twice she turned and looked at
him, and her eyes met his beaming at her.


Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep.
 He did not sleep long and
suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration.


As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that now
always occupied his mind--about life and death, and chiefly about death.


"Love? What is love?" he thought.


"Love hinders death.
 Love is life.
 All, everything that I understand, I
understand only because I love.
 Everything is, everything exists, only
because I love.
 Love is God, and to
die means that I, a particle of love, shall return to the general and
eternal source.
" These thoughts seemed to him comforting.
 But they were
only thoughts.
 Something was lacking in them, they were not clear, they
were too one-sidedly personal and brain-spun.
 He fell asleep.


He dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in, but that
he was quite well and unwounded.
 Many various, indifferent, and
insignificant people appeared before him.
 He talked to them and
discussed something trivial.
 They were preparing to go away somewhere.
 He
was seized by an agonizing fear.
 But just when he was clumsily creeping toward
the door, that dreadful something on the other side was already pressing
against it and forcing its way in.
 He seized the
door, making a final effort to hold it back--to lock it was no longer
possible--but his efforts were weak and clumsy and the door, pushed from
behind by that terror, opened and closed again.


Once again it pushed from outside.


But at the instant he died, Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep,
and at the very instant he died, having made an effort, he awoke.


"Yes, it was death! I died--and woke up.
 Yes, death is an awakening!"
And all at once it grew light in his soul and the veil that had till
then concealed the unknown was lifted from his spiritual vision.
 He felt
as if powers till then confined within him had been liberated, and that
strange lightness did not again leave him.


When, waking in a cold perspiration, he moved on the divan, Natasha went
up and asked him what was the matter.


That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary's
arrival.
 From that day, as the doctor expressed it, the wasting fever
assumed a malignant character, but what the doctor said did not interest
Natasha, she saw the terrible moral symptoms which to her were more
convincing.


There was nothing terrible or violent in this comparatively slow
awakening.


His last days and hours passed in an ordinary and simple way.
 They did
not weep or shudder and during these last days they themselves felt
that they were not attending on him (he was no longer there, he had left
them) but on what reminded them most closely of him--his body.
 Both felt
this so strongly that the outward and terrible side of death did not
affect them and they did not feel it necessary to foment their grief.
 They felt that they could not express in
words what they understood.


They both saw that he was sinking slowly and quietly, deeper and deeper,
away from them, and they both knew that this had to be so and that it
was right.


He confessed, and received communion: everyone came to take leave of
him.


When the last convulsions of the body, which the spirit was leaving,
occurred, Princess Mary and Natasha were present.


"Is it over?" said Princess Mary when his body had for a few minutes
lain motionless, growing cold before them.
 She closed them but did not
kiss them, but clung to that which reminded her most nearly of him--his
body.


Little Nicholas cried because his heart was rent by painful perplexity.


Natasha and Princess Mary also wept now, but not because of their own
personal grief; they wept with a reverent and softening emotion which
had taken possession of their souls at the consciousness of the
simple and solemn mystery of death that had been accomplished in their
presence.






BOOK THIRTEEN: 1812





CHAPTER I


Man's mind cannot grasp the causes of events in their completeness, but
the desire to find those causes is implanted in man's soul.
 And without
considering the multiplicity and complexity of the conditions any one
of which taken separately may seem to be the cause, he snatches at the
first approximation to a cause that seems to him intelligible and says:
"This is the cause!" In historical events (where the actions of men are
the subject of observation) the first and most primitive approximation
to present itself was the will of the gods and, after that, the will of
those who stood in the most prominent position--the heroes of history.

But we need only penetrate to the essence of any historic event--which
lies in the activity of the general mass of men who take part in it--to
be convinced that the will of the historic hero does not control the
actions of the mass but is itself continually controlled.
 There
is, and can be, no cause of an historical event except the one cause of
all causes.

The discovery of these laws is only possible when we have quite
abandoned the attempt to find the cause in the will of some one man,
just as the discovery of the laws of the motion of the planets was
possible only when men abandoned the conception of the fixity of the
earth.


The historians consider that, next to the battle of Borodino and the
occupation of Moscow by the enemy and its destruction by fire, the most
important episode of the war of 1812 was the movement of the Russian
army from the Ryazana to the Kaluga road and to the Tarutino camp--the
so-called flank march across the Krasnaya Pakhra River.
 They ascribe the
glory of that achievement of genius to different men and dispute as to
whom the honor is due.
 Even foreign historians, including the French,
acknowledge the genius of the Russian commanders when they speak of
that flank march.
 In
the first place it is hard to understand where the profundity and genius
of this movement lay, for not much mental effort was needed to see that
the best position for an army when it is not being attacked is where
there are most provisions; and even a dull boy of thirteen could have
guessed that the best position for an army after its retreat from Moscow
in 1812 was on the Kaluga road.
 So it is impossible to understand by
what reasoning the historians reach the conclusion that this maneuver
was a profound one.
 And it is even more difficult to understand just why
they think that this maneuver was calculated to save Russia and destroy
the French; for this flank march, had it been preceded, accompanied,
or followed by other circumstances, might have proved ruinous to the
Russians and salutary for the French.
 If the position of the Russian
army really began to improve from the time of that march, it does not at
all follow that the march was the cause of it.


That flank march might not only have failed to give any advantage to
the Russian army, but might in other circumstances have led to its
destruction.
 What would have happened had Moscow not burned down? If
Murat had not lost sight of the Russians? If Napoleon had not remained
inactive? If the Russian army at Krasnaya Pakhra had given battle as
Bennigsen and Barclay advised? What would have happened had the French
attacked the Russians while they were marching beyond the Pakhra? What
would have happened if on approaching Tarutino, Napoleon had attacked
the Russians with but a tenth of the energy he had shown when he
attacked them at Smolensk? What would have happened had the French moved
on Petersburg?.
.
 In any of these eventualities the flank march that
brought salvation might have proved disastrous.


The third and most incomprehensible thing is that people studying
history deliberately avoid seeing that this flank march cannot be
attributed to any one man, that no one ever foresaw it, and that in
reality, like the retreat from Fili, it did not suggest itself to anyone
in its entirety, but resulted--moment by moment, step by step, event by
event--from an endless number of most diverse circumstances and was only
seen in its entirety when it had been accomplished and belonged to the
past.
 In proof of this there is the fact
that the majority of the council voted for such a retreat, and above
all there is the well-known conversation after the council, between the
commander in chief and Lanskoy, who was in charge of the commissariat
department.
 Subsequently the
inactivity of the French (who even lost sight of the Russian army),
concern for the safety of the arsenal at Tula, and especially the
advantages of drawing nearer to its supplies caused the army to turn
still further south to the Tula road.
 Having crossed over, by a forced
march, to the Tula road beyond the Pakhra, the Russian commanders
intended to remain at Podolsk and had no thought of the Tarutino
position; but innumerable circumstances and the reappearance of French
troops who had for a time lost touch with the Russians, and projects
of giving battle, and above all the abundance of provisions in Kaluga
province, obliged our army to turn still more to the south and to cross
from the Tula to the Kaluga road and go to Tarutino, which was between
the roads along which those supplies lay.
 Just as it is impossible to
say when it was decided to abandon Moscow, so it is impossible to say
precisely when, or by whom, it was decided to move to Tarutino.
 Only
when the army had got there, as the result of innumerable and varying
forces, did people begin to assure themselves that they had desired this
movement and long ago foreseen its result.


If instead of imagining to ourselves commanders of genius leading the
Russian army, we picture that army without any leaders, it could not
have done anything but make a return movement toward Moscow, describing
an arc in the direction where most provisions were to be found and where
the country was richest.
 At Tarutino Kutuzov received what was almost a reprimand from
the Emperor for having moved his army along the Ryazan road, and the
Emperor's letter indicated to him the very position he had already
occupied near Kaluga.


Having rolled like a ball in the direction of the impetus given by the
whole campaign and by the battle of Borodino, the Russian army--when
the strength of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh push was
received--assumed the position natural to it.
 He alone then understood the meaning of the French
army's inactivity, he alone continued to assert that the battle of
Borodino had been a victory, he alone--who as commander in chief might
have been expected to be eager to attack--employed his whole strength to
restrain the Russian army from useless engagements.
 Suddenly the beast was heard
to moan.
" But he continued to exert all his powers to restrain his
troops from attacking.


During the month that the French troops were pillaging in Moscow and
the Russian troops were quietly encamped at Tarutino, a change had taken
place in the relative strength of the two armies--both in spirit and in
number--as a result of which the superiority had passed to the Russian
side.






CHAPTER III


The Russian army was commanded by Kutuzov and his staff, and also by the
Emperor from Petersburg.
 Before the news of the abandonment of Moscow
had been received in Petersburg, a detailed plan of the whole campaign
had been drawn up and sent to Kutuzov for his guidance.
 So fresh instructions were sent for the solution
of difficulties that might be encountered, as well as fresh people who
were to watch Kutuzov's actions and report upon them.


As a result of the hostility between Kutuzov and Bennigsen, his Chief of
Staff, the presence of confidential representatives of the Emperor, and
these transfers, a more than usually complicated play of parties
was going on among the staff of the army.

In all these plottings the subject of intrigue was generally the conduct
of the war, which all these men believed they were directing; but this
affair of the war went on independently of them, as it had to go:
that is, never in the way people devised, but flowing always from the
essential attitude of the masses.

From General Wintzingerode's reports, I see that an enemy corps of ten
thousand men is moving on the Petersburg road.
 Another corps of several
thousand men is moving on Dmitrov.
 A third has advanced along the
Vladimir road, and a fourth, rather considerable detachment is stationed
between Ruza and Mozhaysk.
 In view of all this information, when the enemy has
scattered his forces in large detachments, and with Napoleon and his
Guards in Moscow, is it possible that the enemy's forces confronting you
are so considerable as not to allow of your taking the offensive? On the
contrary, he is probably pursuing you with detachments, or at most with
an army corps much weaker than the army entrusted to you.
 It would seem
that, availing yourself of these circumstances, you might advantageously
attack a weaker one and annihilate him, or at least oblige him to
retreat, retaining in our hands an important part of the provinces now
occupied by the enemy, and thereby averting danger from Tula and other
towns in the interior.
 Remember that you have still
to answer to our offended country for the loss of Moscow.
 You have
experienced my readiness to reward you.
 That readiness will not weaken
in me, but I and Russia have a right to expect from you all the zeal,
firmness, and success which your intellect, military talent, and the
courage of the troops you command justify us in expecting.


On the second of October a Cossack, Shapovalov, who was out scouting,
killed one hare and wounded another.
 The Cossack laughingly
told his comrades how he had almost fallen into the hands of the French.

A cornet, hearing the story, informed his commander.
 The Cossack officers wished
to take advantage of this chance to capture some horses, but one of
the superior officers, who was acquainted with the higher authorities,
reported the incident to a general on the staff.
 The state of things on
the staff had of late been exceedingly strained.
 Ermolov had been to
see Bennigsen a few days previously and had entreated him to use
his influence with the commander in chief to induce him to take the
offensive.


"If I did not know you I should think you did not want what you are
asking for.


The Cossack's report, confirmed by horse patrols who were sent out, was
the final proof that events had matured.






CHAPTER IV


Bennigsen's note and the Cossack's information that the left flank
of the French was unguarded were merely final indications that it was
necessary to order an attack, and it was fixed for the fifth of October.


On the morning of the fourth of October Kutuzov signed the dispositions.

Toll read them to Ermolov, asking him to attend to the further
arrangements.


"All right--all right.


The dispositions drawn up by Toll were very good.

Everything had been admirably thought out as is usual in dispositions,
and as is always the case, not a single column reached its place at the
appointed time.


When the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had been
prepared, an officer was summoned and sent to deliver them to Ermolov
to deal with.
 A young officer of the Horse Guards, Kutuzov's orderly,
pleased at the importance of the mission entrusted to him, went to
Ermolov's quarters.


"Gone away," said Ermolov's orderly.
"

The officer, mounting his horse, rode off to someone else.
"

"If only they don't make me responsible for this delay! What a nuisance
it is!" thought the officer, and he rode round the whole camp.
 One man
said he had seen Ermolov ride past with some other generals, others said
he must have returned home.
 The officer snatched a little food at
a comrade's, and rode again to the vanguard to find Miloradovich.


"But where is it?"

"Why, there, over at Echkino," said a Cossack officer, pointing to a
country house in the far distance.


"In the meadows.
.
.
 in the meadows!" he heard, accompanied by whistling
and the sound of a torban, drowned every now and then by shouts.
 These
sounds made his spirits rise, but at the same time he was afraid that
he would be blamed for not having executed sooner the important order
entrusted to him.
 He dismounted
and went up into the porch of a large country house which had remained
intact between the Russian and French forces.
 Groups
of singers stood outside the windows.
 The officer was admitted and
immediately saw all the chief generals of the army together, and among
them Ermolov's big imposing figure.
 They all had their coats unbuttoned
and were standing in a semicircle with flushed and animated faces,
laughing loudly.
 In the middle of the room a short handsome general with
a red face was dancing the trepak with much spirit and agility.


"Ha, ha, ha! Bravo, Nicholas Ivanych! Ha, ha, ha!"

The officer felt that by arriving with important orders at such a moment
he was doubly to blame, and he would have preferred to wait; but one of
the generals espied him and, hearing what he had come about, informed
Ermolov.
 He sat
in the caleche, dozing and waking up by turns, and listening for any
sound of firing on the right as an indication that the action had begun.

But all was still quiet.
 On
approaching Tarutino Kutuzov noticed cavalrymen leading their horses to
water across the road along which he was driving.
 Kutuzov looked at
them searchingly, stopped his carriage, and inquired what regiment they
belonged to.
 They belonged to a column that should have been far in
front and in ambush long before then.
 "It may be a mistake," thought
the old commander in chief.


"How! Not rec.
.
" Kutuzov began, but checked himself immediately and
sent for a senior officer.
 Trembling and panting the old man fell
into that state of fury in which he sometimes used to roll on the
ground, and he fell upon Eykhen, threatening him with his hands,
shouting and loading him with gross abuse.


"What sort of another blackguard are you? I'll have you shot!
Scoundrels!" yelled Kutuzov in a hoarse voice, waving his arms and
reeling.


He was suffering physically.
 He, the commander in chief, a Serene
Highness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had ever had
in Russia, to be placed in this position--made the laughingstock of the
whole army! "I needn't have been in such a hurry to pray about today,
or have kept awake thinking everything over all night," thought he to
himself.
 "When I was a chit of an officer no one would have dared to
mock me so.
.
 and now!" He was in a state of physical suffering as if
from corporal punishment, and could not avoid expressing it by cries of
anger and distress.
 But his strength soon began to fail him, and looking
about him, conscious of having said much that was amiss, he again got
into his caleche and drove back in silence.
 And once more Kutuzov had to consent.
 The men were forbidden to talk out loud, to
smoke their pipes, or to strike a light, and they tried to prevent their
horses neighing.
 The secrecy of the undertaking heightened its charm
and they marched gaily.


Only Count Orlov-Denisov with his Cossacks (the least important
detachment of all) got to his appointed place at the right time.


Toward dawn, Count Orlov-Denisov, who had dozed off, was awakened by a
deserter from the French army being brought to him.
 This was a Polish
sergeant of Poniatowski's corps, who explained in Polish that he had
come over because he had been slighted in the service: that he ought
long ago to have been made an officer, that he was braver than any of
them, and so he had left them and wished to pay them out.
 Count Orlov-Denisov consulted his fellow officers.
 Everyone volunteered to go and
everybody advised making the attempt.


"Now, remember," said Count Orlov-Denisov to the sergeant at parting,
"if you have been lying I'll have you hanged like a dog; but if it's
true you shall have a hundred gold pieces!"

Without replying, the sergeant, with a resolute air, mounted and rode
away with Grekov whose men had quickly assembled.
 He looked in that direction, but though the
columns would have been visible quite far off, they were not to be seen.

It seemed to the count that things were beginning to stir in the French
camp, and his keen-sighted adjutant confirmed this.
 How could one capture a
commander in chief from among such a mass of troops!

"I am sure that rascal was lying," said the count.


"They can still be called back," said one of his suite, who like Count
Orlov felt distrustful of the adventure when he looked at the enemy's
camp.


"Eh? Really.
.
.
 what do you think? Should we let them go on or not?"

"Will you have them fetched back?"

"Fetch them back, fetch them back!" said Count Orlov with sudden
determination, looking at his watch.
"

And the adjutant galloped through the forest after Grekov.
 When Grekov
returned, Count Orlov-Denisov, excited both by the abandoned attempt and
by vainly awaiting the infantry columns that still did not appear, as
well as by the proximity of the enemy, resolved to advance.


"Mount!" he commanded in a whisper.
 The men took their places and
crossed themselves.
.
.


One desperate, frightened yell from the first French soldier who saw the
Cossacks, and all who were in the camp, undressed and only just waking
up, ran off in all directions, abandoning cannons, muskets, and horses.


Had the Cossacks pursued the French, without heeding what was behind and
around them, they would have captured Murat and everything there.

That was what the officers desired.
 None of them
listened to orders.
 All this had
to be dealt with, the prisoners and guns secured, the booty divided--not
without some shouting and even a little fighting among themselves--and
it was on this that the Cossacks all busied themselves.
 Orlov-Denisov, still waiting
for the other columns to arrive, advanced no further.


Meantime, according to the dispositions which said that "the First
Column will march" and so on, the infantry of the belated columns,
commanded by Bennigsen and directed by Toll, had started in due order
and, as always happens, had got somewhere, but not to their appointed
places.
 As always happens the men, starting cheerfully, began to halt;
murmurs were heard, there was a sense of confusion, and finally a
backward movement.
 Adjutants and generals galloped about, shouted, grew
angry, quarreled, said they had come quite wrong and were late, gave
vent to a little abuse, and at last gave it all up and went forward,
simply to get somewhere.
 "We shall get somewhere or other!" And they did
indeed get somewhere, though not to their right places; a few eventually
even got to their right place, but too late to be of any use and only
in time to be fired at.
 Toll, who in this battle played the part of
Weyrother at Austerlitz, galloped assiduously from place to place,
finding everything upside down everywhere.
 Thus he stumbled on Bagovut's
corps in a wood when it was already broad daylight, though the corps
should long before have joined Orlov-Denisov.
 Excited and vexed by the
failure and supposing that someone must be responsible for it, Toll
galloped up to the commander of the corps and began upbraiding him
severely, saying that he ought to be shot.


Coming out onto a field under the enemy's fire, this brave general went
straight ahead, leading his men under fire, without considering in his
agitation whether going into action now, with a single division, would
be of any use or no.
 One of the first bullets killed him, and other
bullets killed many of his men.
 He well knew that nothing but
confusion would come of this battle undertaken against his will, and as
far as was in his power held the troops back.
 He did not advance.


He rode silently on his small gray horse, indolently answering
suggestions that they should attack.


"The word attack is always on your tongue, but you don't see that we are
unable to execute complicated maneuvers," said he to Miloradovich who
asked permission to advance.


"We couldn't take Murat prisoner this morning or get to the place in
time, and nothing can be done now!" he replied to someone else.


When Kutuzov was informed that at the French rear--where according to
the reports of the Cossacks there had previously been nobody--there were
now two battalions of Poles, he gave a sidelong glance at Ermolov who
was behind him and to whom he had not spoken since the previous day.


"You see! They are asking to attack and making plans of all kinds,
but as soon as one gets to business nothing is ready, and the enemy,
forewarned, takes measures accordingly.

He understood that for him the storm had blown over, and that Kutuzov
would content himself with that hint.


"He's having a little fun at my expense," said Ermolov softly, nudging
with his knee Raevski who was at his side.


In consequence of this battle Kutuzov received a diamond decoration,
and Bennigsen some diamonds and a hundred thousand rubles, others also
received pleasant recognitions corresponding to their various grades,
and following the battle fresh changes were made in the staff.
 No battle--Tarutino, Borodino, or
Austerlitz--takes place as those who planned it anticipated.
 That is an
essential condition.
 It would be difficult and even impossible to
imagine any result more opportune than the actual outcome of this
battle.
 With a minimum of effort and insignificant losses, despite the
greatest confusion, the most important results of the whole campaign
were attained: the transition from retreat to advance, an exposure of
the weakness of the French, and the administration of that shock which
Napoleon's army had only awaited to begin its flight.
 Moscow, abounding in provisions, arms, munitions, and
incalculable wealth, is in Napoleon's hands.
 The Russian army, only half
the strength of the French, does not make a single attempt to attack for
a whole month.
 He can either fall
on the Russian army with double its strength and destroy it; negotiate
an advantageous peace, or in case of a refusal make a menacing move on
Petersburg, or even, in the case of a reverse, return to Smolensk or
Vilna; or remain in Moscow; in short, no special genius would seem to be
required to retain the brilliant position the French held at that time.

For that, only very simple and easy steps were necessary: not to allow
the troops to loot, to prepare winter clothing--of which there was
sufficient in Moscow for the whole army--and methodically to collect
the provisions, of which (according to the French historians) there were
enough in Moscow to supply the whole army for six months.
 Of all that Napoleon might have done: wintering in Moscow,
advancing on Petersburg or on Nizhni-Novgorod, or retiring by a more
northerly or more southerly route (say by the road Kutuzov afterwards
took), nothing more stupid or disastrous can be imagined than what he
actually did.
 He remained in Moscow till October, letting the troops
plunder the city; then, hesitating whether to leave a garrison behind
him, he quitted Moscow, approached Kutuzov without joining battle,
turned to the right and reached Malo-Yaroslavets, again without
attempting to break through and take the road Kutuzov took, but retiring
instead to Mozhaysk along the devastated Smolensk road.
 Nothing more
stupid than that could have been devised, or more disastrous for the
army, as the sequel showed.
 Had Napoleon's aim been to destroy his army,
the most skillful strategist could hardly have devised any series
of actions that would so completely have accomplished that purpose,
independently of anything the Russian army might do.
 His activity at that time was no less astounding
than it was in Egypt, in Italy, in Austria, and in Prussia.
 We cannot accurately estimate his genius
in Austria or Prussia, for we have to draw our information from French
or German sources, and the incomprehensible surrender of whole corps
without fighting and of fortresses without a siege must incline Germans
to recognize his genius as the only explanation of the war carried on
in Germany.


His activity in Moscow was as amazing and as full of genius as
elsewhere.
 The absence
of citizens and of a deputation, and even the burning of Moscow, did not
disconcert him.






CHAPTER IX


With regard to military matters, Napoleon immediately on his entry into
Moscow gave General Sabastiani strict orders to observe the movements
of the Russian army, sent army corps out along the different roads, and
charged Murat to find Kutuzov.
 Then he gave careful directions about the
fortification of the Kremlin, and drew up a brilliant plan for a future
campaign over the whole map of Russia.


Having similarly explained his views and his magnanimity to Tutolmin, he
dispatched that old man also to Petersburg to negotiate.


With regard to administrative matters, Moscow was granted a
constitution.
 A municipality was established and the following
announcement issued:


INHABITANTS OF MOSCOW!

Your misfortunes are cruel, but His Majesty the Emperor and King
desires to arrest their course.
 Terrible examples have taught you how he
punishes disobedience and crime.
 Strict measures have been taken to
put an end to disorder and to re-establish public security.
 A
paternal administration, chosen from among yourselves, will form your
municipality or city government.
 It will take care of you, of your
needs, and of your welfare.


The city police is established on its former footing, and better order
already prevails in consequence of its activity.
 Several churches of different denominations are
open, and divine service is performed in them unhindered.
 Your fellow
citizens are returning every day to their homes and orders have been
given that they should find in them the help and protection due to
their misfortunes.
 These are the measures the government has adopted to
re-establish order and relieve your condition.
 Soldiers and citizens, of whatever nation you
may be, re-establish public confidence, the source of the welfare of
a state, live like brothers, render mutual aid and protection one to
another, unite to defeat the intentions of the evil-minded, obey the
military and civil authorities, and your tears will soon cease to flow!


With regard to supplies for the army, Napoleon decreed that all the
troops in turn should enter Moscow a la maraude * to obtain provisions
for themselves, so that the army might have its future provided for.



    * As looters.
 Your fellow countrymen are emerging boldly from their hiding places
on finding that they are respected.
 Any violence to them or to their
property is promptly punished.
 His Majesty the Emperor and King protects
them, and considers no one among you his enemy except those who disobey
his orders.
 He desires to end your misfortunes and restore you to your
homes and families.
 Inhabitants, return with confidence to your
abodes! You will soon find means of satisfying your needs.
 Craftsmen
and industrious artisans, return to your work, your houses, your shops,
where the protection of guards awaits you! You shall receive proper pay
for your work.
 (3) Sunday and Wednesday of each week are appointed
as the chief market days and to that end a sufficient number of troops
will be stationed along the highroads on Tuesdays and Saturdays at such
distances from the town as to protect the carts.
 (4) Similar measures
will be taken that peasants with their carts and horses may meet with no
hindrance on their return journey.
 (5) Steps will immediately be taken
to re-establish ordinary trading.


In regard to philanthropy, the greatest virtue of crowned heads,
Napoleon also did all in his power.
 He
visited the Foundling Hospital and, allowing the orphans saved by him
to kiss his white hands, graciously conversed with Tutolmin.
 Then, as
Thiers eloquently recounts, he ordered his soldiers to be paid in forged
Russian money which he had prepared: "Raising the use of these means
by an act worthy of himself and of the French army, he let relief
be distributed to those who had been burned out.
 But as food was too
precious to be given to foreigners, who were for the most part enemies,
Napoleon preferred to supply them with money with which to purchase food
from outside, and had paper rubles distributed to them.






CHAPTER X


But strange to say, all these measures, efforts, and plans--which were
not at all worse than others issued in similar circumstances--did not
affect the essence of the matter but, like the hands of a clock detached
from the mechanism, swung about in an arbitrary and aimless way without
engaging the cogwheels.


With reference to the military side--the plan of campaign--that work of
genius of which Thiers remarks that, "His genius never devised anything
more profound, more skillful, or more admirable," and enters into a
polemic with M.
 Fain to prove that this work of genius must be referred
not to the fourth but to the fifteenth of October--that plan never was
or could be executed, for it was quite out of touch with the facts
of the case.
 The fortifying of the Kremlin, for which la Mosquee (as
Napoleon termed the church of Basil the Beatified) was to have been
razed to the ground, proved quite useless.
 The mining of the Kremlin
only helped toward fulfilling Napoleon's wish that it should be blown
up when he left Moscow--as a child wants the floor on which he has
hurt himself to be beaten.
 The pursuit of the Russian army, about which
Napoleon was so concerned, produced an unheard-of result.
 The French
generals lost touch with the Russian army of sixty thousand men, and
according to Thiers it was only eventually found, like a lost pin, by
the skill--and apparently the genius--of Murat.


With regard to religion, as to which in Egypt matters had so easily been
settled by Napoleon's visit to a mosque, no results were achieved.
"

With reference to commerce, the proclamation to industrious workmen and
to peasants evoked no response.
 There were no industrious workmen, and
the peasants caught the commissaries who ventured too far out of town
with the proclamation and killed them.


This is what the army authorities were reporting:

"Looting continues in the city despite the decrees against it.
 Order
is not yet restored and not a single merchant is carrying on trade in a
lawful manner.
 The sutlers alone venture to trade, and they sell stolen
goods.
"

"The neighborhood of my ward continues to be pillaged by soldiers of
the 3rd Corps who, not satisfied with taking from the unfortunate
inhabitants hiding in the cellars the little they have left, even have
the ferocity to wound them with their sabers, as I have repeatedly
witnessed.
"

"Nothing new, except that the soldiers are robbing and
pillaging--October 9.
 There is a band of thieves in our
district who ought to be arrested by a strong force--October 11.
"

"The Emperor is extremely displeased that despite the strict orders to
stop pillage, parties of marauding Guards are continually seen returning
to the Kremlin.
 The
Emperor sees with regret that the picked soldiers appointed to guard his
person, who should set an example of discipline, carry disobedience to
such a point that they break into the cellars and stores containing army
supplies.
"

"The Grand Marshal of the palace," wrote the governor, "complains
bitterly that in spite of repeated orders, the soldiers continue to
commit nuisances in all the courtyards and even under the very windows
of the Emperor.
"

That army, like a herd of cattle run wild and trampling underfoot the
provender which might have saved it from starvation, disintegrated and
perished with each additional day it remained in Moscow.


It began to run away only when suddenly seized by a panic caused by the
capture of transport trains on the Smolensk road, and by the battle of
Tarutino.


Fleeing from Moscow the soldiers took with them everything they had
stolen.
 Napoleon, too, carried away his own personal tresor, but on
seeing the baggage trains that impeded the army, he was (Thiers says)
horror-struck.
 And yet with his experience of war he did not order all
the superfluous vehicles to be burned, as he had done with those of a
certain marshal when approaching Moscow.
 He gazed at the caleches and
carriages in which soldiers were riding and remarked that it was a very
good thing, as those vehicles could be used to carry provisions, the
sick, and the wounded.


The plight of the whole army resembled that of a wounded animal which
feels it is perishing and does not know what it is doing.
 To study the
skillful tactics and aims of Napoleon and his army from the time it
entered Moscow till it was destroyed is like studying the dying leaps
and shudders of a mortally wounded animal.
 Napoleon, under pressure from his
whole army, did the same thing.
 The rustle of the battle of Tarutino
frightened the beast, and it rushed forward onto the hunter's gun,
reached him, turned back, and finally--like any wild beast--ran back
along the most disadvantageous and dangerous path, where the old scent
was familiar.
 This little dog lived in their shed, sleeping beside Karataev at
night; it sometimes made excursions into the town but always returned
again.
 Probably it had never had an owner, and it still belonged to
nobody and had no name.
 Its lack of a master, a name, or even of a breed or
any definite color did not seem to trouble the blue-gray dog in the
least.
 Everything pleased it.
 Now it would roll on its back, yelping with
delight, now bask in the sun with a thoughtful air of importance, and
now frolic about playing with a chip of wood or a straw.
 He no longer seemed stout, though he still had the appearance of
solidity and strength hereditary in his family.
 The former
slackness which had shown itself even in his eyes was now replaced by an
energetic readiness for action and resistance.
 His feet were bare.
 Every time he looked at his
bare feet a smile of animated self-satisfaction flitted across his face.

The sight of them reminded him of all he had experienced and learned
during these weeks and this recollection was pleasant to him.


For some days the weather had been calm and clear with slight frosts in
the mornings--what is called an "old wives' summer.


On everything--far and near--lay the magic crystal glitter seen only
at that time of autumn.
 The Sparrow Hills were visible in the distance,
with the village, the church, and the large white house.
 The bare trees,
the sand, the bricks and roofs of the houses, the green church spire,
and the corners of the white house in the distance, all stood out in the
transparent air in most delicate outline and with unnatural clearness.


A French corporal, with coat unbuttoned in a homely way, a skullcap on
his head, and a short pipe in his mouth, came from behind a corner of
the shed and approached Pierre with a friendly wink.


"What sunshine, Monsieur Kiril!" (Their name for Pierre.
) "Eh? Just like
spring!"

And the corporal leaned against the door and offered Pierre his pipe,
though whenever he offered it Pierre always declined it.
.
 The corporal replied that Pierre need not
worry about that as they had an ambulance and a permanent hospital and
arrangements would be made for the sick, and that in general everything
that could happen had been foreseen by the authorities.


"Besides, Monsieur Kiril, you have only to say a word to the captain,
you know.
 He is a man who never forgets anything.
)

"'You see, St.
 He knows what's what.
.
 If he wants
anything and asks me, he won't get a refusal.
 When one has studied, you
see, one likes education and well-bred people.
' It is for your sake I
mention it, Monsieur Kiril.
 (The affair
he had alluded to had happened a few days before--a fight between the
prisoners and the French soldiers, in which Pierre had succeeded in
pacifying his comrades.

While Pierre was repeating what he had been told about the army leaving
Moscow, a thin, sallow, tattered French soldier came up to the door of
the shed.
 Rapidly and timidly raising his fingers to his forehead by way
of greeting, he asked Pierre whether the soldier Platoche to whom he had
given a shirt to sew was in that shed.


"Ready, ready, dear fellow!" said Karataev, coming out with a neatly
folded shirt.
 He had
a long, greasy, flowered silk waistcoat next to his sallow, thin bare
body, but no shirt.
 None
of the prisoners said a word.


"See, it fits well!" Platon kept repeating, pulling the shirt straight.


"You see, dear man, this is not a sewing shop, and I had no proper
tools; and, as they say, one needs a tool even to kill a louse," said
Platon with one of his round smiles, obviously pleased with his work.


"It's good, quite good, thank you," said the Frenchman, in French, "but
there must be some linen left over.


"It will fit better still when it sets to your body," said Karataev,
still admiring his handiwork.
.
.
.
"

"Thanks, thanks, old fellow.
.
.
 But the bits left over?" said the
Frenchman again and smiled.
 He took out an assignation ruble note and
gave it to Karataev.
"

Pierre saw that Platon did not want to understand what the Frenchman
was saying, and he looked on without interfering.
 Karataev thanked the
Frenchman for the money and went on admiring his own work.
 "They'd make fine leg
bands for us.
 Well, never mind.
 "Oh dear!" muttered Karataev and went
away.
 It's what the old
folk used to say: 'A sweating hand's an open hand, a dry hand's close.
'
He's naked, but yet he's given it back.


"But they'll make grand leg bands, dear friend," he said, and went back
into the shed.






CHAPTER XII


Four weeks had passed since Pierre had been taken prisoner and though
the French had offered to move him from the men's to the officers' shed,
he had stayed in the shed where he was first put.


In burned and devastated Moscow Pierre experienced almost the extreme
limits of privation a man can endure; but thanks to his physical
strength and health, of which he had till then been unconscious, and
thanks especially to the fact that the privations came so gradually that
it was impossible to say when they began, he endured his position
not only lightly but joyfully.
 And just at this time he obtained the
tranquillity and ease of mind he had formerly striven in vain to reach.

He had long sought in different ways that tranquillity of mind, that
inner harmony which had so impressed him in the soldiers at the battle
of Borodino.
 And now without thinking
about it he had found that peace and inner harmony only through the
horror of death, through privation, and through what he recognized in
Karataev.
 It was plain to him that all these things were no business
of his, and that he was not called on to judge concerning them and
therefore could not do so.
 "Russia and summer weather are not bound
together," he thought, repeating words of Karataev's which he found
strangely consoling.
 His anger with his wife
and anxiety that his name should not be smirched now seemed not merely
trivial but even amusing.
 Prince Andrew had thought and said that happiness could
only be negative, but had said it with a shade of bitterness and irony
as though he was really saying that all desire for positive happiness is
implanted in us merely to torment us and never be satisfied.
 But Pierre
believed it without any mental reservation.
 The satisfaction of one's needs--good
food, cleanliness, and freedom--now that he was deprived of all this,
seemed to Pierre to constitute perfect happiness; and the choice
of occupation, that is, of his way of life--now that that was so
restricted--seemed to him such an easy matter that he forgot that a
superfluity of the comforts of life destroys all joy in satisfying one's
needs, while great freedom in the choice of occupation--such freedom as
his wealth, his education, and his social position had given him in
his own life--is just what makes the choice of occupation insolubly
difficult and destroys the desire and possibility of having an
occupation.


All Pierre's daydreams now turned on the time when he would be free.
 Yet
subsequently, and for the rest of his life, he thought and spoke with
enthusiasm of that month of captivity, of those irrecoverable, strong,
joyful sensations, and chiefly of the complete peace of mind and inner
freedom which he experienced only during those weeks.


When on the first day he got up early, went out of the shed at dawn, and
saw the cupolas and crosses of the New Convent of the Virgin still dark
at first, the hoarfrost on the dusty grass, the Sparrow Hills, and the
wooded banks above the winding river vanishing in the purple distance,
when he felt the contact of the fresh air and heard the noise of the
crows flying from Moscow across the field, and when afterwards light
gleamed from the east and the sun's rim appeared solemnly from behind a
cloud, and the cupolas and crosses, the hoarfrost, the distance and the
river, all began to sparkle in the glad light--Pierre felt a new joy and
strength in life such as he had never before known.
 And this not only
stayed with him during the whole of his imprisonment, but even grew in
strength as the hardships of his position increased.


That feeling of alertness and of readiness for anything was still
further strengthened in him by the high opinion his fellow prisoners
formed of him soon after his arrival at the shed.
 With his knowledge
of languages, the respect shown him by the French, his simplicity, his
readiness to give anything asked of him (he received the allowance
of three rubles a week made to officers); with his strength, which he
showed to the soldiers by pressing nails into the walls of the hut; his
gentleness to his companions, and his capacity for sitting still and
thinking without doing anything (which seemed to them incomprehensible),
he appeared to them a rather mysterious and superior being.
 And Pierre felt that their opinion
placed responsibilities upon him.






CHAPTER XIII


The French evacuation began on the night between the sixth and seventh
of October: kitchens and sheds were dismantled, carts loaded, and troops
and baggage trains started.


At seven in the morning a French convoy in marching trim, wearing shakos
and carrying muskets, knapsacks, and enormous sacks, stood in front
of the sheds, and animated French talk mingled with curses sounded all
along the lines.


In the shed everyone was ready, dressed, belted, shod, and only awaited
the order to start.
 The sick soldier, Sokolov, pale and thin with dark
shadows round his eyes, alone sat in his place barefoot and not dressed.
 It was evidently not so much his sufferings that
caused him to moan (he had dysentery) as his fear and grief at being
left alone.


Just as Pierre reached the door, the corporal who had offered him a
pipe the day before came up to it with two soldiers.


The corporal came, according to orders, to shut the door.


"Corporal, what will they do with the sick man?.
.
.
" Pierre began.
 The corporal frowned at Pierre's
words and, uttering some meaningless oaths, slammed the door.
 The shed
became semidark, and the sharp rattle of the drums on two sides drowned
the sick man's groans.
 It again!.
.
.
" said Pierre to himself, and an
involuntary shudder ran down his spine.
 To fear or to
try to escape that force, to address entreaties or exhortations to those
who served as its tools, was useless.
 Pierre knew this now.
 One had to
wait and endure.
 He did not again go to the sick man, nor turn to look
at him, but stood frowning by the door of the hut.
 The captain was also in
marching kit, and on his cold face appeared that same it which Pierre
had recognized in the corporal's words and in the roll of the drums.


"Pass on, pass on!" the captain reiterated, frowning sternly, and
looking at the prisoners who thronged past him.


Pierre went up to him, though he knew his attempt would be vain.


"What now?" the officer asked with a cold look as if not recognizing
Pierre.


Pierre told him about the sick man.


"He'll manage to walk, devil take him!" said the captain.


"But he is dying," Pierre again began.
.
" shouted the captain, frowning angrily.


"Dram-da-da-dam, dam-dam.
.
.
" rattled the drums, and Pierre understood
that this mysterious force completely controlled these men and that it
was now useless to say any more.


The officer prisoners were separated from the soldiers and told to march
in front.
 There were about thirty officers, with Pierre among them, and
about three hundred men.


The officers, who had come from the other sheds, were all strangers to
Pierre and much better dressed than he.
 Not far from him walked a fat major
with a sallow, bloated, angry face, who was wearing a Kazan dressing
gown tied round with a towel, and who evidently enjoyed the respect of
his fellow prisoners.
 Panting and puffing, the major grumbled and
growled at everybody because he thought he was being pushed and that
they were all hurrying when they had nowhere to hurry to and were
all surprised at something when there was nothing to be surprised at.

Another, a thin little officer, was speaking to everyone, conjecturing
where they were now being taken and how far they would get that day.
 An
official in felt boots and wearing a commissariat uniform ran round from
side to side and gazed at the ruins of Moscow, loudly announcing his
observations as to what had been burned down and what this or that part
of the city was that they could see.


"What are you disputing about?" said the major angrily.
 "What does it
matter whether it is St.
 Nicholas or St.
 Blasius? You see it's burned
down, and there's an end of it.
.
.


"Oh, oh, oh! What have they done?" the prisoners on one side and another
were heard saying as they gazed on the charred ruins.
 "All beyond the
river, and Zubova, and in the Kremlin.
.
.
 Just look! There's not half of
it left.
 Yes, I told you--the whole quarter beyond the river, and so it
is.
"

"Well, you know it's burned, so what's the use of talking?" said the
major.


As they passed near a church in the Khamovniki (one of the few unburned
quarters of Moscow) the whole mass of prisoners suddenly started to one
side and exclamations of horror and disgust were heard.
.
.
 And
smeared with something!"

Pierre too drew near the church where the thing was that evoked these
exclamations, and dimly made out something leaning against the palings
surrounding the church.
 From the words of his comrades who saw better
than he did, he found that this was the body of a man, set upright
against the palings with its face smeared with soot.


"Go on! What the devil.
.
 Go on! Thirty thousand devils!.
.
" the convoy
guards began cursing and the French soldiers, with fresh virulence,
drove away with their swords the crowd of prisoners who were gazing at
the dead man.

From the bridge they had a view of endless lines of moving baggage
trains before and behind them.
 These were troops of Beauharnais' corps which had started
before any of the others.
 Behind, along the riverside and across the
Stone Bridge, were Ney's troops and transport.

But the baggage trains stretched out so that the last of Beauharnais'
train had not yet got out of Moscow and reached the Kaluga road when
the vanguard of Ney's army was already emerging from the Great Ordynka
Street.
 From all
sides, like the roar of the sea, were heard the rattle of wheels, the
tramp of feet, and incessant shouts of anger and abuse.
.
 "Just see what
the blackguards have looted.
.
.
.
 Oh, the rascals!.
.
.
.
.
.
 Heavens!
They're fighting.
"

"That's right, hit him on the snout--on his snout! Like this, we
shan't get away before evening.
.
.
 Why, that must be
Napoleon's own.
.
 That fellow's dropped his sack and doesn't see
it.
 Fighting again.
.
.
.
.
 Just look,
there's no end to it.
 Russian wenches, by heaven, so they are! In
carriages--see how comfortably they've settled themselves!"

Again, as at the church in Khamovniki, a wave of general curiosity
bore all the prisoners forward onto the road, and Pierre, thanks to
his stature, saw over the heads of the others what so attracted their
curiosity.
 All that he now witnessed scarcely made an impression
on him--as if his soul, making ready for a hard struggle, refused to
receive impressions that might weaken it.


The women's vehicles drove by.
 During the hour Pierre watched them they all came flowing from
the different streets with one and the same desire to get on quickly;
they all jostled one another, began to grow angry and to fight, white
teeth gleamed, brows frowned, ever the same words of abuse flew from
side to side, and all the faces bore the same swaggeringly resolute
and coldly cruel expression that had struck Pierre that morning on the
corporal's face when the drums were beating.


It was not till nearly evening that the officer commanding the escort
collected his men and with shouts and quarrels forced his way in among
the baggage trains, and the prisoners, hemmed in on all sides, emerged
onto the Kaluga road.


They marched very quickly, without resting, and halted only when the sun
began to set.
 The baggage carts drew up close together and the men
began to prepare for their night's rest.
 A carriage that followed the escort ran
into one of the carts and knocked a hole in it with its pole.


It seemed that all these men, now that they had stopped amid fields
in the chill dusk of the autumn evening, experienced one and the same
feeling of unpleasant awakening from the hurry and eagerness to push on
that had seized them at the start.
 It was here that the prisoners for the first time
received horseflesh for their meat ration.


This spite increased still more when, on calling over the roll of
prisoners, it was found that in the bustle of leaving Moscow one Russian
soldier, who had pretended to suffer from colic, had escaped.
 Pierre saw
a Frenchman beat a Russian soldier cruelly for straying too far from
the road, and heard his friend the captain reprimand and threaten to
court-martial a noncommissioned officer on account of the escape of the
Russian.
 To the noncommissioned officer's excuse that the prisoner was
ill and could not walk, the officer replied that the order was to shoot
those who lagged behind.


He ate his supper of buckwheat soup with horseflesh and chatted with his
comrades.


Neither Pierre nor any of the others spoke of what they had seen in
Moscow, or of the roughness of their treatment by the French, or of the
order to shoot them which had been announced to them.
 As if in reaction
against the worsening of their position they were all particularly
animated and gay.


The sun had set long since.
 Bright stars shone out here and there in the
sky.
 A red glow as of a conflagration spread above the horizon from the
rising full moon, and that vast red ball swayed strangely in the gray
haze.
 He wanted to talk to them.
 On
the road he was stopped by a French sentinel who ordered him back.
 Tucking his legs under him and
dropping his head he sat down on the cold ground by the wheel of the
cart and remained motionless a long while sunk in thought.


"Ha-ha-ha!" laughed Pierre.

What, me? Me? My immortal soul? Ha-ha-ha! Ha-ha-ha!.
.
.
" and he laughed
till tears started to his eyes.


A man got up and came to see what this queer big fellow was laughing at
all by himself.
 Pierre stopped laughing, got up, went farther away from
the inquisitive man, and looked around him.
 High up in the light
sky hung the full moon.
 Forests and fields beyond the camp, unseen
before, were now visible in the distance.
 And farther still, beyond
those forests and fields, the bright, oscillating, limitless distance
lured one to itself.
 Pierre glanced up at the sky and the twinkling
stars in its faraway depths.

Kutuzov replied to this letter as he had done to the one formerly
brought by Lauriston, saying that there could be no question of peace.


Soon after that a report was received from Dorokhov's guerrilla
detachment operating to the left of Tarutino that troops of Broussier's
division had been seen at Forminsk and that being separated from the
rest of the French army they might easily be destroyed.
 Generals on the staff, excited by the
memory of the easy victory at Tarutino, urged Kutuzov to carry out
Dorokhov's suggestion.
 Kutuzov did not consider any offensive necessary.
 At Austerlitz he remained last at the
Augezd dam, rallying the regiments, saving what was possible when all
were flying and perishing and not a single general was left in the rear
guard.
 Ill with fever he went to Smolensk with twenty thousand men
to defend the town against Napoleon's whole army.

And the quiet little Dokhturov rode thither, and Borodino became the
greatest glory of the Russian army.
 At that time Dokhturov had under his command, besides
Dorokhov's detachment, the two small guerrilla detachments of Figner and
Seslavin.


On the evening of October 11 Seslavin came to the Aristovo headquarters
with a French guardsman he had captured.
 The prisoner said that the
troops that had entered Forminsk that day were the vanguard of the whole
army, that Napoleon was there and the whole army had left Moscow four
days previously.
 Some
Cossacks of Dokhturov's detachment reported having sighted the French
Guards marching along the road to Borovsk.
 Dokhturov was unwilling to undertake
any action, as it was not clear to him now what he ought to do.
 He had
been ordered to attack Forminsk.
 But only Broussier had been there at
that time and now the whole French army was there.
 Ermolov wished to act
on his own judgment, but Dokhturov insisted that he must have Kutuzov's
instructions.
 Toward midnight Bolkhovitinov, having received the
dispatch and verbal instructions, galloped off to the General Staff
accompanied by a Cossack with spare horses.






CHAPTER XVI


It was a warm, dark, autumn night.
 It had been raining for four days.

Having changed horses twice and galloped twenty miles in an hour and a
half over a sticky, muddy road, Bolkhovitinov reached Litashevka after
one o'clock at night.
 Dismounting at a cottage on whose wattle fence
hung a signboard, GENERAL STAFF, and throwing down his reins, he entered
a dark passage.


"The general on duty, quick! It's very important!" said he to someone
who had risen and was sniffing in the dark passage.


"He has been very unwell since the evening and this is the third night
he has not slept," said the orderly pleadingly in a whisper.
"

"But this is very important, from General Dokhturov," said
Bolkhovitinov, entering the open door which he had found by feeling in
the dark.


The orderly had gone in before him and began waking somebody.


"Your honor, your honor! A courier.
"

"What? What's that? From whom?" came a sleepy voice.


"From Dokhturov and from Alexey Petrovich.


The man who had wakened yawned and stretched himself.
 "He is very
ill.
"

"Here is the dispatch," said Bolkhovitinov.
"

"Wait a moment, I'll light a candle.
 (This was Shcherbinin, Konovnitsyn's adjutant.


The orderly was striking a light and Shcherbinin was fumbling for
something on the candlestick.


By the light of the sparks Bolkhovitinov saw Shcherbinin's youthful face
as he held the candle, and the face of another man who was still asleep.
 Bolkhovitinov was bespattered
all over with mud and had smeared his face by wiping it with his sleeve.
 "Prisoners, Cossacks, and
the scouts all say the same thing.
"

"There's nothing to be done, we'll have to wake him," said Shcherbinin,
rising and going up to the man in the nightcap who lay covered by a
greatcoat.
) "To
the General Staff!" he said with a smile, knowing that those words would
be sure to arouse him.


And in fact the head in the nightcap was lifted at once.
 On
Konovnitsyn's handsome, resolute face with cheeks flushed by fever,
there still remained for an instant a faraway dreamy expression remote
from present affairs, but then he suddenly started and his face assumed
its habitual calm and firm appearance.


While listening to the officer's report Konovnitsyn broke the seal and
read the dispatch.
 Then he took off his nightcap, combed his hair over his temples,
and donned his cap.
 He did not consider or ask
himself whether the news was good or bad.
 He
regarded the whole business of the war not with his intelligence or his
reason but by something else.

And he did his work, giving his whole strength to the task.


Peter Petrovich Konovnitsyn, like Dokhturov, seems to have been included
merely for propriety's sake in the list of the so-called heroes of
1812--the Barclays, Raevskis, Ermolovs, Platovs, and Miloradoviches.

Like Dokhturov he had the reputation of being a man of very limited
capacity and information, and like Dokhturov he never made plans of
battle but was always found where the situation was most difficult.

Since his appointment as general on duty he had always slept with his
door open, giving orders that every messenger should be allowed to wake
him up.
 In battle he was always under fire, so that Kutuzov reproved him
for it and feared to send him to the front, and like Dokhturov he
was one of those unnoticed cogwheels that, without clatter or noise,
constitute the most essential part of the machine.
 And this premonition was disagreeable to him
though he knew it could not be helped.


And in fact Toll, to whom he went to communicate the news, immediately
began to expound his plans to a general sharing his quarters, until
Konovnitsyn, who listened in weary silence, reminded him that they must
go to see his Highness.






CHAPTER XVII


Kutuzov like all old people did not sleep much at night.


So he lay now on his bed, supporting his large, heavy, scarred head on
his plump hand, with his one eye open, meditating and peering into the
darkness.


Since Bennigsen, who corresponded with the Emperor and had more
influence than anyone else on the staff, had begun to avoid him, Kutuzov
was more at ease as to the possibility of himself and his troops being
obliged to take part in useless aggressive movements.
 The lesson of the
Tarutino battle and of the day before it, which Kutuzov remembered with
pain, must, he thought, have some effect on others too.

Patience and time are my warriors, my champions," thought Kutuzov.
 He
knew that an apple should not be plucked while it is green.
 It will fall
of itself when ripe, but if picked unripe the apple is spoiled, the tree
is harmed, and your teeth are set on edge.
 Like an experienced sportsman
he knew that the beast was wounded, and wounded as only the whole
strength of Russia could have wounded it, but whether it was mortally
wounded or not was still an undecided question.
 Now by the fact of
Lauriston and Barthelemi having been sent, and by the reports of the
guerrillas, Kutuzov was almost sure that the wound was mortal.
 But he
needed further proofs and it was necessary to wait.
 Wait and we shall
see! Continual maneuvers, continual advances!" thought he.
 "What for?
Only to distinguish themselves! As if fighting were fun.
 They are
like children from whom one can't get any sensible account of what has
happened because they all want to show how well they can fight.
 But the contingencies are endless.
"

The undecided question as to whether the wound inflicted at Borodino was
mortal or not had hung over Kutuzov's head for a whole month.
 On the one
hand the French had occupied Moscow.
 On the other Kutuzov felt assured
with all his being that the terrible blow into which he and all the
Russians had put their whole strength must have been mortal.
 But in any
case proofs were needed; he had waited a whole month for them and grew
more impatient the longer he waited.
 Lying on his bed during those
sleepless nights he did just what he reproached those younger generals
for doing.
 He imagined all sorts of possible contingencies, just like
the younger men, but with this difference, that he saw thousands of
contingencies instead of two or three and based nothing on them.
 The
longer he thought the more contingencies presented themselves.
 But these were
only suppositions, which seemed important to the younger men but not to
Kutuzov.
 With his sixty years' experience he knew what value to attach
to rumors, knew how apt people who desire anything are to group all news
so that it appears to confirm what they desire, and he knew how readily
in such cases they omit all that makes for the contrary.
 This question
absorbed all his mental powers.
 But the destruction of the French, which he
alone foresaw, was his heart's one desire.


On the night of the eleventh of October he lay leaning on his arm and
thinking of that.


There was a stir in the next room and he heard the steps of Toll,
Konovnitsyn, and Bolkhovitinov.


"Who brought it?" asked Kutuzov with a look which, when the candle was
lit, struck Toll by its cold severity.


"There can be no doubt about it, your Highness.
"

"Call him in, call him here.
"

Kutuzov sat up with one leg hanging down from the bed and his big paunch
resting against the other which was doubled under him.
 He screwed up his
seeing eye to scrutinize the messenger more carefully, as if wishing to
read in his face what preoccupied his own mind.
 What news have you brought me? Eh? That Napoleon
has left Moscow? Are you sure? Eh?"

Bolkhovitinov gave a detailed account from the beginning of all he had
been told to report.


"Speak quicker, quicker! Don't torture me!" Kutuzov interrupted him.
 Toll was beginning to say something but Kutuzov checked
him.
 He tried to say something, but his face suddenly puckered and
wrinkled; he waved his arm at Toll and turned to the opposite side of
the room, to the corner darkened by the icons that hung there.


"O Lord, my Creator, Thou has heard our prayer.
.
.
" said he in a
tremulous voice with folded hands.
 "Russia is saved.






CHAPTER XVIII


From the time he received this news to the end of the campaign all
Kutuzov's activity was directed toward restraining his troops, by
authority, by guile, and by entreaty, from useless attacks,
maneuvers, or encounters with the perishing enemy.
 Dokhturov went to
Malo-Yaroslavets, but Kutuzov lingered with the main army and gave
orders for the evacuation of Kaluga--a retreat beyond which town seemed
to him quite possible.


Everywhere Kutuzov retreated, but the enemy without waiting for his
retreat fled in the opposite direction.


But not to speak of the fact that nothing prevented him from advancing
into those southern provinces (for the Russian army did not bar his
way), the historians forget that nothing could have saved his army, for
then already it bore within itself the germs of inevitable ruin.
 How
could that army--which had found abundant supplies in Moscow and had
trampled them underfoot instead of keeping them, and on arriving at
Smolensk had looted provisions instead of storing them--how could that
army recuperate in Kaluga province, which was inhabited by Russians such
as those who lived in Moscow, and where fire had the same property of
consuming what was set ablaze?

That army could not recover anywhere.


The members of what had once been an army--Napoleon himself and all his
soldiers fled--without knowing whither, each concerned only to make his
escape as quickly as possible from this position, of the hopelessness of
which they were all more or less vaguely conscious.


So it came about that at the council at Malo-Yaroslavets, when the
generals pretending to confer together expressed various opinions, all
mouths were closed by the opinion uttered by the simple-minded soldier
Mouton who, speaking last, said what they all felt: that the one thing
needful was to get away as quickly as possible; and no one, not
even Napoleon, could say anything against that truth which they all
recognized.
 An
external shock was needed to overcome that shame, and this shock came in
due time.
 It was what the French called "le hourra de l'Empereur.
 Some Cossacks on the prowl for
booty fell in with the Emperor and very nearly captured him.
 Here as at Tarutino they went after plunder, leaving the
men.
 Disregarding Napoleon they rushed after the plunder and Napoleon
managed to escape.


When les enfants du Don might so easily have taken the Emperor himself
in the midst of his army, it was clear that there was nothing for it but
to fly as fast as possible along the nearest, familiar road.
 One must have the prospect of a promised
land to have the strength to move.


The promised land for the French during their advance had been Moscow,
during their retreat it was their native land.
 But that native land
was too far off, and for a man going a thousand miles it is absolutely
necessary to set aside his final goal and to say to himself: "Today I
shall get to a place twenty-five miles off where I shall rest and
spend the night," and during the first day's journey that resting place
eclipses his ultimate goal and attracts all his hopes and desires.


For the French retreating along the old Smolensk road, the final
goal--their native land--was too remote, and their immediate goal
was Smolensk, toward which all their desires and hopes, enormously
intensified in the mass, urged them on.
 It was not that they knew that
much food and fresh troops awaited them in Smolensk, nor that they were
told so (on the contrary their superior officers, and Napoleon himself,
knew that provisions were scarce there), but because this alone could
give them strength to move on and endure their present privations.
 So
both those who knew and those who did not know deceived themselves, and
pushed on to Smolensk as to a promised land.


Coming out onto the highroad the French fled with surprising energy
and unheard-of rapidity toward the goal they had fixed on.
 Besides the
common impulse which bound the whole crowd of French into one mass and
supplied them with a certain energy, there was another cause binding
them together--their great numbers.


Each of them desired nothing more than to give himself up as a prisoner
to escape from all this horror and misery; but on the one hand the force
of this common attraction to Smolensk, their goal, drew each of them in
the same direction; on the other hand an army corps could not surrender
to a company, and though the French availed themselves of every
convenient opportunity to detach themselves and to surrender on the
slightest decent pretext, such pretexts did not always occur.
 Beyond a certain limit no mechanical disruption of the
body could hasten the process of decomposition.


A lump of snow cannot be melted instantaneously.
 There is a certain
limit of time in less than which no amount of heat can melt the snow.
 On
the contrary the greater the heat the more solidified the remaining snow
becomes.


Of the Russian commanders Kutuzov alone understood this.
 When the flight
of the French army along the Smolensk road became well defined, what
Konovnitsyn had foreseen on the night of the eleventh of October began
to occur.


He could not tell them what we say now: "Why fight, why block the road,
losing our own men and inhumanly slaughtering unfortunate wretches? What
is the use of that, when a third of their army has melted away on the
road from Moscow to Vyazma without any battle?" But drawing from his
aged wisdom what they could understand, he told them of the golden
bridge, and they laughed at and slandered him, flinging themselves on,
rending and exulting over the dying beast.


Ermolov, Miloradovich, Platov, and others in proximity to the French
near Vyazma could not resist their desire to cut off and break up two
French corps, and by way of reporting their intention to Kutuzov they
sent him a blank sheet of paper in an envelope.
 Infantry regiments, we are told, advanced to the
attack with music and with drums beating, and killed and lost thousands
of men.


But they did not cut off or overthrow anybody and the French army,
closing up more firmly at the danger, continued, while steadily melting
away, to pursue its fatal path to Smolensk.






BOOK FOURTEEN: 1812





CHAPTER I


The Battle of Borodino, with the occupation of Moscow that followed it
and the flight of the French without further conflicts, is one of the
most instructive phenomena in history.
 An army gains a victory, and at once the
rights of the conquering nation have increased to the detriment of the
defeated.
 An army has suffered defeat, and at once a people loses its
rights in proportion to the severity of the reverse, and if its army
suffers a complete defeat the nation is quite subjugated.
 All Napoleon's wars serve to confirm this
rule.
 The
victories of the French at Jena and Auerstadt destroy the independent
existence of Prussia.
 Moscow is
taken and after that, with no further battles, it is not Russia that
ceases to exist, but the French army of six hundred thousand, and
then Napoleonic France itself.


After the French victory at Borodino there was no general engagement nor
any that were at all serious, yet the French army ceased to exist.


The period of the campaign of 1812 from the battle of Borodino to the
expulsion of the French proved that the winning of a battle does not
produce a conquest and is not even an invariable indication of conquest;
it proved that the force which decides the fate of peoples lies not in
the conquerors, nor even in armies and battles, but in something else.


The French historians, describing the condition of the French army
before it left Moscow, affirm that all was in order in the Grand Army,
except the cavalry, the artillery, and the transport--there was no
forage for the horses or the cattle.
 That was a misfortune no one could
remedy, for the peasants of the district burned their hay rather than
let the French have it.


The victory gained did not bring the usual results because the peasants
Karp and Vlas (who after the French had evacuated Moscow drove in their
carts to pillage the town, and in general personally failed to manifest
any heroic feelings), and the whole innumerable multitude of such
peasants, did not bring their hay to Moscow for the high price offered
them, but burned it instead.
 The fencing has
gone on for some time; suddenly one of the combatants, feeling himself
wounded and understanding that the matter is no joke but concerns his
life, throws down his rapier, and seizing the first cudgel that comes to
hand begins to brandish it.
 Then let us imagine that the combatant who
so sensibly employed the best and simplest means to attain his end was
at the same time influenced by traditions of chivalry and, desiring to
conceal the facts of the case, insisted that he had gained his victory
with the rapier according to all the rules of art.
 One can imagine what
confusion and obscurity would result from such an account of the duel.
 The burning of towns and villages, the
retreats after battles, the blow dealt at Borodino and the renewed
retreat, the burning of Moscow, the capture of marauders, the seizure of
transports, and the guerrilla war were all departures from the rules.


Napoleon felt this, and from the time he took up the correct fencing
attitude in Moscow and instead of his opponent's rapier saw a cudgel
raised above his head, he did not cease to complain to Kutuzov and to
the Emperor Alexander that the war was being carried on contrary to all
the rules--as if there were any rules for killing people.


And it is well for a people who do not--as the French did in
1813--salute according to all the rules of art, and, presenting the hilt
of their rapier gracefully and politely, hand it to their magnanimous
conqueror, but at the moment of trial, without asking what rules others
have adopted in similar cases, simply and easily pick up the first
cudgel that comes to hand and strike with it till the feeling of
resentment and revenge in their soul yields to a feeling of contempt and
compassion.






CHAPTER II


One of the most obvious and advantageous departures from the so-called
laws of war is the action of scattered groups against men pressed
together in a mass.
 Such action always occurs in wars that take on a
national character.


Guerrilla war (always successful, as history shows) directly infringes
that rule.
 Les gros
bataillons ont toujours raison.
 *


    * Large battalions are always victorious.


Momentum (quantity of motion) is the product of mass and velocity.


In military affairs the strength of an army is the product of its mass
and some unknown x.


Military science, seeing in history innumerable instances of the fact
that the size of any army does not coincide with its strength and that
small detachments defeat larger ones, obscurely admits the existence
of this unknown factor and tries to discover it--now in a geometric
formation, now in the equipment employed, now, and most usually, in the
genius of the commanders.
 But the assignment of these various meanings
to the factor does not yield results which accord with the historic
facts.


Yet it is only necessary to abandon the false view (adopted to gratify
the "heroes") of the efficacy of the directions issued in wartime by
commanders, in order to find this unknown quantity.


That unknown quantity is the spirit of the army, that is to say, the
greater or lesser readiness to fight and face danger felt by all the men
composing an army, quite independently of whether they are, or are not,
fighting under the command of a genius, in two--or three-line formation,
with cudgels or with rifles that repeat thirty times a minute.


The spirit of an army is the factor which multiplied by the mass gives
the resulting force.


This problem is only solvable if we cease arbitrarily to substitute
for the unknown x itself the conditions under which that force becomes
apparent--such as the commands of the general, the equipment employed,
and so on--mistaking these for the real significance of the factor,
and if we recognize this unknown quantity in its entirety as being
the greater or lesser desire to fight and to face danger.
 Only then,
expressing known historic facts by equations and comparing the relative
significance of this factor, can we hope to define the unknown.
 This equation does not
give us the value of the unknown factor but gives us a ratio between two
unknowns.
 And by bringing variously selected historic units (battles,
campaigns, periods of war) into such equations, a series of numbers
could be obtained in which certain laws should exist and might be
discovered.


The tactical rule that an army should act in masses when attacking, and
in smaller groups in retreat, unconsciously confirms the truth that the
strength of an army depends on its spirit.
 To lead men forward under
fire more discipline (obtainable only by movement in masses) is needed
than is needed to resist attacks.


On August 24 Davydov's first partisan detachment was formed and then
others were recognized.
 The further the campaign progressed the more
numerous these detachments became.
 They gathered the
fallen leaves that dropped of themselves from that withered tree--the
French army--and sometimes shook that tree itself.
 There were some that adopted
all the army methods and had infantry, artillery, staffs, and the
comforts of life.
 Others consisted solely of Cossack cavalry.
 A sacristan commanded one party which
captured several hundred prisoners in the course of a month; and there
was Vasilisa, the wife of a village elder, who slew hundreds of the
French.
 By the end
of October this kind of warfare had taken definite shape: it had become
clear to all what could be ventured against the French and what could
not.
 Now only the commanders of detachments with staffs, and moving
according to rules at a distance from the French, still regarded many
things as impossible.
 The small bands that had started their activities
long before and had already observed the French closely considered
things possible which the commanders of the big detachments did not dare
to contemplate.
 The Cossacks and peasants who crept in among the French
now considered everything possible.


On October 22, Denisov (who was one of the irregulars) was with his
group at the height of the guerrilla enthusiasm.
 Besides Denisov and Dolokhov (who also led
a small party and moved in Denisov's vicinity), the commanders of some
large divisions with staffs also knew of this convoy and, as Denisov
expressed it, were sharpening their teeth for it.


Having arranged matters thus, Denisov and Dolokhov intended, without
reporting matters to the higher command, to attack and seize that
convoy with their own small forces.
 To the left of the road
between Mikulino and Shamshevo there were large forests, extending in
some places up to the road itself though in others a mile or more back
from it.
 Through these forests Denisov and his party rode all day,
sometimes keeping well back in them and sometimes coming to the very
edge, but never losing sight of the moving French.
 That morning,
Cossacks of Denisov's party had seized and carried off into the forest
two wagons loaded with cavalry saddles, which had stuck in the mud not
far from Mikulino where the forest ran close to the road.
 Since then,
and until evening, the party had watched the movements of the French
without attacking.
 It was necessary to let the French reach Shamshevo
quietly without alarming them and then, after joining Dolokhov who was
to come that evening to a consultation at a watchman's hut in the forest
less than a mile from Shamshevo, to surprise the French at dawn, falling
like an avalanche on their heads from two sides, and rout and capture
them all at one blow.


In their rear, more than a mile from Mikulino where the forest came
right up to the road, six Cossacks were posted to report if any fresh
columns of French should show themselves.


Beyond Shamshevo, Dolokhov was to observe the road in the same way, to
find out at what distance there were other French troops.


Denisov considered it dangerous to make a second attack for fear of
putting the whole column on the alert, so he sent Tikhon Shcherbaty, a
peasant of his party, to Shamshevo to try and seize at least one of the
French quartermasters who had been sent on in advance.






CHAPTER IV


It was a warm rainy autumn day.
 The sky and the horizon were both
the color of muddy water.
 At times a sort of mist descended, and then
suddenly heavy slanting rain came down.


Denisov in a felt cloak and a sheepskin cap from which the rain ran down
was riding a thin thoroughbred horse with sunken sides.



    * A captain of Cossacks.
 Though it was impossible to
say in what the peculiarity of the horse and rider lay, yet at first
glance at the esaul and Denisov one saw that the latter was wet and
uncomfortable and was a man mounted on a horse, while looking at the
esaul one saw that he was as comfortable and as much at ease as always
and that he was not a man who had mounted a horse, but a man who was one
with his horse, a being consequently possessed of twofold strength.


A little ahead of them walked a peasant guide, wet to the skin and
wearing a gray peasant coat and a white knitted cap.


Beside him rode an hussar, with a boy in a tattered French uniform and
blue cap behind him on the crupper of his horse.
 The boy held on to the
hussar with cold, red hands, and raising his eyebrows gazed about him
with surprise.
 This was the French drummer boy captured that morning.


Behind them along the narrow, sodden, cutup forest road came hussars in
threes and fours, and then Cossacks: some in felt cloaks, some in French
greatcoats, and some with horsecloths over their heads.
 Steam rose from them.
 Clothes, saddles, reins, were all wet,
slippery, and sodden, like the ground and the fallen leaves that strewed
the road.
 The men sat huddled up trying not to stir, so as to warm the
water that had trickled to their bodies and not admit the fresh cold
water that was leaking in under their seats, their knees, and at the
back of their necks.


Denisov's horse swerved aside to avoid a pool in the track and bumped
his rider's knee against a tree.


"Oh, the devil!" exclaimed Denisov angrily, and showing his teeth he
struck his horse three times with his whip, splashing himself and his
comrades with mud.


Denisov was out of sorts both because of the rain and also from hunger
(none of them had eaten anything since morning), and yet more because he
still had no news from Dolokhov and the man sent to capture a "tongue"
had not returned.


"There'll hardly be another such chance to fall on a transport as today.


"There's someone coming," said he.


The esaul looked in the direction Denisov indicated.
 In front, at a weary
gallop and using his leather whip, rode an officer, disheveled and
drenched, whose trousers had worked up to above his knees.
 Behind him,
standing in the stirrups, trotted a Cossack.
 The officer, a very young
lad with a broad rosy face and keen merry eyes, galloped up to Denisov
and handed him a sodden envelope.
 "Please excuse its not being quite
dry.
"

Denisov, frowning, took the envelope and opened it.
 But what's this?" he asked,
noticing the French drummer boy.
 "A prisoner? You've already been in
action? May I speak to him?"

"Wostov! Petya!" exclaimed Denisov, having run through the dispatch.

"Why didn't you say who you were?" and turning with a smile he held out
his hand to the lad.


The officer was Petya Rostov.


All the way Petya had been preparing himself to behave with Denisov as
befitted a grownup man and an officer--without hinting at their previous
acquaintance.
 But as soon as Denisov smiled at him Petya brightened
up, blushed with pleasure, forgot the official manner he had been
rehearsing, and began telling him how he had already been in a battle
near Vyazma and how a certain hussar had distinguished himself there.
 He"--he indicated Petya--"is serving under him.


While Denisov was talking to the esaul, Petya--abashed by Denisov's
cold tone and supposing that it was due to the condition of his
trousers--furtively tried to pull them down under his greatcoat so
that no one should notice it, while maintaining as martial an air as
possible.


"Will there be any orders, your honor?" he asked Denisov, holding his
hand at the salute and resuming the game of adjutant and general for
which he had prepared himself, "or shall I remain with your honor?"

"Orders?" Denisov repeated thoughtfully.
 "But can you stay till
tomowwow?"

"Oh, please.
 May I stay with you?" cried Petya.


Petya blushed.


"He gave me no instructions.


And turning to his men he directed a party to go on to the halting place
arranged near the watchman's hut in the forest, and told the officer on
the Kirghiz horse (who performed the duties of an adjutant) to go and
find out where Dolokhov was and whether he would come that evening.

Denisov himself intended going with the esaul and Petya to the edge of
the forest where it reached out to Shamshevo, to have a look at the part
of the French bivouac they were to attack next day.
 Denisov, the esaul, and Petya rode silently, following the
peasant in the knitted cap who, stepping lightly with outturned toes
and moving noiselessly in his bast shoes over the roots and wet leaves,
silently led them to the edge of the forest.


He ascended an incline, stopped, looked about him, and advanced to where
the screen of trees was less dense.


Denisov and Petya rode up to him.
 Immediately beyond the forest, on a
downward slope, lay a field of spring rye.

In the village, in the house, in the garden, by the well, by the pond,
over all the rising ground, and all along the road uphill from the
bridge leading to the village, not more than five hundred yards
away, crowds of men could be seen through the shimmering mist.
 Their
un-Russian shouting at their horses which were straining uphill with the
carts, and their calls to one another, could be clearly heard.


"Bwing the prisoner here," said Denisov in a low voice, not taking his
eyes off the French.


A Cossack dismounted, lifted the boy down, and took him to Denisov.
 The boy, thrusting his cold hands into his pockets and
lifting his eyebrows, looked at Denisov in affright, but in spite of
an evident desire to say all he knew gave confused answers, merely
assenting to everything Denisov asked him.
 Denisov turned away from him
frowning and addressed the esaul, conveying his own conjectures to him.


"Whether Dolokhov comes or not, we must seize it, eh?" said Denisov with
a merry sparkle in his eyes.


"We'll send the infantwy down by the swamps," Denisov continued.

"They'll cweep up to the garden; you'll wide up fwom there with the
Cossacks"--he pointed to a spot in the forest beyond the village--"and I
with my hussars fwom here.
 And at the signal shot.
"

"The hollow is impassable--there's a swamp there," said the esaul.
 "The
horses would sink.
 We must ride round more to the left.
.
.
 For a moment Denisov and the
esaul drew back.
 But the firing and shouting did not relate
to them.
 Down below, a man wearing something red was running through the
marsh.
 The French were evidently firing and shouting at him.


"Why, that's our Tikhon," said the esaul.


"He'll get away!" said the esaul, screwing up his eyes.


The man whom they called Tikhon, having run to the stream, plunged in
so that the water splashed in the air, and, having disappeared for an
instant, scrambled out on all fours, all black with the wet, and ran on.

The French who had been pursuing him stopped.


"Smart, that!" said the esaul.


"He's our plastun.
 I sent him to capture a 'tongue.

He was a peasant from Pokrovsk, near the river Gzhat.
 But
when Denisov explained that his purpose was to kill the French, and
asked if no French had strayed that way, the elder replied that some
"more-orderers" had really been at their village, but that Tikhon
Shcherbaty was the only man who dealt with such matters.


"We don't do the French any harm," said Tikhon, evidently frightened by
Denisov's words.
.
.
"

Next day when Denisov had left Pokrovsk, having quite forgotten about
this peasant, it was reported to him that Tikhon had attached himself
to their party and asked to be allowed to remain with it.
 Denisov gave
orders to let him do so.
 Denisov then relieved him from drudgery and
began taking him with him when he went out on expeditions and had him
enrolled among the Cossacks.


Tikhon did not like riding, and always went on foot, never lagging
behind the cavalry.
 He was armed with a musketoon (which he carried
rather as a joke), a pike and an ax, which latter he used as a wolf uses
its teeth, with equal ease picking fleas out of its fur or crunching
thick bones.
 Tikhon with equal accuracy would split logs with blows at
arm's length, or holding the head of the ax would cut thin little pegs
or carve spoons.
 In Denisov's party he held a peculiar and exceptional
position.


Once a Frenchman Tikhon was trying to capture fired a pistol at him
and shot him in the fleshy part of the back.
 That wound (which Tikhon
treated only with internal and external applications of vodka) was the
subject of the liveliest jokes by the whole detachment--jokes in which
Tikhon readily joined.


"Hallo, mate! Never again? Gave you a twist?" the Cossacks would banter
him.
 And Tikhon, purposely writhing and making faces, pretended to be
angry and swore at the French with the funniest curses.
 The only effect
of this incident on Tikhon was that after being wounded he seldom
brought in prisoners.
 No one found more
opportunities for attacking, no one captured or killed more Frenchmen,
and consequently he was made the buffoon of all the Cossacks and hussars
and willingly accepted that role.
 Now he had been sent by Denisov
overnight to Shamshevo to capture a "tongue.






CHAPTER VI


After talking for some time with the esaul about next day's attack,
which now, seeing how near they were to the French, he seemed to have
definitely decided on, Denisov turned his horse and rode back.


"Now, my lad, we'll go and get dwy," he said to Petya.


As they approached the watchhouse Denisov stopped, peering into the
forest.
 Among the trees a man with long legs and long, swinging arms,
wearing a short jacket, bast shoes, and a Kazan hat, was approaching
with long, light steps.
 When he espied Denisov he hastily threw something
into the bushes, removed his sodden hat by its floppy brim, and
approached his commander.
 It was Tikhon.
 He
lifted his head high and gazed at Denisov as if repressing a laugh.


"Where did I disappear to? I went to get Frenchmen," answered Tikhon
boldly and hurriedly, in a husky but melodious bass voice.


"Where is he?"

"You see, I took him first thing at dawn," Tikhon continued, spreading
out his flat feet with outturned toes in their bast shoes.
 "I took him
into the forest.
"

"You see?.
 What a wogue--it's just as I thought," said Denisov to the
esaul.
 "Why didn't you bwing that one?"

"What was the good of bringing him?" Tikhon interrupted hastily and
angrily--"that one wouldn't have done for you.
) "One turned up and
I grabbed him, like this.
" (He jumped up quickly and lightly.
) "'Come
along to the colonel,' I said.
 'Christ
be with you!'" shouted Tikhon, waving his arms with an angry scowl and
throwing out his chest.


Petya badly wanted to laugh, but noticed that they all refrained from
laughing.


"Don't play the fool!" said Denisov, coughing angrily.
 "Why didn't you
bwing the first one?"

Tikhon scratched his back with one hand and his head with the other,
then suddenly his whole face expanded into a beaming, foolish grin,
disclosing a gap where he had lost a tooth (that was why he was called
Shcherbaty--the gap-toothed).
 Denisov smiled, and Petya burst into a
peal of merry laughter in which Tikhon himself joined.


"Oh, but he was a regular good-for-nothing," said Tikhon.
 "The clothes
on him--poor stuff! How could I bring him? And so rude, your honor! Why,
he says: 'I'm a general's son myself, I won't go!' he says.
"

"You are a bwute!" said Denisov.
.
.

'There are a lot of us,' he says, 'but all poor stuff--only soldiers
in name,' he says.
 'Shout loud at them,' he says, 'and you'll take
them all,'" Tikhon concluded, looking cheerfully and resolutely into
Denisov's eyes.


"I'll give you a hundwed sharp lashes--that'll teach you to play the
fool!" said Denisov severely.


"But why are you angry?" remonstrated Tikhon, "just as if I'd never seen
your Frenchmen! Only wait till it gets dark and I'll fetch you any of
them you want--three if you like.
"

"Well, let's go," said Denisov, and rode all the way to the watchhouse
in silence and frowning angrily.


Tikhon followed behind and Petya heard the Cossacks laughing with him
and at him, about some pair of boots he had thrown into the bushes.


When the fit of laughter that had seized him at Tikhon's words and smile
had passed and Petya realized for a moment that this Tikhon had killed a
man, he felt uneasy.


Denisov at once cheered up and, calling Petya to him, said: "Well, tell
me about yourself.
"





CHAPTER VII


Petya, having left his people after their departure from Moscow, joined
his regiment and was soon taken as orderly by a general commanding a
large guerrilla detachment.
 He was highly delighted
with what he saw and experienced in the army, but at the same time
it always seemed to him that the really heroic exploits were being
performed just where he did not happen to be.
 And he was always in a
hurry to get where he was not.


When on the twenty-first of October his general expressed a wish to send
somebody to Denisov's detachment, Petya begged so piteously to be sent
that the general could not refuse.
 So now the general explicitly forbade his taking part in any
action whatever of Denisov's.
 That was why Petya had blushed and grown
confused when Denisov asked him whether he could stay.
 But when he saw the
French and saw Tikhon and learned that there would certainly be an
attack that night, he decided, with the rapidity with which young people
change their views, that the general, whom he had greatly respected till
then, was a rubbishy German, that Denisov was a hero, the esaul a hero,
and Tikhon a hero too, and that it would be shameful for him to leave
them at a moment of difficulty.
 In the twilight saddled horses could be seen, and
Cossacks and hussars who had rigged up rough shelters in the glade and
were kindling glowing fires in a hollow of the forest where the French
could not see the smoke.
 In the room
three officers of Denisov's band were converting a door into a tabletop.

Petya took off his wet clothes, gave them to be dried, and at once began
helping the officers to fix up the dinner table.


In ten minutes the table was ready and a napkin spread on it.


Sitting at table with the officers and tearing the fat savory mutton
with his hands, down which the grease trickled, Petya was in an ecstatic
childish state of love for all men, and consequently of confidence that
others loved him in the same way.
 "It's
all right my staying a day with you?" And not waiting for a reply he
answered his own question: "You see I was told to find out--well, I
am finding out.
.
.
.
.
.
 I
don't want a reward.
.
.


"Into the vewy chief.
.
" Denisov repeated with a smile.
.
"
Petya went on.
 "What would it be to you?.
 Oh, you want a knife?" he
said, turning to an officer who wished to cut himself a piece of mutton.
 The officer admired it.


"Please keep it.
 I have several like it," said Petya, blushing.
 "I have some
raisins, fine ones; you know, seedless ones.
 Would you like some?.
.
.
 "Have some, gentlemen, have some!"

"You want a coffeepot, don't you?" he asked the esaul.
 "I bought a
capital one from our sutler! He has splendid things.
 And he's very
honest, that's the chief thing.
 I'll be sure to send it to you.
 I have brought some with me, here they are"--and he
showed a bag--"a hundred flints.
 Please take
as many as you want, or all if you like.
.
.


He tried to remember whether he had not done anything else that was
foolish.
 And running over the events of the day he remembered the French
drummer boy.
 "It's capital for us here, but what of him? Where have they
put him? Have they fed him? Haven't they hurt his feelings?" he thought.

But having caught himself saying too much about the flints, he was now
afraid to speak out.
 Will it
seem odd if I ask?" Petya thought.
 "Well, never mind!" and immediately,
blushing and looking anxiously at the officers to see if they appeared
ironical, he said:

"May I call in that boy who was taken prisoner and give him something to
eat?.
.
.
 "Call him in.
"

"I'll call him," said Petya.


"Yes, yes, call him.


Petya was standing at the door when Denisov said this.
 He slipped in
between the officers, came close to Denisov, and said:

"Let me kiss you, dear old fellow! Oh, how fine, how splendid!"

And having kissed Denisov he ran out of the hut.


"Bosse! Vincent!" Petya cried, stopping outside the door.


"Ah, Vesenny?" said a Cossack.


Vincent, the boy's name, had already been changed by the Cossacks into
Vesenny (vernal) and into Vesenya by the peasants and soldiers.


"He is warming himself there by the bonfire.
 Ho, Vesenya!
Vesenya!--Vesenny!" laughing voices were heard calling to one another in
the darkness.


"He's a smart lad," said an hussar standing near Petya.
 "Voulez-vous manger? N'ayez pas peur, on
ne vous fera pas de mal," * he added shyly and affectionately, touching
the boy's hand.
" *(2)


     * "Ah, it's you! Do you want something to eat? Don't be
     afraid, they won't hurt you.
"

     * (2) "Come in, come in.



    * "Thank you, sir.
"


There were many things Petya wanted to say to the drummer boy, but did
not dare to.
 He stood irresolutely beside him in the passage.
 Then in
the darkness he took the boy's hand and pressed it.
 Petya had heard in the army many
stories of Dolokhov's extraordinary bravery and of his cruelty to the
French, so from the moment he entered the hut Petya did not take his
eyes from him, but braced himself up more and more and held his head
high, that he might not be unworthy even of such company.


Denisov wore a Cossack coat, had a beard, had an icon of Nicholas the
Wonder-Worker on his breast, and his way of speaking and everything he
did indicated his unusual position.
 But Dolokhov, who in Moscow had worn
a Persian costume, had now the appearance of a most correct officer of
the Guards.
 He was clean-shaven and wore a Guardsman's padded coat with
an Order of St.
 "It will be necessary to go there.
 I like to work
accurately.
 Here now--wouldn't one of these gentlemen like to ride over
to the French camp with me? I have brought a spare uniform.
.
.
 I'll go with you!" cried Petya.


"There's no need for you to go at all," said Denisov, addressing
Dolokhov, "and as for him, I won't let him go on any account.
.
 because.
.
.


"Why not?" Dolokhov answered absently, scrutinizing the face of the
French drummer boy.
 "Have you had that youngster with you long?" he
asked Denisov.
"

"Yes, and where do you put the others?" inquired Dolokhov.
 "And I say boldly that I have not a single man's life
on my conscience.
 "Because you are sorry for him! Don't we
know those 'receipts' of yours? You send a hundred men away, and thirty
get there.


"That's not the point.
 I'm not going to discuss the matter.
 I do not
wish to take it on my conscience.
 You say they'll die.
 All wight.


"Who has told them not to capture me these twenty times over? But if
they did catch me they'd string me up to an aspen tree, and with all
your chivalry just the same.
 "However, we must get to work.

Tell the Cossack to fetch my kit.
 I have two French uniforms in it.

Well, are you coming with me?" he asked Petya.


"I? Yes, yes, certainly!" cried Petya, blushing almost to tears and
glancing at Denisov.


While Dolokhov had been disputing with Denisov what should be done with
prisoners, Petya had once more felt awkward and restless; but again he
had no time to grasp fully what they were talking about.
 "If grown-up,
distinguished men think so, it must be necessary and right," thought he.

"But above all Denisov must not dare to imagine that I'll obey him and
that he can order me about.
 I will certainly go to the French camp with
Dolokhov.
 If he can, so can I!"

And to all Denisov's persuasions, Petya replied that he too was
accustomed to do everything accurately and not just anyhow, and that he
never considered personal danger.
.
.
 Besides, I want to go very much and certainly will go, so don't
hinder me," said he.
.
.
"





CHAPTER IX


Having put on French greatcoats and shakos, Petya and Dolokhov rode to
the clearing from which Denisov had reconnoitered the French camp,
and emerging from the forest in pitch darkness they descended into the
hollow.
 On reaching the bottom, Dolokhov told the Cossacks accompanying
him to await him there and rode on at a quick trot along the road to the
bridge.
 Petya, his heart in his mouth with excitement, rode by his side.


"If we're caught, I won't be taken alive! I have a pistol," whispered
he.


"Don't talk Russian," said Dolokhov in a hurried whisper, and at that
very moment they heard through the darkness the challenge: "Qui vive?" *
and the click of a musket.


"Lanciers du 6-me," * replied Dolokhov, neither hastening nor slackening
his horse's pace.
"


The black figure of a sentinel stood on the bridge.
" *


    * "Password.
"


Dolokhov reined in his horse and advanced at a walk.


"Dites donc, le colonel Gerard est ici?" * he asked.
.
.
.
 I am asking you if the colonel is
     here.

Something was boiling in a small cauldron at the edge of the fire and
a soldier in a peaked cap and blue overcoat, lit up by the fire, was
kneeling beside it stirring its contents with a ramrod.



    * "Good day, gentlemen.
"


There was a stir among the officers in the shadow beyond the fire,
and one tall, long-necked officer, walking round the fire, came up to
Dolokhov.
.
.
?" But, noticing
his mistake, he broke off short and, with a frown, greeted Dolokhov as a
stranger, asking what he could do for him.


Dolokhov said that he and his companion were trying to overtake their
regiment, and addressing the company in general asked whether they knew
anything of the 6th Regiment.
 None of them knew anything, and Petya
thought the officers were beginning to look at him and Dolokhov with
hostility and suspicion.


Dolokhov replied that they were not hungry and must push on farther that
night.
 That officer did not take his eyes from Dolokhov and again asked
to what regiment he belonged.
 No one replied.


"Well, now he'll come away," Petya thought every moment as he stood by
the campfire listening to the talk.


But Dolokhov restarted the conversation which had dropped and began
putting direct questions as to how many men there were in the battalion,
how many battalions, and how many prisoners.
 Asking about the Russian
prisoners with that detachment, Dolokhov said:

"A horrid business dragging these corpses about with one! It would be
better to shoot such rabble," and burst into loud laughter, so strange
that Petya thought the French would immediately detect their disguise,
and involuntarily took a step back from the campfire.


No one replied a word to Dolokhov's laughter, and a French officer whom
they could not see (he lay wrapped in a greatcoat) rose and whispered
something to a companion.
 Dolokhov got up and called to the soldier who
was holding their horses.


The horses were brought.


"Good evening, gentlemen," said Dolokhov.
 Dolokhov was a long time mounting
his horse which would not stand still, then he rode out of the yard at a
footpace.


Coming out onto the road Dolokhov did not ride back across the open
country, but through the village.

When they had descended to the bridge Petya and Dolokhov rode past the
sentinel, who without saying a word paced morosely up and down it, then
they descended into the hollow where the Cossacks awaited them.
 But Petya did not let go of him
and Dolokhov saw through the gloom that Petya was bending toward him and
wanted to kiss him.






CHAPTER X


Having returned to the watchman's hut, Petya found Denisov in the
passage.
 "Yes, thank God!" he repeated, listening to
Petya's rapturous account.
 "But, devil take you, I haven't slept because
of you! Well, thank God.
 Now lie down.
.
 no," said Petya, "I don't want to sleep yet.
 Besides I know
myself, if I fall asleep it's finished.
"

He sat awhile in the hut joyfully recalling the details of his
expedition and vividly picturing to himself what would happen next day.


It was still quite dark outside.
 The rain was over, but drops were still
falling from the trees.
 Near the watchman's hut the black shapes of the
Cossacks' shanties and of horses tethered together could be seen.

Not all the Cossacks and hussars were asleep; here and there, amid the
sounds of falling drops and the munching of the horses near by, could be
heard low voices which seemed to be whispering.
 In the dark Petya recognized his own horse, which
he called "Karabakh" though it was of Ukranian breed, and went up to it.


"Well, Karabakh! We'll do some service tomorrow," said he, sniffing its
nostrils and kissing it.


"No, ah.
 Likhachev--isn't that your name? Do you know I have only just
come back! We've been into the French camp.


"No, I am used to this," said Petya.
 "I say, aren't the flints in your
pistols worn out? I brought some with me.
 Don't you want any? You can
have some.

"Some fellows do things just anyhow, without preparation, and then
they're sorry for it afterwards.
 I don't like that.
"

"Just so," said the Cossack.
.
.
) "Can you do it?"

"Of course I can.
"

Likhachev got up, rummaged in his pack, and soon Petya heard the warlike
sound of steel on whetstone.
 The Cossack was sharpening the saber under the wagon.


"Some are, and some aren't--like us.
"

"Well, and that boy?"

"Vesenny? Oh, he's thrown himself down there in the passage.
 He was that glad!"

After that Petya remained silent for a long time, listening to the
sounds.


"What are you sharpening?" asked a man coming up to the wagon.
"

"That's right," said the man, whom Petya took to be an hussar.


"It must be daylight soon," said he, yawning, and went away.
 The big dark blotch might really be the
watchman's hut or it might be a cavern leading to the very depths of
the earth.
 Perhaps the red spot was a fire, or it might be the eye of an
enormous monster.
 Perhaps he was really sitting on a wagon, but it might
very well be that he was not sitting on a wagon but on a terribly high
tower from which, if he fell, he would have to fall for a whole day or a
whole month, or go on falling and never reach the bottom.
 He was in a
fairy kingdom where everything was possible.


He looked up at the sky.
 And the sky was a fairy realm like the earth.

It was clearing, and over the tops of the trees clouds were swiftly
sailing as if unveiling the stars.
 Sometimes it looked as if the clouds
were passing, and a clear black sky appeared.
 Sometimes it seemed as
if the black spaces were clouds.
 Sometimes the sky seemed to be rising
high, high overhead, and then it seemed to sink so low that one could
touch it with one's hand.


Petya's eyes began to close and he swayed a little.


The trees were dripping.
 Quiet talking was heard.
 Someone snored.
.
.
 The melody
grew and passed from one instrument to another.


"Oh--why, that was in a dream!" Petya said to himself, as he lurched
forward.
.
"

He closed his eyes, and, from all sides as if from a distance, sounds
fluttered, grew into harmonies, separated, blended, and again all
mingled into the same sweet and solemn hymn.
 "Now fuller,
more joyful.
 Still more and more joyful!" And from an unknown depth rose
increasingly triumphant sounds.
 "Now voices join in!" ordered Petya.
 The voices
grew in harmonious triumphant strength, and Petya listened to their
surpassing beauty in awe and joy.


With a solemn triumphal march there mingled a song, the drip from the
trees, and the hissing of the saber, "Ozheg-zheg-zheg.
.
.
" and again the
horses jostled one another and neighed, not disturbing the choir but
joining in it.


Petya did not know how long this lasted: he enjoyed himself all the
time, wondered at his enjoyment and regretted that there was no one to
share it.


"It's ready, your honor; you can split a Frenchman in half with it!"

Petya woke up.


"It's getting light, it's really getting light!" he exclaimed.


The horses that had previously been invisible could now be seen to their
very tails, and a watery light showed itself through the bare branches.

Petya shook himself, jumped up, took a ruble from his pocket and gave it
to Likhachev; then he flourished the saber, tested it, and sheathed
it.
 The Cossacks were untying their horses and tightening their saddle
girths.


"And here's the commander," said Likhachev.


Denisov came out of the watchman's hut and, having called Petya, gave
orders to get ready.






CHAPTER XI


The men rapidly picked out their horses in the semidarkness, tightened
their saddle girths, and formed companies.
 Petya held his horse by the bridle,
impatiently awaiting the order to mount.

Cold shivers ran down his spine and his whole body pulsed rhythmically.


"Well, is ev'wything weady?" asked Denisov.
 Petya put his
foot in the stirrup.
 for God's
sake.
.
.
!" said he.


Denisov seemed to have forgotten Petya's very existence.
 He turned to
glance at him.

When they had come to the edge of the forest it was noticeably growing
light over the field.
 Denisov talked in whispers with the esaul and
the Cossacks rode past Petya and Denisov.
 When they had all ridden by,
Denisov touched his horse and rode down the hill.
 Slipping onto their
haunches and sliding, the horses descended with their riders into the
ravine.
 It was getting lighter and lighter, but the mist still hid
distant objects.
 In an instant the tramp
of horses galloping forward was heard, shouts came from various sides,
and then more shots.


At the first sound of trampling hoofs and shouting, Petya lashed his
horse and loosening his rein galloped forward, not heeding Denisov who
shouted at him.
 It seemed to Petya that at the moment the shot was
fired it suddenly became as bright as noon.
 He galloped to the bridge.

Cossacks were galloping along the road in front of him.

In front of him soldiers, probably Frenchmen, were running from right
to left across the road.
 One of them fell in the mud under his horse's
feet.


Cossacks were crowding about a hut, busy with something.
 From the midst
of that crowd terrible screams arose.
 Petya galloped up, and the
first thing he saw was the pale face and trembling jaw of a Frenchman,
clutching the handle of a lance that had been aimed at him.


"Hurrah!.
.
.
.


He could hear shooting ahead of him.
 The shots came from the yard of the landowner's house
he had visited the night before with Dolokhov.
 "Go round! Wait
for the infantry!" he exclaimed as Petya rode up to him.
.
.


A volley was heard, and some bullets whistled past, while others plashed
against something.
 In the dense wavering smoke some of the
French threw down their arms and ran out of the bushes to meet the
Cossacks, while others ran down the hill toward the pond.
 His horse, having galloped up to a campfire
that was smoldering in the morning light, stopped suddenly, and Petya
fell heavily on to the wet ground.
 A bullet had
pierced his skull.


"Done for!" he said with a frown, and went to the gate to meet Denisov
who was riding toward him.


"Killed?" cried Denisov, recognizing from a distance the unmistakably
lifeless attitude--very familiar to him--in which Petya's body was
lying.


"Done for!" repeated Dolokhov as if the utterance of these words
afforded him pleasure, and he went quickly up to the prisoners, who
were surrounded by Cossacks who had hurried up.
 Raisins, fine ones.
.
 And the Cossacks looked round in surprise at the
sound, like the yelp of a dog, with which Denisov turned away, walked to
the wattle fence, and seized hold of it.


Among the Russian prisoners rescued by Denisov and Dolokhov was Pierre
Bezukhov.






CHAPTER XII


During the whole of their march from Moscow no fresh orders had been
issued by the French authorities concerning the party of prisoners
among whom was Pierre.
 Not one of those dismounted cavalrymen who had marched in
front of the prisoners was left; they had all disappeared.
 Behind the prisoners came a cavalry baggage train.


From Vyazma onwards the French army, which had till then moved in three
columns, went on as a single group.


The road along which they moved was bordered on both sides by dead
horses; ragged men who had fallen behind from various regiments
continually changed about, now joining the moving column, now again
lagging behind it.


Several times during the march false alarms had been given and the
soldiers of the escort had raised their muskets, fired, and run
headlong, crushing one another, but had afterwards reassembled and
abused each other for their causeless panic.


These three groups traveling together--the cavalry stores, the convoy of
prisoners, and Junot's baggage train--still constituted a separate and
united whole, though each of the groups was rapidly melting away.
 Three wagons had been raided and robbed by stragglers
from Davout's corps.
 From the talk of the Germans Pierre learned that
a larger guard had been allotted to that baggage train than to the
prisoners, and that one of their comrades, a German soldier, had been
shot by the marshal's own order because a silver spoon belonging to the
marshal had been found in his possession.
 Of the three hundred
and thirty men who had set out from Moscow fewer than a hundred now
remained.
 The prisoners were more burdensome to the escort than even the
cavalry saddles or Junot's baggage.
 They understood that the saddles and
Junot's spoon might be of some use, but that cold and hungry soldiers
should have to stand and guard equally cold and hungry Russians who
froze and lagged behind on the road (in which case the order was to
shoot them) was not merely incomprehensible but revolting.


At Dorogobuzh while the soldiers of the convoy, after locking the
prisoners in a stable, had gone off to pillage their own stores, several
of the soldier prisoners tunneled under the wall and ran away, but were
recaptured by the French and shot.

All who could walk went together, and after the third stage Pierre had
rejoined Karataev and the gray-blue bandy-legged dog that had chosen
Karataev for its master.


On the third day after leaving Moscow Karataev again fell ill with the
fever he had suffered from in the hospital in Moscow, and as he grew
gradually weaker Pierre kept away from him.
 Pierre did not know why, but
since Karataev had begun to grow weaker it had cost him an effort to
go near him.


While imprisoned in the shed Pierre had learned not with his intellect
but with his whole being, by life itself, that man is created for
happiness, that happiness is within him, in the satisfaction of simple
human needs, and that all unhappiness arises not from privation but from
superfluity.
 And now during these last three weeks of the march he had
learned still another new, consolatory truth--that nothing in this world
is terrible.
 He had learned that as there is no condition in which man
can be happy and entirely free, so there is no condition in which he
need be unhappy and lack freedom.
 He learned that suffering and freedom
have their limits and that those limits are very near together; that the
person in a bed of roses with one crumpled petal suffered as keenly as
he now, sleeping on the bare damp earth with one side growing chilled
while the other was warming; and that when he had put on tight dancing
shoes he had suffered just as he did now when he walked with bare feet
that were covered with sores--his footgear having long since fallen to
pieces.
 Of all that he himself
subsequently termed his sufferings, but which at the time he scarcely
felt, the worst was the state of his bare, raw, and scab-covered feet.

(The horseflesh was appetizing and nourishing, the saltpeter flavor of
the gunpowder they used instead of salt was even pleasant; there was
no great cold, it was always warm walking in the daytime, and at night
there were the campfires; the lice that devoured him warmed his body.
)
The one thing that was at first hard to bear was his feet.


After the second day's march Pierre, having examined his feet by the
campfire, thought it would be impossible to walk on them; but when
everybody got up he went along, limping, and, when he had warmed up,
walked without feeling the pain, though at night his feet were more
terrible to look at than before.


Only now did Pierre realize the full strength of life in man and the
saving power he has of transferring his attention from one thing
to another, which is like the safety valve of a boiler that allows
superfluous steam to blow off when the pressure exceeds a certain limit.
 Still less did Pierre think about himself.
 The
harder his position became and the more terrible the future, the more
independent of that position in which he found himself were the joyful
and comforting thoughts, memories, and imaginings that came to him.






CHAPTER XIII


At midday on the twenty-second of October Pierre was going uphill along
the muddy, slippery road, looking at his feet and at the roughness of
the way.
 Occasionally he glanced at the familiar crowd around him and
then again at his feet.
 All around lay
the flesh of different animals--from men to horses--in various stages
of decomposition; and as the wolves were kept off by the passing men the
dog could eat all it wanted.
 The saturated road no longer absorbed the water,
which ran along the ruts in streams.


Pierre walked along, looking from side to side, counting his steps in
threes, and reckoning them off on his fingers.
 Mentally addressing the
rain, he repeated: "Now then, now then, go on! Pelt harder!"

It seemed to him that he was thinking of nothing, but far down and
deep within him his soul was occupied with something important and
comforting.


At their yesterday's halting place, feeling chilly by a dying campfire,
Pierre had got up and gone to the next one, which was burning better.

There Platon Karataev was sitting covered up--head and all--with
his greatcoat as if it were a vestment, telling the soldiers in his
effective and pleasant though now feeble voice a story Pierre knew.
 It
was already past midnight, the hour when Karataev was usually free of
his fever and particularly lively.
 His
feeling of pity for this man frightened him and he wished to go away,
but there was no other fire, and Pierre sat down, trying not to look at
Platon.


"Well, how are you?" he asked.


"And so, brother," he continued, with a smile on his pale emaciated face
and a particularly happy light in his eyes, "you see, brother.
.
"

Pierre had long been familiar with that story.
 But well as he knew it, Pierre now listened to that tale as to
something new, and the quiet rapture Karataev evidently felt as he told
it communicated itself also to Pierre.
 The story was of an old merchant
who lived a good and God-fearing life with his family, and who went once
to the Nizhni fair with a companion--a rich merchant.


Having put up at an inn they both went to sleep, and next morning his
companion was found robbed and with his throat cut.


"And so, brother" (it was at this point that Pierre came up), "ten years
or more passed by.
 Only he prayed to God for death.
 So they asked the old man: 'What
are you being punished for, Daddy?'--'I, my dear brothers,' said he, 'am
being punished for my own and other men's sins.
 But I have not killed
anyone or taken anything that was not mine, but have only helped my
poorer brothers.
 'And he went on to tell them all about it in due order.

Only I am sorry for my old wife and the children,' and the old man began
to weep.
 'Where did it happen, Daddy?' he said.

So he comes up to the old man like this, and falls down at his feet!
'You are perishing because of me, Daddy,' he says.
 'It's quite true,
lads, that this man,' he says, 'is being tortured innocently and for
nothing! I,' he says, 'did that deed, and I put the knife under your
head while you were asleep.
 Forgive me, Daddy,' he says, 'for Christ's
sake!'"

Karataev paused, smiling joyously as he gazed into the fire, and he drew
the logs together.


"And the old man said, 'God will forgive you, we are all sinners in His
sight.
 'I have taken six lives,' he says (he was a great sinner),
'but what I am most sorry for is this old man.
 Don't let him suffer
because of me.
' So he confessed and it was all written down and the
papers sent off in due form.
 The place was a long way off, and while
they were judging, what with one thing and another, filling in the
papers all in due form--the authorities I mean--time passed.
 The affair
reached the Tsar.
 After a while the Tsar's decree came: to set the
merchant free and give him a compensation that had been awarded.
 'Where is the old
man who has been suffering innocently and in vain? A paper has come from
the Tsar!' so they began looking for him," here Karataev's lower jaw
trembled, "but God had already forgiven him--he was dead! That's how it
was, dear fellows!" Karataev concluded and sat for a long time silent,
gazing before him with a smile.






CHAPTER XIV


"A vos places!" * suddenly cried a voice.
"


A pleasant feeling of excitement and an expectation of something
joyful and solemn was aroused among the soldiers of the convoy and the
prisoners.
 From all sides came shouts of command, and from the left came
smartly dressed cavalrymen on good horses, passing the prisoners at a
trot.
 The expression on all faces showed the tension people feel at the
approach of those in authority.


"The Emperor! The Emperor! The Marshal! The Duke!" and hardly had the
sleek cavalry passed, before a carriage drawn by six gray horses rattled
by.
 Pierre caught a glimpse of a man in a three-cornered hat with a
tranquil look on his handsome, plump, white face.
 It was one of the
marshals.
 His eye fell on Pierre's large and striking figure, and in
the expression with which he frowned and looked away Pierre thought he
detected sympathy and a desire to conceal that sympathy.


The general in charge of the stores galloped after the carriage with a
red and frightened face, whipping up his skinny horse.
 Their faces all
looked excited and worried.

He sat in his short overcoat leaning against a birch tree.
 On his face,
besides the look of joyful emotion it had worn yesterday while telling
the tale of the merchant who suffered innocently, there was now an
expression of quiet solemnity.
 But Pierre was not sufficiently sure of himself.


When the prisoners again went forward Pierre looked round.


From behind, where Karataev had been sitting, came the sound of a shot.
 And
he again started reckoning.
 Two French soldiers ran past Pierre, one of
whom carried a lowered and smoking gun.
 They both looked pale, and
in the expression on their faces--one of them glanced timidly at
Pierre--there was something resembling what he had seen on the face of
the young soldier at the execution.
 Pierre looked at the soldier and
remembered that, two days before, that man had burned his shirt while
drying it at the fire and how they had laughed at him.


Behind him, where Karataev had been sitting, the dog began to howl.

"What a stupid beast! Why is it howling?" thought Pierre.


His comrades, the prisoner soldiers walking beside him, avoided looking
back at the place where the shot had been fired and the dog was howling,
just as Pierre did, but there was a set look on all their faces.

Pierre went up to the fire, ate some roast horseflesh, lay down with his
back to the fire, and immediately fell asleep.


"Life is everything.
 Everything changes and moves and that
movement is God.
 To love life is to love God.
 Harder and more blessed
than all else is to love this life in one's sufferings, in innocent
sufferings.
"

"Karataev!" came to Pierre's mind.


And suddenly he saw vividly before him a long-forgotten, kindly old man
who had given him geography lessons in Switzerland.
 "Wait a bit,"
said the old man, and showed Pierre a globe.
 Each drop tried to spread out and occupy as much
space as possible, but others striving to do the same compressed it,
sometimes destroyed it, and sometimes merged with it.


"How simple and clear it is," thought Pierre.
 There now, Karataev
has spread out and disappeared.


"Do you understand, damn you?" shouted a voice, and Pierre woke up.


He lifted himself and sat up.
 His
brown morose face with frowning brows was clearly visible by the glow of
the charcoal.


"It's all the same to him," he muttered, turning quickly to a soldier
who stood behind him.
 "Brigand! Get away!"

And twisting the ramrod he looked gloomily at Pierre, who turned
away and gazed into the darkness.
 Looking more closely Pierre recognized the blue-gray dog,
sitting beside the soldier, wagging its tail.


"Ah, he's come?" said Pierre.
 "And Plat-" he began, but did not finish.


Suddenly and simultaneously a crowd of memories awoke in his fancy--of
the look Platon had given him as he sat under the tree, of the shot
heard from that spot, of the dog's howl, of the guilty faces of the two
Frenchmen as they ran past him, of the lowered and smoking gun, and of
Karataev's absence at this halt--and he was on the point of realizing
that Karataev had been killed, but just at that instant, he knew not
why, the recollection came to his mind of a summer evening he had spent
with a beautiful Polish lady on the veranda of his house in Kiev.


Before sunrise he was awakened by shouts and loud and rapid firing.

French soldiers were running past him.


"The Cossacks!" one of them shouted, and a moment later a crowd of
Russians surrounded Pierre.


For a long time he could not understand what was happening to him.


The hussars and Cossacks crowded round the prisoners; one offered them
clothes, another boots, and a third bread.


Dolokhov stood at the gate of the ruined house, letting a crowd
of disarmed Frenchmen pass by.
 The French, excited by all that had
happened, were talking loudly among themselves, but as they passed
Dolokhov who gently switched his boots with his whip and watched them
with cold glassy eyes that boded no good, they became silent.
 On the
opposite side stood Dolokhov's Cossack, counting the prisoners and
marking off each hundred with a chalk line on the gate.


"How many?" Dolokhov asked the Cossack.


"The second hundred," replied the Cossack.


"Filez, filez!" * Dolokhov kept saying, having adopted this expression
from the French, and when his eyes met those of the prisoners they
flashed with a cruel light.






CHAPTER XVI


After the twenty-eighth of October when the frosts began, the flight of
the French assumed a still more tragic character, with men freezing,
or roasting themselves to death at the campfires, while carriages
with people dressed in furs continued to drive past, carrying away the
property that had been stolen by the Emperor, kings, and dukes; but
the process of the flight and disintegration of the French army went on
essentially as before.


From Moscow to Vyazma the French army of seventy-three thousand men not
reckoning the Guards (who did nothing during the whole war but pillage)
was reduced to thirty-six thousand, though not more than five thousand
had fallen in battle.
 From this beginning the succeeding terms of the
progression could be determined mathematically.
 Berthier wrote to his
Emperor (we know how far commanding officers allow themselves to diverge
from the truth in describing the condition of an army) and this is what
he said:


I deem it my duty to report to Your Majesty the condition of the various
corps I have had occasion to observe during different stages of the last
two or three days' march.
 They are almost disbanded.
 In general they regard Smolensk as the place where
they hope to recover.
 During the last few days many of the men have been
seen to throw away their cartridges and their arms.
 In such a state
of affairs, whatever your ultimate plans may be, the interest of Your
Majesty's service demands that the army should be rallied at Smolensk
and should first of all be freed from ineffectives, such as dismounted
cavalry, unnecessary baggage, and artillery material that is no longer
in proportion to the present forces.
 The soldiers, who are worn out with
hunger and fatigue, need these supplies as well as a few days' rest.

Many have died these last days on the road or at the bivouacs.
 This
state of things is continually becoming worse and makes one fear that
unless a prompt remedy is applied the troops will no longer be under
control in case of an engagement.


November 9: twenty miles from Smolensk.



After staggering into Smolensk which seemed to them a promised land, the
French, searching for food, killed one another, sacked their own stores,
and when everything had been plundered fled farther.


They all went without knowing whither or why they were going.
 But these
orders and reports were only on paper, nothing in them was acted upon
for they could not be carried out, and though they entitled one
another Majesties, Highnesses, or Cousins, they all felt that they were
miserable wretches who had done much evil for which they had now to
pay.






CHAPTER XVII


The movements of the Russian and French armies during the campaign
from Moscow back to the Niemen were like those in a game of Russian
blindman's bluff, in which two players are blindfolded and one of
them occasionally rings a little bell to inform the catcher of his
whereabouts.
 First he rings his bell fearlessly, but when he gets into
a tight place he runs away as quietly as he can, and often thinking to
escape runs straight into his opponent's arms.
 If news was received one day
that the enemy had been in a certain position the day before, by the
third day when something could have been done, that army was already two
days' march farther on and in quite another position.


One army fled and the other pursued.
 Beyond Smolensk there were several
different roads available for the French, and one would have thought
that during their stay of four days they might have learned where
the enemy was, might have arranged some more advantageous plan and
undertaken something new.
 In
front of them all fled the Emperor, then the kings, then the dukes.
 The
Russian army, expecting Napoleon to take the road to the right
beyond the Dnieper--which was the only reasonable thing for him to
do--themselves turned to the right and came out onto the highroad at
Krasnoe.
 And here as in a game of blindman's buff the French ran into
our vanguard.

Then for three days separate portions of the French army--first Murat's
(the vice-king's), then Davout's, and then Ney's--ran, as it were, the
gauntlet of the Russian army.
 They abandoned one another, abandoned
all their heavy baggage, their artillery, and half their men, and fled,
getting past the Russians by night by making semicircles to the right.


Ney, who came last, had been busying himself blowing up the walls of
Smolensk which were in nobody's way, because despite the unfortunate
plight of the French or because of it, they wished to punish the floor
against which they had hurt themselves.
 Ney, who had had a corps of ten
thousand men, reached Napoleon at Orsha with only one thousand men left,
having abandoned all the rest and all his cannon, and having crossed the
Dnieper at night by stealth at a wooded spot.


From Orsha they fled farther along the road to Vilna, still playing
at blindman's buff with the pursuing army.
 At the Berezina they again
became disorganized, many were drowned and many surrendered, but those
who got across the river fled farther.
 The others who could do so drove away too,
leaving those who could not to surrender or die.
 From the time they turned onto
the Kaluga road to the day their leader fled from the army, none of the
movements of the crowd had any sense.
 So one might have thought that
regarding this period of the campaign the historians, who attributed
the actions of the mass to the will of one man, would have found it
impossible to make the story of the retreat fit their theory.
 But
no! Mountains of books have been written by the historians about this
campaign, and everywhere are described Napoleon's arrangements, the
maneuvers, and his profound plans which guided the army, as well as the
military genius shown by his marshals.


The retreat from Malo-Yaroslavets when he had a free road into a
well-supplied district and the parallel road was open to him along
which Kutuzov afterwards pursued him--this unnecessary retreat along
a devastated road--is explained to us as being due to profound
considerations.
 Similarly profound considerations are given for
his retreat from Smolensk to Orsha.
 Then his heroism at Krasnoe is
described, where he is reported to have been prepared to accept battle
and take personal command, and to have walked about with a birch stick
and said:

"J'ai assez fait l'empereur; il est temps de faire le general," * but
nevertheless immediately ran away again, abandoning to its fate the
scattered fragments of the army he left behind.



     * "I have acted the Emperor long enough; it is time to act
     the general.
"


Then we are told of the greatness of soul of the marshals, especially
of Ney--a greatness of soul consisting in this: that he made his way by
night around through the forest and across the Dnieper and escaped to
Orsha, abandoning standards, artillery, and nine tenths of his men.


And lastly, the final departure of the great Emperor from his heroic
army is presented to us by the historians as something great and
characteristic of genius.


When it is impossible to stretch the very elastic threads of historical
ratiocination any farther, when actions are clearly contrary to all
that humanity calls right or even just, the historians produce a saving
conception of "greatness.
" "Greatness," it seems, excludes the standards
of right and wrong.
 For the "great" man nothing is wrong, there is no
atrocity for which a "great" man can be blamed.
" Grand is good, not
grand is bad.
 Grand is the characteristic, in their conception, of some
special animals called "heroes.
" And Napoleon, escaping home in a warm
fur coat and leaving to perish those who were not merely his comrades
but were (in his opinion) men he had brought there, feels que c'est
grand, *(2) and his soul is tranquil.



     * "It is great.



"Du sublime (he saw something sublime in himself) au ridicule il n'y
a qu'un pas," * said he.
 And the whole world for fifty years has been
repeating: "Sublime! Grand! Napoleon le Grand!" Du sublime au ridicule
il n'y a qu'un pas.



    * "From the sublime to the ridiculous is but a step.
"


And it occurs to no one that to admit a greatness not commensurable with
the standard of right and wrong is merely to admit one's own nothingness
and immeasurable meanness.


For us with the standard of good and evil given us by Christ, no human
actions are incommensurable.
 And there is no greatness where simplicity,
goodness, and truth are absent.
.
.


But why did they not execute those maneuvers? And why if they were
guilty of not carrying out a prearranged plan were they not tried and
punished? But even if we admitted that Kutuzov, Chichagov, and others
were the cause of the Russian failures, it is still incomprehensible
why, the position of the Russian army being what it was at Krasnoe and
at the Berezina (in both cases we had superior forces), the French army
with its marshals, kings, and Emperor was not captured, if that was what
the Russians aimed at.


The explanation of this strange fact given by Russian military
historians (to the effect that Kutuzov hindered an attack) is unfounded,
for we know that he could not restrain the troops from attacking at
Vyazma and Tarutino.


Why was the Russian army--which with inferior forces had withstood the
enemy in full strength at Borodino--defeated at Krasnoe and the Berezina
by the disorganized crowds of the French when it was numerically
superior?

If the aim of the Russians consisted in cutting off and capturing
Napoleon and his marshals--and that aim was not merely frustrated but
all attempts to attain it were most shamefully baffled--then this last
period of the campaign is quite rightly considered by the French to be a
series of victories, and quite wrongly considered victorious by Russian
historians.


There never was or could have been such an aim, for it would have been
senseless and its attainment quite impossible.


It would have been senseless, first because Napoleon's disorganized
army was flying from Russia with all possible speed, that is to say, was
doing just what every Russian desired.
 So what was the use of performing
various operations on the French who were running away as fast as they
possibly could?

Secondly, it would have been senseless to block the passage of men whose
whole energy was directed to flight.


Thirdly, it would have been senseless to sacrifice one's own troops in
order to destroy the French army, which without external interference
was destroying itself at such a rate that, though its path was not
blocked, it could not carry across the frontier more than it actually
did in December, namely a hundredth part of the original army.


Fourthly, it would have been senseless to wish to take captive the
Emperor, kings, and dukes--whose capture would have been in the highest
degree embarrassing for the Russians, as the most adroit diplomatists of
the time (Joseph de Maistre and others) recognized.
 Still more senseless
would have been the wish to capture army corps of the French, when our
own army had melted away to half before reaching Krasnoe and a whole
division would have been needed to convoy the corps of prisoners, and
when our men were not always getting full rations and the prisoners
already taken were perishing of hunger.


All the profound plans about cutting off and capturing Napoleon and his
army were like the plan of a market gardener who, when driving out of
his garden a cow that had trampled down the beds he had planted, should
run to the gate and hit the cow on the head.


But besides the fact that cutting off Napoleon with his army would have
been senseless, it was impossible.


It was impossible first because--as experience shows that a three-mile
movement of columns on a battlefield never coincides with the plans--the
probability of Chichagov, Kutuzov, and Wittgenstein effecting a junction
on time at an appointed place was so remote as to be tantamount to
impossibility, as in fact thought Kutuzov, who when he received the plan
remarked that diversions planned over great distances do not yield the
desired results.


Secondly it was impossible, because to paralyze the momentum with which
Napoleon's army was retiring, incomparably greater forces than the
Russians possessed would have been required.
 It is only possible to capture
prisoners if they agree to be captured, just as it is only possible
to catch a swallow if it settles on one's hand.


Fourthly and chiefly it was impossible, because never since the world
began has a war been fought under such conditions as those that obtained
in 1812, and the Russian army in its pursuit of the French strained its
strength to the utmost and could not have done more without destroying
itself.


During the movement of the Russian army from Tarutino to Krasnoe it
lost fifty thousand sick or stragglers, that is a number equal to the
population of a large provincial town.
 Half the men fell out of the army
without a battle.


And it is of this period of the campaign--when the army lacked boots
and sheepskin coats, was short of provisions and without vodka, and
was camping out at night for months in the snow with fifteen degrees
of frost, when there were only seven or eight hours of daylight and
the rest was night in which the influence of discipline cannot be
maintained, when men were taken into that region of death where
discipline fails, not for a few hours only as in a battle, but for
months, where they were every moment fighting death from hunger and
cold, when half the army perished in a single month--it is of this
period of the campaign that the historians tell us how Miloradovich
should have made a flank march to such and such a place, Tormasov to
another place, and Chichagov should have crossed (more than knee-deep
in snow) to somewhere else, and how so-and-so "routed" and "cut off" the
French and so on and so on.


Yet one need only discard the study of the reports and general plans and
consider the movement of those hundreds of thousands of men who took a
direct part in the events, and all the questions that seemed insoluble
easily and simply receive an immediate and certain solution.


The aim of cutting off Napoleon and his army never existed except in
the imaginations of a dozen people.
 That aim
was attained in the first place of itself, as the French ran away,
and so it was only necessary not to stop their flight.
 Secondly it was
attained by the guerrilla warfare which was destroying the French, and
thirdly by the fact that a large Russian army was following the French,
ready to use its strength in case their movement stopped.


The Russian army had to act like a whip to a running animal.






BOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13





CHAPTER I


When seeing a dying animal a man feels a sense of horror: substance
similar to his own is perishing before his eyes.
 But when it is a
beloved and intimate human being that is dying, besides this horror at
the extinction of life there is a severance, a spiritual wound, which
like a physical wound is sometimes fatal and sometimes heals, but always
aches and shrinks at any external irritating touch.
 They
carefully guarded their open wounds from any rough and painful contact.

They spoke little even to one another, and when they did it was of very
unimportant matters.


Both avoided any allusion to the future.
 It seemed to them that
what they had lived through and experienced could not be expressed in
words, and that any reference to the details of his life infringed the
majesty and sacredness of the mystery that had been accomplished before
their eyes.


But pure and complete sorrow is as impossible as pure and complete joy.
 Life did not
stand still and it was necessary to live.
 She went through the accounts with
Alpatych, conferred with Dessalles about her nephew, and gave orders and
made preparations for the journey to Moscow.


Princess Mary asked the countess to let Natasha go with her to Moscow,
and both parents gladly accepted this offer, for they saw their daughter
losing strength every day and thought that a change of scene and the
advice of Moscow doctors would be good for her.


"I am not going anywhere," Natasha replied when this was proposed to
her.
 "Do please just leave me alone!" And she ran out of the room, with
difficulty refraining from tears of vexation and irritation rather than
of sorrow.
 This solitude exhausted
and tormented her but she was in absolute need of it.
 And that other side of life, of which she had never before
thought and which had formerly seemed to her so far away and improbable,
was now nearer and more akin and more comprehensible than this side of
life, where everything was either emptiness and desolation or suffering
and indignity.


She was gazing where she knew him to be; but she could not imagine him
otherwise than as he had been here.
 She now saw him again as he had been
at Mytishchi, at Troitsa, and at Yaroslavl.


There he is lying back in an armchair in his velvet cloak, leaning
his head on his thin pale hand.
 His chest is dreadfully hollow and his
shoulders raised.
 His lips are firmly closed, his eyes glitter, and a
wrinkle comes and goes on his pale forehead.
 One of his legs twitches
just perceptibly, but rapidly.
 Natasha knows that he is struggling with
terrible pain.
 "What is that pain like? Why does he have that pain? What
does he feel? How does it hurt him?" thought Natasha.
 He noticed her
watching him, raised his eyes, and began to speak seriously:

"One thing would be terrible," said he: "to bind oneself forever to a
suffering man.
 It would be continual torture.
"

She now saw him from the commencement of that scene and relived what she
had then felt.


"I agreed," Natasha now said to herself, "that it would be dreadful if
he always continued to suffer.
 I said it then only because it would have
been dreadful for him, but he understood it differently.
 He thought it
would be dreadful for me.

And I said it so awkwardly and stupidly! I did not say what I meant.

I thought quite differently.
 Now there is
nothing.
 Did he know that? No, he did not and never will know
it.
 And now it will never, never be possible to put it right.
 She stopped
him and said: "Terrible for you, but not for me! You know that for me
there is nothing in life but you, and to suffer with you is the greatest
happiness for me," and he took her hand and pressed it as he had
pressed it that terrible evening four days before his death.
.
.
.

Again everything was shrouded in hard, dry perplexity, and again with a
strained frown she peered toward the world where he was.
 And now, now
it seemed to her she was penetrating the mystery.
.
.
 But at the instant
when it seemed that the incomprehensible was revealing itself to her a
loud rattle of the door handle struck painfully on her ears.
 Dunyasha,
her maid, entered the room quickly and abruptly with a frightened look
on her face and showing no concern for her mistress.
.
.
.
.
 a letter," she finished
with a sob.
 She heard
Dunyasha's words about Peter Ilynich and a misfortune, but did not grasp
them.


"What misfortune? What misfortune can happen to them? They just live
their own old, quiet, and commonplace life," thought Natasha.


As she entered the ballroom her father was hurriedly coming out of
her mother's room.
 His face was puckered up and wet with tears.


"Pe.
.
.
.
.
.
.
" and weeping like a child
and quickly shuffling on his feeble legs to a chair, he almost fell into
it, covering his face with his hands.


Suddenly an electric shock seemed to run through Natasha's whole being.

Terrible anguish struck her heart, she felt a dreadful ache as if
something was being torn inside her and she were dying.
 But the pain
was immediately followed by a feeling of release from the oppressive
constraint that had prevented her taking part in life.
 The sight of her
father, the terribly wild cries of her mother that she heard through the
door, made her immediately forget herself and her own grief.


She ran to her father, but he feebly waved his arm, pointing to her
mother's door.
 Princess Mary, pale and with quivering chin, came out
from that room and taking Natasha by the arm said something to her.

Natasha neither saw nor heard her.
 She went in with rapid steps, pausing
at the door for an instant as if struggling with herself, and then ran
to her mother.
 Sonya and the
maids were holding her arms.
.
 "It's not true.
.
.
 it's not
true.
.
.
 Natasha!" she shrieked, pushing those around her
away.
 "Go away, all of you; it's not true! Killed!.
.
.
 ha, ha, ha!.
.
.

It's not true!"

Natasha put one knee on the armchair, stooped over her mother, embraced
her, and with unexpected strength raised her, turned her face toward
herself, and clung to her.


"Mummy!.
.
 darling!.
.
.
 I am here, my dearest Mummy," she kept on
whispering, not pausing an instant.


She did not let go of her mother but struggled tenderly with her,
demanded a pillow and hot water, and unfastened and tore open her
mother's dress.


"My dearest darling.
.
.
.
.
" she whispered
incessantly, kissing her head, her hands, her face, and feeling her own
irrepressible and streaming tears tickling her nose and cheeks.


The countess pressed her daughter's hand, closed her eyes, and became
quiet for a moment.
 Suddenly she sat up with unaccustomed swiftness,
glanced vacantly around her, and seeing Natasha began to press her
daughter's head with all her strength.
 Then she turned toward her
daughter's face which was wincing with pain and gazed long at it.


"Natasha, you love me?" she said in a soft trustful whisper.
 "Natasha,
you would not deceive me? You'll tell me the whole truth?"

Natasha looked at her with eyes full of tears and in her look there was
nothing but love and an entreaty for forgiveness.


"My darling Mummy!" she repeated, straining all the power of her love to
find some way of taking on herself the excess of grief that crushed her
mother.


And again in a futile struggle with reality her mother, refusing to
believe that she could live when her beloved boy was killed in the bloom
of life, escaped from reality into a world of delirium.
 She did not sleep and did not leave her mother.
 Her
persevering and patient love seemed completely to surround the countess
every moment, not explaining or consoling, but recalling her to life.


During the third night the countess kept very quiet for a few minutes,
and Natasha rested her head on the arm of her chair and closed her eyes,
but opened them again on hearing the bedstead creak.


"How glad I am you have come.
 You are tired.


"Mamma! What are you saying.
.
.
"

"Natasha, he is no more, no more!"

And embracing her daughter, the countess began to weep for the first
time.
 Sonya and the count tried to
replace Natasha but could not.
 They saw that she alone was able to
restrain her mother from unreasoning despair.


The mother's wounded spirit could not heal.
 Petya's death had torn from
her half her life.
 But the same blow that
almost killed the countess, this second blow, restored Natasha to life.


A spiritual wound produced by a rending of the spiritual body is like
a physical wound and, strange as it may seem, just as a deep wound may
heal and its edges join, physical and spiritual wounds alike can yet
heal completely only as the result of a vital force from within.
 She thought her life was ended,
but her love for her mother unexpectedly showed her that the essence of
life--love--was still active within her.
 Love awoke and so did life.


Prince Andrew's last days had bound Princess Mary and Natasha together;
this new sorrow brought them still closer to one another.
 Princess Mary
put off her departure, and for three weeks looked after Natasha as if
she had been a sick child.
 Natasha lay down,
but when Princess Mary had drawn the blinds and was going away she
called her back.


"I don't want to sleep, Mary, sit by me a little.
"

"You are tired--try to sleep.


Natasha lay on the bed and in the semidarkness of the room scanned
Princess Mary's face.


"Is she like him?" thought Natasha.
 And she loves me.
 What
is in her heart? All that is good.
 No? Mary darling, how I love you!
Let us be quite, quite friends.


From that day a tender and passionate friendship such as exists only
between women was established between Princess Mary and Natasha.
 They
were continually kissing and saying tender things to one another and
spent most of their time together.
 Together they felt more in harmony
with one another than either of them felt with herself when alone.
 They spoke most
of what was long past.
 Princess Mary spoke of her childhood, of her
mother, her father, and her daydreams; and Natasha, who with a passive
lack of understanding had formerly turned away from that life of
devotion, submission, and the poetry of Christian self-sacrifice, now
feeling herself bound to Princess Mary by affection, learned to love her
past too and to understand a side of life previously incomprehensible to
her.
 She did not think of applying submission and self-abnegation to her
own life, for she was accustomed to seek other joys, but she understood
and loved in another those previously incomprehensible virtues.


Just as before, they never mentioned him so as not to lower (as they
thought) their exalted feelings by words; but this silence about him had
the effect of making them gradually begin to forget him without being
conscious of it.


Natasha had grown thin and pale and physically so weak that they all
talked about her health, and this pleased her.
 But sometimes she was
suddenly overcome by fear not only of death but of sickness, weakness,
and loss of good looks, and involuntarily she examined her bare arm
carefully, surprised at its thinness, and in the morning noticed her
drawn and, as it seemed to her, piteous face in her glass.
 It seemed to
her that things must be so, and yet it was dreadfully sad.

Unconsciously she immediately invented a reason for going down, and
then, testing her strength, ran upstairs again, observing the result.






CHAPTER IV


After the encounter at Vyazma, where Kutuzov had been unable to hold
back his troops in their anxiety to overwhelm and cut off the enemy and
so on, the farther movement of the fleeing French, and of the Russians
who pursued them, continued as far as Krasnoe without a battle.
 The
flight was so rapid that the Russian army pursuing the French could
not keep up with them; cavalry and artillery horses broke down, and the
information received of the movements of the French was never reliable.


The men in the Russian army were so worn out by this continuous marching
at the rate of twenty-seven miles a day that they could not go any
faster.


The rapidity of the Russian pursuit was just as destructive to our army
as the flight of the French was to theirs.


But besides this, since the exhaustion and enormous diminution of the
army caused by the rapidity of the advance had become evident, another
reason for slackening the pace and delaying presented itself to Kutuzov.
 The road the
French would take was unknown, and so the closer our troops trod on
their heels the greater distance they had to cover.
 All
the artful maneuvers suggested by our generals meant fresh movements of
the army and a lengthening of its marches, whereas the only reasonable
aim was to shorten those marches.


But to the generals, especially the foreign ones in the Russian army,
who wished to distinguish themselves, to astonish somebody, and for some
reason to capture a king or a duke--it seemed that now--when any battle
must be horrible and senseless--was the very time to fight and conquer
somebody.


This longing to distinguish themselves, to maneuver, to overthrow, and
to cut off showed itself particularly whenever the Russians stumbled on
the French army.


So it was at Krasnoe, where they expected to find one of the three
French columns and stumbled instead on Napoleon himself with sixteen
thousand men.
 Despite all Kutuzov's efforts to avoid that ruinous
encounter and to preserve his troops, the massacre of the broken mob
of French soldiers by worn-out Russians continued at Krasnoe for three
days.
 And as usual nothing happened in accord with the disposition.

Prince Eugene of Wurttemberg fired from a hill over the French crowds
that were running past, and demanded reinforcements which did not
arrive.
 The French, avoiding the Russians, dispersed and hid themselves
in the forest by night, making their way round as best they could, and
continued their flight.


Miloradovich, who said he did not want to know anything about the
commissariat affairs of his detachment, and could never be found when
he was wanted--that chevalier sans peur et sans reproche * as he styled
himself--who was fond of parleys with the French, sent envoys demanding
their surrender, wasted time, and did not do what he was ordered to do.



"I give you that column, lads," he said, riding up to the troops and
pointing out the French to the cavalry.


At Krasnoe they took twenty-six thousand prisoners, several hundred
cannon, and a stick called a "marshal's staff," and disputed as to
who had distinguished himself and were pleased with their
achievement--though they much regretted not having taken Napoleon, or at
least a marshal or a hero of some sort, and reproached one another and
especially Kutuzov for having failed to do so.
 They blamed Kutuzov and said that from the very beginning of the
campaign he had prevented their vanquishing Napoleon, that he thought of
nothing but satisfying his passions and would not advance from the Linen
Factories because he was comfortable there, that at Krasnoe he checked
the advance because on learning that Napoleon was there he had quite
lost his head, and that it was probable that he had an understanding
with Napoleon and had been bribed by him, and so on, and so on.


Not only did his contemporaries, carried away by their passions, talk
in this way, but posterity and history have acclaimed Napoleon as grand,
while Kutuzov is described by foreigners as a crafty, dissolute, weak
old courtier, and by Russians as something indefinite--a sort of puppet
useful only because he had a Russian name.






CHAPTER V


In 1812 and 1813 Kutuzov was openly accused of blundering.
 The Emperor
was dissatisfied with him.
 And in a history recently written by order
of the Highest Authorities it is said that Kutuzov was a cunning court
liar, frightened of the name of Napoleon, and that by his blunders at
Krasnoe and the Berezina he deprived the Russian army of the glory of
complete victory over the French.
 *


     * History of the year 1812.
 The character of Kutuzov and
     reflections on the unsatisfactory results of the battles at
     Krasnoe, by Bogdanovich.
 The hatred and contempt of the crowd punish such men for discerning
the higher laws.


For Russian historians, strange and terrible to say, Napoleon--that most
insignificant tool of history who never anywhere, even in exile, showed
human dignity--Napoleon is the object of adulation and enthusiasm; he
is grand.
 But Kutuzov--the man who from the beginning to the end of his
activity in 1812, never once swerving by word or deed from Borodino to
Vilna, presented an example exceptional in history of self-sacrifice
and a present consciousness of the future importance of what was
happening--Kutuzov seems to them something indefinite and pitiful, and
when speaking of him and of the year 1812 they always seem a little
ashamed.


And yet it is difficult to imagine an historical character whose
activity was so unswervingly directed to a single aim; and it would be
difficult to imagine any aim more worthy or more consonant with the
will of the whole people.
 Still more difficult would it be to find
an instance in history of the aim of an historical personage being so
completely accomplished as that to which all Kutuzov's efforts were
directed in 1812.


Kutuzov never talked of "forty centuries looking down from the
Pyramids," of the sacrifices he offered for the fatherland, or of
what he intended to accomplish or had accomplished; in general he said
nothing about himself, adopted no prose, always appeared to be the
simplest and most ordinary of men, and said the simplest and most
ordinary things.
 When Count Rostopchin at the Yauza bridge
galloped up to Kutuzov with personal reproaches for having caused the
destruction of Moscow, and said: "How was it you promised not to abandon
Moscow without a battle?" Kutuzov replied: "And I shall not abandon
Moscow without a battle," though Moscow was then already abandoned.
 When
Arakcheev, coming to him from the Emperor, said that Ermolov ought to
be appointed chief of the artillery, Kutuzov replied: "Yes, I was
just saying so myself," though a moment before he had said quite the
contrary.


Not merely in these cases but continually did that old man--who by
experience of life had reached the conviction that thoughts and the
words serving as their expression are not what move people--use quite
meaningless words that happened to enter his head.
 Obviously in spite of
himself, in very diverse circumstances, he repeatedly expressed his real
thoughts with the bitter conviction that he would not be understood.
 He alone said that the loss of
Moscow is not the loss of Russia.


And this courtier, as he is described to us, who lies to Arakcheev
to please the Emperor, he alone--incurring thereby the Emperor's
displeasure--said in Vilna that to carry the war beyond the frontier is
useless and harmful.


This procrastinator Kutuzov, whose motto was "Patience and Time,"
this enemy of decisive action, gave battle at Borodino, investing the
preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity.
 This Kutuzov who before
the battle of Austerlitz began said that it would be lost, he alone, in
contradiction to everyone else, declared till his death that Borodino
was a victory, despite the assurance of generals that the battle was
lost and despite the fact that for an army to have to retire after
winning a battle was unprecedented.


It is easy now to understand the significance of these events--if
only we abstain from attributing to the activity of the mass aims that
existed only in the heads of a dozen individuals--for the events and
results now lie before us.


But how did that old man, alone, in opposition to the general opinion,
so truly discern the importance of the people's view of the events that
in all his activity he was never once untrue to it?

The source of that extraordinary power of penetrating the meaning of the
events then occuring lay in the national feeling which he possessed in
full purity and strength.
 Toward evening--after much disputing and many mistakes made by
generals who did not go to their proper places, and after adjutants had
been sent about with counterorders--when it had become plain that the
enemy was everywhere in flight and that there could and would be no
battle, Kutuzov left Krasnoe and went to Dobroe whither his headquarters
had that day been transferred.
 Kutuzov rode to Dobroe on his plump little
white horse, followed by an enormous suite of discontented generals who
whispered among themselves behind his back.
 All along the road groups of
French prisoners captured that day (there were seven thousand of them)
were crowding to warm themselves at campfires.
 At the approach of the
commander in chief the buzz of talk ceased and all eyes were fixed on
Kutuzov who, wearing a white cap with a red band and a padded overcoat
that bulged on his round shoulders, moved slowly along the road on his
white horse.
 One of the generals was reporting to him where the guns and
prisoners had been captured.
 There was something horrible and bestial in
the fleeting glance they threw at the riders and in the malevolent
expression with which, after a glance at Kutuzov, the soldier with the
sores immediately turned away and went on with what he was doing.
 He puckered his
face, screwed up his eyes, and pensively swayed his head.
 At another
spot he noticed a Russian soldier laughingly patting a Frenchman on the
shoulder, saying something to him in a friendly manner, and Kutuzov with
the same expression on his face again swayed his head.


He looked about him absently.
 Thousands of eyes were looking at him from
all sides awaiting a word from him.
 One of his suite beckoned to the soldiers carrying
the standards to advance and surround the commander in chief with them.
 A throng of officers surrounded him.

The victory is complete and Russia will not forget you! Honor to you
forever.
"

He paused and looked around.


"Lower its head, lower it!" he said to a soldier who had accidentally
lowered the French eagle he was holding before the Preobrazhensk
standards.


While the soldiers were shouting Kutuzov leaned forward in his saddle
and bowed his head, and his eye lit up with a mild and apparently ironic
gleam.


"You see, brothers.
.
.
" said he when the shouts had ceased.
.
.
 and all at
once his voice and the expression of his face changed.


There was a stir among the throng of officers and in the ranks of the
soldiers, who moved that they might hear better what he was going to
say.


"You see, brothers, I know it's hard for you, but it can't be helped!
Bear up; it won't be for long now! We'll see our visitors off and then
we'll rest.
 It is hard for you, but
still you are at home while they--you see what they have come to," said
he, pointing to the prisoners.
 "Worse off than our poorest beggars.
 They are human beings too.
 Isn't it so, lads?"

He looked around, and in the direct, respectful, wondering gaze fixed
upon him he read sympathy with what he had said.
 His face grew brighter
and brighter with an old man's mild smile, which drew the corners of his
lips and eyes into a cluster of wrinkles.


"But after all who asked them here? Serves them right, the bloody
bastards!" he cried, suddenly lifting his head.


And flourishing his whip he rode off at a gallop for the first time
during the whole campaign, and left the broken ranks of the soldiers
laughing joyfully and shouting "Hurrah!"

Kutuzov's words were hardly understood by the troops.






CHAPTER VII


When the troops reached their night's halting place on the eighth of
November, the last day of the Krasnoe battles, it was already growing
dusk.
 Through the falling
snow a purple-black and starry sky showed itself and the frost grew
keener.


An infantry regiment which had left Tarutino three thousand strong but
now numbered only nine hundred was one of the first to arrive that night
at its halting place--a village on the highroad.
 There was only one hut
available for the regimental commander.
 The regiment passed through the
village and stacked its arms in front of the last huts.


Like some huge many-limbed animal, the regiment began to prepare its
lair and its food.
 One part of it dispersed and waded knee-deep
through the snow into a birch forest to the right of the village, and
immediately the sound of axes and swords, the crashing of branches,
and merry voices could be heard from there.
 Another section amid the
regimental wagons and horses which were standing in a group was busy
getting out caldrons and rye biscuit, and feeding the horses.


Some fifteen men with merry shouts were shaking down the high wattle
wall of a shed, the roof of which had already been removed.
 The lower stakes cracked more and
more and at last the wall fell, and with it the men who had been pushing
it.
.
 At
the end of the third verse as the last note died away, twenty voices
roared out at once: "Oo-oo-oo-oo! That's it.
.
" but despite their united efforts the wattle hardly moved, and
in the silence that followed the heavy breathing of the men was audible.

will you? You may want us one of these days.
"

Some twenty men of the Sixth Company who were on their way into the
village joined the haulers, and the wattle wall, which was about
thirty-five feet long and seven feet high, moved forward along the
village street, swaying, pressing upon and cutting the shoulders of the
gasping men.


"Get along.
.
 Falling? What are you stopping for? There now.
.
"

Merry senseless words of abuse flowed freely.

"There are gentry here; the general himself is in that hut, and you
foul-mouthed devils, you brutes, I'll give it to you!" shouted he,
hitting the first man who came in his way a swinging blow on the back.

"Can't you make less noise?"

The men became silent.
 The soldier who had been struck groaned and wiped
his face, which had been scratched till it bled by his falling against
the wattle.


"Don't you like it?" said a laughing voice, and moderating their tones
the men moved forward.


When they were out of the village they began talking again as loud as
before, interlarding their talk with the same aimless expletives.


In the hut which the men had passed, the chief officers had gathered and
were in animated talk over their tea about the events of the day and the
maneuvers suggested for tomorrow.
 It was proposed to make a flank march
to the left, cut off the Vice-King (Murat) and capture him.


By the time the soldiers had dragged the wattle fence to its place
the campfires were blazing on all sides ready for cooking, the wood
crackled, the snow was melting, and black shadows of soldiers flitted
to and fro all over the occupied space where the snow had been trodden
down.
 Everything was done without any
orders being given.
 They beat the tattoo, called the
roll, had supper, and settled down round the fires for the night--some
repairing their footgear, some smoking pipes, and some stripping
themselves naked to steam the lice out of their shirts.


On the contrary, the army had never under the best material conditions
presented a more cheerful and animated aspect.
 This was because all who
began to grow depressed or who lost strength were sifted out of the army
day by day.
 For leave to sit by their wattle
they demanded contributions of fuel.


"Eh, Makeev! What has become of you, you son of a bitch? Are you lost or
have the wolves eaten you? Fetch some more wood!" shouted a red-haired
and red-faced man, screwing up his eyes and blinking because of the
smoke but not moving back from the fire.
 "And you, Jackdaw, go and fetch
some wood!" said he to another soldier.


"Bring it here--that's fine!"

They split up the wood, pressed it down on the fire, blew at it with
their mouths, and fanned it with the skirts of their greatcoats, making
the flames hiss and crackle.
 The men drew nearer and lit their pipes.

The handsome young soldier who had brought the wood, setting his arms
akimbo, began stamping his cold feet rapidly and deftly on the spot
where he stood.


"Mother! The dew is cold but clear.
.
.
" he sang, pretending to hiccough after each syllable.
 "What a
fellow you are for dancing!"

The dancer stopped, pulled off the loose piece of leather, and threw it
on the fire.


"Right enough, friend," said he, and, having sat down, took out of his
knapsack a scrap of blue French cloth, and wrapped it round his foot.

"It's the steam that spoils them," he added, stretching out his feet
toward the fire.


"I've had an eye on him this long while," said the other.


"Well, he's a poor sort of soldier.
.
.
"

"But in the Third Company they say nine men were missing yesterday.
"

"Yes, it's all very well, but when a man's feet are frozen how can he
walk?"

"Eh? Don't talk nonsense!" said a sergeant major.


"Do you want to be doing the same?" said an old soldier, turning
reproachfully to the man who had spoken of frozen feet.
 "Tell them to send me to hospital; I'm
aching all over; anyway I shan't be able to keep up.
"

"That'll do, that'll do!" replied the sergeant major quietly.


The soldier said no more and the talk went on.


"What a lot of those Frenchies were taken today, and the fact is that
not one of them had what you might call real boots on," said a soldier,
starting a new theme.
 "They were no more than make-believes.
"

"The Cossacks have taken their boots.
 It was pitiful to see them, boys," put in
the dancer.
 "As they turned them over one seemed still alive and, would
you believe it, he jabbered something in their lingo.
"

"Well, what do you think? They make soldiers of all classes there.
"

"But they don't understand our talk at all," said the dancer with a
puzzled smile.
 "I asked him whose subject he was, and he jabbered in his
own way.
 But theirs,' he says, 'are white as paper
and not so much smell as a whiff of gunpowder.
'"

All were silent.
 "They used to
gobble the same food as the gentry.


"That peasant near Mozhaysk where the battle was said the men were all
called up from ten villages around and they carted for twenty days and
still didn't finish carting the dead away.
 And as for the wolves, he
says.
.
"

"That was a real battle," said an old soldier.
 "It's the only one worth
remembering; but since that.
.
 it's only been tormenting folk.
 'Pardon!' they say.
 That's only one
case.
 And there's no way of killing him
either.
"

"You're a first-class liar, Kiselev, when I come to look at you!"

"Liar, indeed! It's the real truth.
"

"If he fell into my hands, when I'd caught him I'd bury him in the
ground with an aspen stake to fix him down.
 What a lot of men he's
ruined!"

"Well, anyhow we're going to end it.


The conversation flagged, and the soldiers began settling down to sleep.
"

"We shall want some more wood.
 That's queer.
"

"O Lord!"

"What are you pushing for? Is the fire only for you? Look how he's
sprawling!"

In the silence that ensued, the snoring of those who had fallen asleep
could be heard.


"Hark at them roaring there in the Fifth Company!" said one of the
soldiers, "and what a lot of them there are!"

One of the men got up and went over to the Fifth Company.
 "Two Frenchies have
turned up.
 One's quite frozen and the other's an awful swaggerer.
.
.
.
"

"Oh, I'll go across and have a look.
.
.






CHAPTER IX


The fifth company was bivouacking at the very edge of the forest.


About midnight they heard the sound of steps in the snow of the forest,
and the crackling of dry branches.


"A bear, lads," said one of the men.


They all raised their heads to listen, and out of the forest into the
bright firelight stepped two strangely clad human figures clinging to
one another.


These were two Frenchmen who had been hiding in the forest.
 One was taller than the other; he wore an officer's hat
and seemed quite exhausted.
 On approaching the fire he had been going to
sit down, but fell.
 The other, a short sturdy soldier with a shawl
tied round his head, was stronger.
 He raised his companion and said
something, pointing to his mouth.
 The soldiers surrounded the Frenchmen,
spread a greatcoat on the ground for the sick man, and brought some
buckwheat porridge and vodka for both of them.


When Morel had drunk some vodka and finished his bowl of porridge he
suddenly became unnaturally merry and chattered incessantly to the
soldiers, who could not understand him.
 Ramballe refused food and
resting his head on his elbow lay silent beside the campfire, looking at
the Russian soldiers with red and vacant eyes.
 Morel, pointing to his
shoulders, tried to impress on the soldiers the fact that Ramballe was
an officer and ought to be warmed.
 A Russian officer who had come up
to the fire sent to ask his colonel whether he would not take a French
officer into his hut to warm him, and when the messenger returned and
said that the colonel wished the officer to be brought to him, Ramballe
was told to go.


"You won't do it again, eh?" said one of the soldiers, winking and
turning mockingly to Ramballe.


They surrounded Ramballe, lifted him on the crossed arms of two
soldiers, and carried him to the hut.
 Ramballe put his arms around their
necks while they carried him and began wailing plaintively:

"Oh, you fine fellows, my kind, kind friends! These are men! Oh, my
brave, kind friends," and he leaned his head against the shoulder of one
of the men like a child.


Morel, a short sturdy Frenchman with inflamed and streaming eyes, was
wearing a woman's cloak and had a shawl tied woman fashion round his
head over his cap.
 He was evidently tipsy, and was singing a French song
in a hoarse broken voice, with an arm thrown round the nearest soldier.

The soldiers simply held their sides as they watched him.


"Now then, now then, teach us how it goes! I'll soon pick it up.
 How is
it?" said the man--a singer and a wag--whom Morel was embracing.
 "Ce
diable a quatre.
.
"


"Vivarika! Vif-seruvaru! Sedyablyaka!" repeated the soldier, flourishing
his arm and really catching the tune.


"Bravo! Ha, ha, ha!" rose their rough, joyous laughter from all sides.


Morel, wrinkling up his face, laughed too.
.
.



"It goes smoothly, too.
 Well, now, Zaletaev!"

"Ke.
.
.
" Zaletaev, brought out with effort: "ke-e-e-e," he drawled,
laboriously pursing his lips, "le-trip-ta-la-de-bu-de-ba, e
de-tra-va-ga-la" he sang.
 All the young soldiers smiled gaily as they watched him.


"They are men too," said one of them as he wrapped himself up in his
coat.
.






CHAPTER X


The French army melted away at the uniform rate of a mathematical
progression; and that crossing of the Berezina about which so much has
been written was only one intermediate stage in its destruction, and
not at all the decisive episode of the campaign.
 If so much has been
and still is written about the Berezina, on the French side this is only
because at the broken bridge across that river the calamities their army
had been previously enduring were suddenly concentrated at one moment
into a tragic spectacle that remained in every memory, and on the
Russian side merely because in Petersburg--far from the seat of war--a
plan (again one of Pfuel's) had been devised to catch Napoleon in a
strategic trap at the Berezina River.
 Everyone assured himself that all
would happen according to plan, and therefore insisted that it was just
the crossing of the Berezina that destroyed the French army.
 In reality
the results of the crossing were much less disastrous to the French--in
guns and men lost--than Krasnoe had been, as the figures show.
 The French crowd fled
at a continually increasing speed and all its energy was directed to
reaching its goal.
 It fled like a wounded animal and it was impossible
to block its path.


That impulse was reasonable.
 The condition of fugitives and of pursuers
was equally bad.
 As long as they remained with their own people each
might hope for help from his fellows and the definite place he held
among them.
 The most compassionate
Russian commanders, those favorable to the French--and even the
Frenchmen in the Russian service--could do nothing for the prisoners.
 It was impossible to take bread and clothes from our
hungry and indispensable soldiers to give to the French who, though not
harmful, or hated, or guilty, were simply unnecessary.
 Some Russians
even did that, but they were exceptions.


Certain destruction lay behind the French but in front there was hope.


The farther they fled the more wretched became the plight of the
remnant, especially after the Berezina, on which (in consequence of the
Petersburg plan) special hopes had been placed by the Russians, and
the keener grew the passions of the Russian commanders, who blamed one
another and Kutuzov most of all.
 Anticipation that the failure of
the Petersburg Berezina plan would be attributed to Kutuzov led
to dissatisfaction, contempt, and ridicule, more and more strongly
expressed.
 The ridicule and contempt were of course expressed in a
respectful form, making it impossible for him to ask wherein he was
to blame.
 They had heard all that before.
 And all he said--that it
was necessary to await provisions, or that the men had no boots--was so
simple, while what they proposed was so complicated and clever, that
it was evident that he was old and stupid and that they, though not in
power, were commanders of genius.


After the junction with the army of the brilliant admiral and Petersburg
hero Wittgenstein, this mood and the gossip of the staff reached their
maximum.
 Kutuzov saw this and merely sighed and shrugged his shoulders.

Only once, after the affair of the Berezina, did he get angry and write
to Bennigsen (who reported separately to the Emperor) the following
letter:

"On account of your spells of ill health, will your excellency please
be so good as to set off for Kaluga on receipt of this, and there await
further commands and appointments from His Imperial Majesty.
"

But after Bennigsen's departure, the Grand Duke Tsarevich Constantine
Pavlovich joined the army.
 He had taken part in the beginning of the
campaign but had subsequently been removed from the army by Kutuzov.

Now having come to the army, he informed Kutuzov of the Emperor's
displeasure at the poor success of our forces and the slowness of their
advance.
 The Emperor intended to join the army personally in a few days'
time.


The old man, experienced in court as well as in military affairs--this
same Kutuzov who in August had been chosen commander in chief
against the sovereign's wishes and who had removed the Grand Duke and
heir--apparent from the army--who on his own authority and contrary
to the Emperor's will had decided on the abandonment of Moscow, now
realized at once that his day was over, that his part was played,
and that the power he was supposed to hold was no longer his.
 And he
understood this not merely from the attitude of the court.
 He saw on the
one hand that the military business in which he had played his part was
ended and felt that his mission was accomplished; and at the same time
he began to be conscious of the physical weariness of his aged body and
of the necessity of physical rest.
 And he suddenly turned from the cares of army
and state and, as far as the passions that seethed around him allowed,
immersed himself in the quiet life to which he had formerly been
accustomed, as if all that was taking place and all that had still to be
done in the realm of history did not concern him at all.
 In undress
naval uniform, with a dirk, and holding his cap under his arm, he handed
Kutuzov a garrison report and the keys of the town.
 The contemptuously
respectful attitude of the younger men to the old man in his dotage was
expressed in the highest degree by the behavior of Chichagov, who knew
of the accusations that were being directed against Kutuzov.
.
"

Contrary to the Emperor's wish Kutuzov detained the greater part of the
army at Vilna.
 Those about him said that he became extraordinarily slack
and physically feeble during his stay in that town.
 He attended to army
affairs reluctantly, left everything to his generals, and while awaiting
the Emperor's arrival led a dissipated life.
 In spite of the severe frost some hundred generals and staff
officers in full parade uniform stood in front of the castle, as well as
a guard of honor of the Semenov regiment.


A courier who galloped to the castle in advance, in a troyka with three
foam-flecked horses, shouted "Coming!" and Konovnitsyn rushed into the
vestibule to inform Kutuzov, who was waiting in the hall porter's little
lodge.


A minute later the old man's large stout figure in full-dress uniform,
his chest covered with orders and a scarf drawn round his stomach,
waddled out into the porch.


From the habit of fifty years all this had a physically agitating effect
on the old general.
 He carefully and hastily felt himself all over,
readjusted his hat, and pulling himself together drew himself up and,
at the very moment when the Emperor, having alighted from the sleigh,
lifted his eyes to him, handed him the report and began speaking in his
smooth, ingratiating voice.
 And this embrace too, owing
to a long-standing impression related to his innermost feelings, had its
usual effect on Kutuzov and he gave a sob.


The Emperor greeted the officers and the Semenov guard, and again
pressing the old man's hand went with him into the castle.


When alone with the field marshal the Emperor expressed his
dissatisfaction at the slowness of the pursuit and at the mistakes made
at Krasnoe and the Berezina, and informed him of his intentions for a
future campaign abroad.
 The same
submissive, expressionless look with which he had listened to the
Emperor's commands on the field of Austerlitz seven years before settled
on his face now.
 Kutuzov seemed not to understand what was expected of
him.


Suddenly he seemed to remember; a scarcely perceptible smile flashed
across his puffy face, and bowing low and respectfully he took the
object that lay on the salver.
 It was the Order of St.
 George of the
First Class.






CHAPTER XI


Next day the field marshal gave a dinner and ball which the Emperor
honored by his presence.
 Kutuzov had received the Order of St.
 George
of the First Class and the Emperor showed him the highest honors, but
everyone knew of the imperial dissatisfaction with him.
 The proprieties
were observed and the Emperor was the first to set that example,
but everybody understood that the old man was blameworthy and
good-for-nothing.
"

The Emperor's displeasure with Kutuzov was specially increased at Vilna
by the fact that Kutuzov evidently could not or would not understand the
importance of the coming campaign.


When on the following morning the Emperor said to the officers assembled
about him: "You have not only saved Russia, you have saved Europe!" they
all understood that the war was not ended.


Kutuzov alone would not see this and openly expressed his opinion that
no fresh war could improve the position or add to the glory of Russia,
but could only spoil and lower the glorious position that Russia had
gained.
 He tried to prove to the Emperor the impossibility of levying
fresh troops, spoke of the hardships already endured by the people, of
the possibility of failure and so forth.


To avoid unpleasant encounters with the old man, the natural method was
to do what had been done with him at Austerlitz and with Barclay at
the beginning of the Russian campaign--to transfer the authority to the
Emperor himself, thus cutting the ground from under the commander in
chief's feet without upsetting the old man by informing him of the
change.


With this object his staff was gradually reconstructed and its real
strength removed and transferred to the Emperor.
 Toll, Konovnitsyn, and
Ermolov received fresh appointments.


His health had to be bad for his place to be taken away and given to
another.


The war of 1812, besides its national significance dear to every Russian
heart, was now to assume another, a European, significance.


Alexander I was as necessary for the movement of the peoples from east
to west and for the refixing of national frontiers as Kutuzov had been
for the salvation and glory of Russia.
 He could not understand it.
 For the representative of
the Russian people, after the enemy had been destroyed and Russia had
been liberated and raised to the summit of her glory, there was nothing
left to do as a Russian.
 Nothing remained for the representative of the
national war but to die, and Kutuzov died.






CHAPTER XII


As generally happens, Pierre did not feel the full effects of the
physical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until after
they were over.
" But
despite the fact that the doctors treated him, bled him, and gave him
medicines to drink, he recovered.


Scarcely any impression was left on Pierre's mind by all that happened
to him from the time of his rescue till his illness.
 He remembered
only the dull gray weather now rainy and now snowy, internal physical
distress, and pains in his feet and side.
 He remembered a general
impression of the misfortunes and sufferings of people and of being
worried by the curiosity of officers and generals who questioned him, he
also remembered his difficulty in procuring a conveyance and horses, and
above all he remembered his incapacity to think and feel all that time.

On the day of his rescue he had seen the body of Petya Rostov.
 That same
day he had learned that Prince Andrew, after surviving the battle of
Borodino for more than a month had recently died in the Rostovs' house
at Yaroslavl, and Denisov who told him this news also mentioned Helene's
death, supposing that Pierre had heard of it long before.
 Just then he was only anxious to get away as quickly as
possible from places where people were killing one another, to some
peaceful refuge where he could recover himself, rest, and think over
all the strange new facts he had learned; but on reaching Orel he
immediately fell ill.
 When he came to himself after his illness he saw
in attendance on him two of his servants, Terenty and Vaska, who had
come from Moscow; and also his cousin the eldest princess, who had been
living on his estate at Elets and hearing of his rescue and illness had
come to look after him.
 In the
same way little by little he came to understand the news he had been
told after his rescue, about the death of Prince Andrew, the death of
his wife, and the destruction of the French.


A joyous feeling of freedom--that complete inalienable freedom natural
to man which he had first experienced at the first halt outside
Moscow--filled Pierre's soul during his convalescence.
 He was alone in a strange town, without acquaintances.
 No one
demanded anything of him or sent him anywhere.
 He had all he wanted:
the thought of his wife which had been a continual torment to him was no
longer there, since she was no more.


"Oh, how good! How splendid!" said he to himself when a cleanly laid
table was moved up to him with savory beef tea, or when he lay down for
the night on a soft clean bed, or when he remembered that the French had
gone and that his wife was no more.
 Ah, how splendid!"

The very question that had formerly tormented him, the thing he had
continually sought to find--the aim of life--no longer existed for
him now.


He could not see an aim, for he now had faith--not faith in any kind
of rule, or words, or ideas, but faith in an ever-living, ever-manifest
God.
 In his
captivity he had learned that in Karataev God was greater, more infinite
and unfathomable than in the Architect of the Universe recognized by the
Freemasons.
 He felt like a man who after straining his eyes to see into
the far distance finds what he sought at his very feet.
 He had equipped
himself with a mental telescope and looked into remote space, where
petty worldliness hiding itself in misty distance had seemed to him
great and infinite merely because it was not clearly seen.
 And such
had European life, politics, Freemasonry, philosophy, and philanthropy
seemed to him.
 But even then, at moments of weakness as he had accounted
them, his mind had penetrated to those distances and he had there seen
the same pettiness, worldliness, and senselessness.
 Now, however, he
had learned to see the great, eternal, and infinite in everything, and
therefore--to see it and enjoy its contemplation--he naturally threw
away the telescope through which he had till now gazed over men's heads,
and gladly regarded the ever-changing, eternally great, unfathomable,
and infinite life around him.
 And the closer he looked the more tranquil
and happy he became.
 That dreadful question, "What for?" which had
formerly destroyed all his mental edifices, no longer existed for him.
"





CHAPTER XIII


In external ways Pierre had hardly changed at all.


The princess, who had never liked Pierre and had been particularly
hostile to him since she had felt herself under obligations to him after
the old count's death, now after staying a short time in Orel--where she
had come intending to show Pierre that in spite of his ingratitude she
considered it her duty to nurse him--felt to her surprise and vexation
that she had become fond of him.
 Pierre did not in any way seek her
approval, he merely studied her with interest.


The most cunning man could not have crept into her confidence more
successfully, evoking memories of the best times of her youth and
showing sympathy with them.
 They considered that he had become much
"simpler.
 And Pierre,
noticing that Terenty wanted a chat, generally kept him there.
.


And Terenty would begin talking of the destruction of Moscow, and of
the old count, and would stand for a long time holding the clothes and
talking, or sometimes listening to Pierre's stories, and then would go
out into the hall with a pleasant sense of intimacy with his master and
affection for him.


The doctor who attended Pierre and visited him every day, though he
considered it his duty as a doctor to pose as a man whose every moment
was of value to suffering humanity, would sit for hours with Pierre
telling him his favorite anecdotes and his observations on the
characters of his patients in general, and especially of the ladies.


"It's a pleasure to talk to a man like that; he is not like our
provincials," he would say.


There were several prisoners from the French army in Orel, and the
doctor brought one of them, a young Italian, to see Pierre.


The Italian seemed happy only when he could come to see Pierre, talk
with him, tell him about his past, his life at home, and his love,
and pour out to him his indignation against the French and especially
against Napoleon.
 "You, who have suffered so from the
French, do not even feel animosity toward them.
"

Pierre had evoked the passionate affection of the Italian merely by
evoking the best side of his nature and taking a pleasure in so doing.


During the last days of Pierre's stay in Orel his old Masonic
acquaintance Count Willarski, who had introduced him to the lodge in
1807, came to see him.
 Willarski was married to a Russian heiress who
had a large estate in Orel province, and he occupied a temporary post in
the commissariat department in that town.


Hearing that Bezukhov was in Orel, Willarski, though they had never been
intimate, came to him with the professions of friendship and intimacy
that people who meet in a desert generally express for one another.

Willarski felt dull in Orel and was pleased to meet a man of his own
circle and, as he supposed, of similar interests.


"You are letting yourself go, my dear fellow," he said.


But for all that Willarski found it pleasanter now than it had been
formerly to be with Pierre, and came to see him every day.
 And Pierre, without trying to
change the other's views and without condemning him, but with the quiet,
joyful, and amused smile now habitual to him, was interested in this
strange though very familiar phenomenon.


There was a new feature in Pierre's relations with Willarski, with the
princess, with the doctor, and with all the people he now met, which
gained for him the general good will.
 This was his acknowledgment of
the impossibility of changing a man's convictions by words, and his
recognition of the possibility of everyone thinking, feeling, and seeing
things each from his own point of view.
 The difference, and sometimes complete contradiction, between
men's opinions and their lives, and between one man and another, pleased
him and drew from him an amused and gentle smile.
 Formerly all pecuniary questions,
especially requests for money to which, as an extremely wealthy man,
he was very exposed, produced in him a state of hopeless agitation and
perplexity.
 "To give or not to give?" he had asked himself.
 "I have
it and he needs it.
 But someone else needs it still more.
 Formerly he had been in a
similar state of perplexity with regard to every question concerning his
property, when one person advised one thing and another something else.
 The first time he
had recourse to his new judge was when a French prisoner, a colonel,
came to him and, after talking a great deal about his exploits,
concluded by making what amounted to a demand that Pierre should give
him four thousand francs to send to his wife and children.
 Pierre
refused without the least difficulty or effort, and was afterwards
surprised how simple and easy had been what used to appear so
insurmountably difficult.
 At the same time that he refused the colonel's
demand he made up his mind that he must have recourse to artifice when
leaving Orel, to induce the Italian officer to accept some money of
which he was evidently in need.
 The burning of Moscow had cost him, according to the
head steward's calculation, about two million rubles.


To console Pierre for these losses the head steward gave him an estimate
showing that despite these losses his income would not be diminished but
would even be increased if he refused to pay his wife's debts which he
was under no obligation to meet, and did not rebuild his Moscow house
and the country house on his Moscow estate, which had cost him eighty
thousand rubles a year and brought in nothing.


"Yes, of course that's true," said Pierre with a cheerful smile.
 "I
don't need all that at all.
 By being ruined I have become much richer.
 Why this was necessary he
did not know, but he knew for certain that it was necessary.
 His income
would be reduced by three fourths, but he felt it must be done.


Willarski was going to Moscow and they agreed to travel together.
 The presence and remarks of Willarski who
continually deplored the ignorance and poverty of Russia and its
backwardness compared with Europe only heightened Pierre's pleasure.

Where Willarski saw deadness Pierre saw an extraordinary strength
and vitality--the strength which in that vast space amid the snows
maintained the life of this original, peculiar, and unique people.

He did not contradict Willarski and even seemed to agree with him--an
apparent agreement being the simplest way to avoid discussions that
could lead to nothing--and he smiled joyfully as he listened to him.
 But when
we watch the ants round their ruined heap, the tenacity, energy, and
immense number of the delving insects prove that despite the destruction
of the heap, something indestructible, which though intangible is the
real strength of the colony, still exists; and similarly, though in
Moscow in the month of October there was no government and no churches,
shrines, riches, or houses--it was still the Moscow it had been in
August.


The motives of those who thronged from all sides to Moscow after it had
been cleared of the enemy were most diverse and personal, and at first
for the most part savage and brutal.
 One motive only they all had in
common: a desire to get to the place that had been called Moscow, to
apply their activities there.


Within a week Moscow already had fifteen thousand inhabitants, in a
fortnight twenty-five thousand, and so on.
 By the autumn of 1813 the
number, ever increasing and increasing, exceeded what it had been in
1812.
 The Russians who
entered Moscow, finding it plundered, plundered it in their turn.
 Trains of peasant carts came to
Moscow to carry off to the villages what had been abandoned in the
ruined houses and the streets.
 The Cossacks carried off what they could
to their camps, and the householders seized all they could find in other
houses and moved it to their own, pretending that it was their property.


But the first plunderers were followed by a second and a third
contingent, and with increasing numbers plundering became more and more
difficult and assumed more definite forms.


The French found Moscow abandoned but with all the organizations of
regular life, with diverse branches of commerce and craftsmanship, with
luxury, and governmental and religious institutions.
 These forms were
lifeless but still existed.
 The longer the French remained the more these
forms of town life perished, until finally all was merged into one
confused, lifeless scene of plunder.


The more the plundering by the French continued, the more both the
wealth of Moscow and the strength of its plunderers was destroyed.
 But
plundering by the Russians, with which the reoccupation of the city
began, had an opposite effect: the longer it continued and the greater
the number of people taking part in it the more rapidly was the wealth
of the city and its regular life restored.


Besides the plunderers, very various people, some drawn by curiosity,
some by official duties, some by self-interest--house owners, clergy,
officials of all kinds, tradesmen, artisans, and peasants--streamed into
Moscow as blood flows to the heart.


Within a week the peasants who came with empty carts to carry off
plunder were stopped by the authorities and made to cart the corpses
out of the town.
 Gangs
of carpenters hoping for high pay arrived in Moscow every day, and on
all sides logs were being hewn, new houses built, and old, charred ones
repaired.
 Tradesmen began trading in booths.
 Cookshops and taverns were
opened in partially burned houses.
 The clergy resumed the services
in many churches that had not been burned.
 Donors contributed
Church property that had been stolen.
 Government clerks set up their
baize-covered tables and their pigeonholes of documents in small rooms.

The higher authorities and the police organized the distribution of
goods left behind by the French.
 He called on Count Rostopchin and
on some acquaintances who were back in Moscow, and he intended to leave
for Petersburg two days later.
 Pierre felt particularly
well disposed toward them all, but was now instinctively on his
guard for fear of binding himself in any way.
 To all questions put to
him--whether important or quite trifling--such as: Where would he live?
Was he going to rebuild? When was he going to Petersburg and would he
mind taking a parcel for someone?--he replied: "Yes, perhaps," or, "I
think so," and so on.


He had heard that the Rostovs were at Kostroma but the thought of
Natasha seldom occurred to him.
 If it did it was only as a pleasant
memory of the distant past.


On the third day after his arrival he heard from the Drubetskoys that
Princess Mary was in Moscow.
 Having heard at dinner that Princess Mary
was in Moscow and living in her house--which had not been burned--in
Vozdvizhenka Street, he drove that same evening to see her.


On his way to the house Pierre kept thinking of Prince Andrew, of their
friendship, of his various meetings with him, and especially of the last
one at Borodino.


"Is it possible that he died in the bitter frame of mind he was then in?
Is it possible that the meaning of life was not disclosed to him
before he died?" thought Pierre.


Pierre drove up to the house of the old prince in a most serious mood.

The house had escaped the fire; it showed signs of damage but its
general aspect was unchanged.


"Announce me.
 Perhaps she will see me," said Pierre.


"Yes, sir," said the man.
 "Please step into the portrait gallery.


In a rather low room lit by one candle sat the princess and with her
another person dressed in black.
 Pierre remembered that the princess
always had lady companions, but who they were and what they were like
he never knew or remembered.


The princess rose quickly to meet him and held out her hand.


"Yes," she said, looking at his altered face after he had kissed her
hand, "so this is how we meet again.
 It was the first piece of good
news we had received for a long time.
"

Again the princess glanced round at her companion with even more
uneasiness in her manner and was about to add something, but Pierre
interrupted her.


"Just imagine--I knew nothing about him!" said he.
 All I know I heard at second hand from others.
.
.
 What a strange coincidence!"

Pierre spoke rapidly and with animation.
 She again glanced rapidly from Pierre's face to
that of the lady in the black dress and said:

"Do you really not recognize her?"

Pierre looked again at the companion's pale, delicate face with its
black eyes and peculiar mouth, and something near to him, long forgotten
and more than sweet, looked at him from those attentive eyes.
 "This stern, thin, pale face that
looks so much older! It cannot be she.
"
But at that moment Princess Mary said, "Natasha!" And with difficulty,
effort, and stress, like the opening of a door grown rusty on its
hinges, a smile appeared on the face with the attentive eyes, and from
that opening door came a breath of fragrance which suffused Pierre with
a happiness he had long forgotten and of which he had not even been
thinking--especially at that moment.
 It suffused him, seized him, and
enveloped him completely.


At that moment Pierre involuntarily betrayed to her, to Princess Mary,
and above all to himself, a secret of which he himself had been unaware.
 He tried to hide his
agitation.
 But the more he tried to hide it the more clearly--clearer
than any words could have done--did he betray to himself, to her, and to
Princess Mary that he loved her.


"No, it's only the unexpectedness of it," thought Pierre.
 But as soon as
he tried to continue the conversation he had begun with Princess Mary he
again glanced at Natasha, and a still-deeper flush suffused his face and
a still-stronger agitation of mingled joy and fear seized his soul.


Pierre had failed to notice Natasha because he did not at all expect to
see her there, but he had failed to recognize her because the change in
her since he last saw her was immense.
 "The count and
countess will be here in a few days.
 The countess is in a dreadful
state; but it was necessary for Natasha herself to see a doctor.
"

"Yes, is there a family free from sorrow now?" said Pierre, addressing
Natasha.
 I saw him.


"What can one say or think of as a consolation?" said Pierre.
 "Nothing!
Why had such a splendid boy, so full of life, to die?"

"Yes, in these days it would be hard to live without faith.
.
.
" remarked
Princess Mary.


"Yes, yes, that is really true," Pierre hastily interrupted her.
"

Natasha without waiting for Princess Mary to finish again looked
inquiringly at Pierre.


"And because," Pierre continued, "only one who believes that there is a
God ruling us can bear a loss such as hers and.
.
.
"

Natasha had already opened her mouth to speak but suddenly stopped.

Pierre hurriedly turned away from her and again addressed Princess Mary,
asking about his friend's last days.


Pierre's confusion had now almost vanished, but at the same time he felt
that his freedom had also completely gone.
 He felt that there was now a
judge of his every word and action whose judgment mattered more to
him than that of all the rest of the world.
 He did
not purposely say things to please her, but whatever he was saying he
regarded from her standpoint.


Princess Mary--reluctantly as is usual in such cases--began telling of
the condition in which she had found Prince Andrew.
 But Pierre's face
quivering with emotion, his questions and his eager restless expression,
gradually compelled her to go into details which she feared to recall
for her own sake.
.
.
.
 So he did
soften?.
.
 What a happy thing that he saw you again," he added, suddenly
turning to Natasha and looking at her with eyes full of tears.


Natasha's face twitched.
 She frowned and lowered her eyes for a moment.

She hesitated for an instant whether to speak or not.


"Yes, that was happiness," she then said in her quiet voice with its
deep chest notes.
 "For me it certainly was happiness.
" She paused.
.
.
 he said he was wishing for it at the very moment I entered
the room.
 She blushed, pressed her clasped hands on her
knees, and then controlling herself with an evident effort lifted her
head and began to speak rapidly.


"We knew nothing of it when we started from Moscow.
 Then suddenly Sonya told me he was traveling with us.
 He listened to her and felt only pity for
her, for what she was suffering now while she was speaking.


Princess Mary, frowning in her effort to hold back her tears, sat beside
Natasha, and heard for the first time the story of those last days of
her brother's and Natasha's love.


Evidently Natasha needed to tell that painful yet joyful tale.


She spoke, mingling most trifling details with the intimate secrets of
her soul, and it seemed as if she could never finish.
 Several times she
repeated the same thing twice.


Dessalles' voice was heard outside the door asking whether little
Nicholas might come in to say good night.


Princess Mary roused him from his abstraction by drawing his attention
to her nephew who had entered the room.


At that moment of emotional tenderness young Nicholas' face, which
resembled his father's, affected Pierre so much that when he had kissed
the boy he got up quickly, took out his handkerchief, and went to the
window.
 Go downstairs, we will come immediately.
 They had evidently both formed the same resolution; the eyes of
both shone with satisfaction and a confession that besides sorrow life
also has joy.


"Do you take vodka, Count?" asked Princess Mary, and those words
suddenly banished the shadows of the past.
 "One hears such improbable wonders about you.
"

"Yes," replied Pierre with the smile of mild irony now habitual to him.

"They even tell me wonders I myself never dreamed of! Mary Abramovna
invited me to her house and kept telling me what had happened, or ought
to have happened, to me.
 Stepan Stepanych also instructed me how I ought
to tell of my experiences.
 In general I have noticed that it is very
easy to be an interesting man (I am an interesting man now); people
invite me out and tell me all about myself.


"We have been told," Princess Mary interrupted her, "that you lost two
millions in Moscow.


Though the position was now altered by his decision to pay his wife's
debts and to rebuild his houses, Pierre still maintained that he had
become three times as rich as before.


"What I have certainly gained is freedom," he began seriously, but did
not continue, noticing that this theme was too egotistic.


"And are you building?"

"Yes.


"No," answered Pierre, evidently not considering awkward the meaning
Princess Mary had given to his words.
 "I heard of it in Orel and you
cannot imagine how it shocked me.
 We were not an exemplary couple," he
added quickly, glancing at Natasha and noticing on her face curiosity as
to how he would speak of his wife, "but her death shocked me terribly.

When two people quarrel they are always both in fault, and one's own
guilt suddenly becomes terribly serious when the other is no longer
alive.
 without friends and without consolation!
I am very, very sorry for her," he concluded, and was pleased to notice
a look of glad approval on Natasha's face.


"And did you really see and speak to Napoleon, as we have been told?"
said Princess Mary.


"No, not once! Everybody seems to imagine that being taken prisoner
means being Napoleon's guest.
 "I guessed it then when we met at the
Sukharev tower, do you remember?"

Pierre admitted that it was true, and from that was gradually led by
Princess Mary's questions and especially by Natasha's into giving a
detailed account of his adventures.


At first he spoke with the amused and mild irony now customary with
him toward everybody and especially toward himself, but when he came
to describe the horrors and sufferings he had witnessed he was
unconsciously carried away and began speaking with the suppressed
emotion of a man re-experiencing in recollection strong impressions he
has lived through.
 In the whole narrative she saw only Pierre and his goodness.
 Not only
her look, but her exclamations and the brief questions she put, showed
Pierre that she understood just what he wished to convey.
 It was clear
that she understood not only what he said but also what he wished to,
but could not, express in words.
.

One was snatched out before my eyes.
.
.
 and there were women who had
their things snatched off and their earrings torn out.
.
.
" he flushed
and grew confused.
 "Then a patrol arrived and all the men--all those who
were not looting, that is--were arrested, and I among them.
.
" said Natasha and pausing added, "something fine?"

Pierre continued.


Pierre began to tell about Karataev, but paused.
 By this time he had
risen from the table and was pacing the room, Natasha following him with
her eyes.
 Then he added:

"No, you can't understand what I learned from that illiterate man--that
simple fellow.
"

"Yes, yes, go on!" said Natasha.
 He now, as
it were, saw a new meaning in all he had gone through.
 Now that he was
telling it all to Natasha he experienced that pleasure which a man has
when women listen to him--not clever women who when listening either try
to remember what they hear to enrich their minds and when opportunity
offers to retell it, or who wish to adopt it to some thought of their
own and promptly contribute their own clever comments prepared in their
little mental workshop--but the pleasure given by real women gifted with
a capacity to select and absorb the very best a man shows of himself.

Natasha without knowing it was all attention: she did not lose a word,
no single quiver in Pierre's voice, no look, no twitch of a muscle in
his face, nor a single gesture.
 She caught the unfinished word in its
flight and took it straight into her open heart, divining the secret
meaning of all Pierre's mental travail.


Princess Mary understood his story and sympathized with him, but she
now saw something else that absorbed all her attention.
 The footmen came in with sad and
stern faces to change the candles, but no one noticed them.
 Natasha continued to look at him intently
with bright, attentive, and animated eyes, as if trying to understand
something more which he had perhaps left untold.
 While there is life there is
happiness.
 There is much, much before us.
 I say this to you," he added,
turning to Natasha.


"Yes, and nothing more," said Natasha.


"It's not true, not true!" cried Pierre.
"

Suddenly Natasha bent her head, covered her face with her hands, and
began to cry.
 "Good night!
It is time for bed.
"

Pierre rose and took his leave.



Princess Mary and Natasha met as usual in the bedroom.
 They talked of
what Pierre had told them.
 Princess Mary did not express her opinion of
Pierre nor did Natasha speak of him.
 "Do you know, I am often afraid
that by not speaking of him" (she meant Prince Andrew) "for fear of not
doing justice to our feelings, we forget him.
 It was hard and
painful, but good, very good!" said Natasha.
 That is why I told him.
 Was it all right?" she added, suddenly
blushing.


"To tell Pierre? Oh, yes.
 What a splendid man he is!" said Princess
Mary.


"Do you know, Mary.
.
.
 Isn't it true?"

"Yes," replied Princess Mary.
"

"With a short coat and his hair cropped; just as if, well, just as if he
had come straight from the bath.
.
.
"

"I understand why he" (Prince Andrew) "liked no one so much as him,"
said Princess Mary.
 They say men are friends when
they are quite different.
 That must be true.
"

"Yes, but he's wonderful.
"

"Well, good night," said Natasha.






CHAPTER XVIII


It was a long time before Pierre could fall asleep that night.
 He paced
up and down his room, now turning his thoughts on a difficult problem
and frowning, now suddenly shrugging his shoulders and wincing, and now
smiling happily.


He was thinking of Prince Andrew, of Natasha, and of their love, at one
moment jealous of her past, then reproaching himself for that feeling.

It was already six in the morning and he still paced up and down the
room.


"Well, what's to be done if it cannot be avoided? What's to be done?
Evidently it has to be so," said he to himself, and hastily undressing
he got into bed, happy and agitated but free from hesitation or
indecision.
 When he awoke on the Thursday, Savelich came to ask him about
packing for the journey.


"What, to Petersburg? What is Petersburg? Who is there in Petersburg?"
he asked involuntarily, though only to himself.
 "Oh, yes, long ago
before this happened I did for some reason mean to go to Petersburg,"
he reflected.
 "Why? But perhaps I shall go.


"What's the good of freedom to me, your excellency? We lived under the
late count--the kingdom of heaven be his!--and we have lived under you
too, without ever being wronged.
"

"And your children?"

"The children will live just the same.
 With such masters one can live.
.
.

it might happen," he added with an involuntary smile.
"

"How easy he thinks it," thought Pierre.
 "He doesn't know how terrible
it is and how dangerous.
 Too soon or too late.
.
 it is terrible!"

"So what are your orders? Are you starting tomorrow?" asked Savelich.
 Shall
I have a talk with him and see what he thinks?" Pierre reflected.
"

At breakfast Pierre told the princess, his cousin, that he had been to
see Princess Mary the day before and had there met--"Whom do you think?
Natasha Rostova!"

The princess seemed to see nothing more extraordinary in that than if he
had seen Anna Semenovna.


"Do you know her?" asked Pierre.
 It was a great pity.
"

"No, she either doesn't understand or is pretending," thought Pierre.

"Better not say anything to her either.
"

The princess too had prepared provisions for Pierre's journey.
 And all for me!"

On the same day the Chief of Police came to Pierre, inviting him to send
a representative to the Faceted Palace to recover things that were to be
returned to their owners that day.


"And this man too," thought Pierre, looking into the face of the Chief
of Police.
 "What a fine, good-looking officer and how kind.
 What nonsense! Besides, why shouldn't he take bribes?
That's the way he was brought up, and everybody does it.
 But what a
kind, pleasant face and how he smiles as he looks at me.
"

Pierre went to Princess Mary's to dinner.


As he drove through the streets past the houses that had been burned
down, he was surprised by the beauty of those ruins.
 The picturesqueness
of the chimney stacks and tumble-down walls of the burned-out quarters
of the town, stretching out and concealing one another, reminded him of
the Rhine and the Colosseum.
 The cabmen he met and their passengers,
the carpenters cutting the timber for new houses with axes, the women
hawkers, and the shopkeepers, all looked at him with cheerful beaming
eyes that seemed to say: "Ah, there he is! Let's see what will come of
it!"

At the entrance to Princess Mary's house Pierre felt doubtful whether
he had really been there the night before and really seen Natasha and
talked to her.
 "Perhaps I imagined it; perhaps I shall go in and find
no one there.
 She
was in the same black dress with soft folds and her hair was done the
same way as the day before, yet she was quite different.
 Had she been
like this when he entered the day before he could not for a moment have
failed to recognize her.


Next day he came early, dined, and stayed the whole evening.
 He stayed so long
that Princess Mary and Natasha exchanged glances, evidently wondering
when he would go.
 He felt uneasy
and embarrassed, but sat on because he simply could not get up and take
his leave.


Princess Mary, foreseeing no end to this, rose first, and complaining of
a headache began to say good night.


"So you are going to Petersburg tomorrow?" she asked.
 "Yes.
.
 no.
 to Petersburg? Tomorrow--but I won't say
good-by yet.


Natasha gave him her hand and went out.
 Princess Mary on the other hand
instead of going away sank into an armchair, and looked sternly and
intently at him with her deep, radiant eyes.
 He quickly
moved an armchair toward Princess Mary.
.
"

He paused and rubbed his face and eyes with his hands.


"Well," he went on with an evident effort at self-control and coherence.
 I cannot propose to her at present, but the thought that
perhaps she might someday be my wife and that I may be missing that
possibility.
 is terrible.


"I am thinking of what you have told me," answered Princess Mary.

"This is what I will say.
.
.
"

Princess Mary stopped.


"But what am I to do?"

"Leave it to me," said Princess Mary.
 "I know.
.
.
.
.
.
" he said.


"I know that she loves.
.
.
 will love you," Princess Mary corrected
herself.


"What makes you think so? You think I may hope? You think.
.
?"

"Yes, I think so," said Princess Mary with a smile.
 I wish it to
happen and my heart tells me it will.
.
.


"Go to Petersburg, that will be best.
 And I will write to you," she
said.


"To Petersburg? Go there? Very well, I'll go.
 But I may come again
tomorrow?"

Next day Pierre came to say good-by.
 Natasha was less animated than
she had been the day before; but that day as he looked at her Pierre
sometimes felt as if he was vanishing and that neither he nor she
existed any longer, that nothing existed but happiness.


When on saying good-by he took her thin, slender hand, he could not help
holding it a little longer in his own.
.
.
 No, that's
impossible!.
.
 "I shall look forward very much to
your return," she added in a whisper.
.
.






CHAPTER XIX


There was nothing in Pierre's soul now at all like what had troubled it
during his courtship of Helene.


He did not repeat to himself with a sickening feeling of shame the words
he had spoken, or say: "Oh, why did I not say that?" and, "Whatever made
me say 'Je vous aime'?" On the contrary, he now repeated in imagination
every word that he or Natasha had spoken and pictured every detail of
her face and smile, and did not wish to diminish or add anything, but
only to repeat it again and again.
 There was now not a shadow of doubt
in his mind as to whether what he had undertaken was right or wrong.

Only one terrible doubt sometimes crossed his mind: "Wasn't it all
a dream? Isn't Princess Mary mistaken? Am I not too conceited and
self-confident? I believe all this--and suddenly Princess Mary will tell
her, and she will be sure to smile and say: 'How strange! He must be
deluding himself.
 Doesn't he know that he is a man, just a man, while
I.
.
 The happiness before him appeared so inconceivable that if only
he could attain it, it would be the end of all things.
 Everything ended
with that.


A joyful, unexpected frenzy, of which he had thought himself incapable,
possessed him.
 The whole meaning of life--not for him alone but for the
whole world--seemed to him centered in his love and the possibility of
being loved by her.
 Sometimes it seemed to him that
other people were all as pleased as he was himself and merely tried to
hide that pleasure by pretending to be busy with other interests.
 In
every word and gesture he saw allusions to his happiness.
 And when
he realized that people might not be aware of his happiness, he pitied
them with his whole heart and felt a desire somehow to explain to them
that all that occupied them was a mere frivolous trifle unworthy of
attention.


When it was suggested to him that he should enter the civil service,
or when the war or any general political affairs were discussed on the
assumption that everybody's welfare depended on this or that issue
of events, he would listen with a mild and pitying smile and surprise
people by his strange comments.


When dealing with the affairs and papers of his dead wife, her memory
aroused in him no feeling but pity that she had not known the bliss he
now knew.
 Prince Vasili, who having obtained a new post and some
fresh decorations was particularly proud at this time, seemed to him a
pathetic, kindly old man much to be pitied.
 All
the views he formed of men and circumstances at this time remained true
for him always.
 He not only did not renounce them subsequently, but when
he was in doubt or inwardly at variance, he referred to the views he had
held at this time of his madness and they always proved correct.


"I may have appeared strange and queer then," he thought, "but I was
not so mad as I seemed.
.
 because I was happy.
"

Pierre's insanity consisted in not waiting, as he used to do, to
discover personal attributes which he termed "good qualities" in people
before loving them; his heart was now overflowing with love, and by
loving people without cause he discovered indubitable causes for loving
them.






CHAPTER XX


After Pierre's departure that first evening, when Natasha had said to
Princess Mary with a gaily mocking smile: "He looks just, yes, just as
if he had come out of a Russian bath--in a short coat and with his hair
cropped," something hidden and unknown to herself, but irrepressible,
awoke in Natasha's soul.
 She no longer complained of her
position, did not say a word about the past, and no longer feared to
make happy plans for the future.


The change that took place in Natasha at first surprised Princess Mary;
but when she understood its meaning it grieved her.


When Princess Mary returned to her room after her nocturnal talk with
Pierre, Natasha met her on the threshold.


"He has spoken? Yes? He has spoken?" she repeated.


And a joyful yet pathetic expression which seemed to beg forgiveness for
her joy settled on Natasha's face.


"I wanted to listen at the door, but I knew you would tell me.
 She remembered her brother and his
love.


"But what's to be done? She can't help it," thought the princess.


And with a sad and rather stern look she told Natasha all that Pierre
had said.


"To Petersburg!" she repeated as if unable to understand.


But noticing the grieved expression on Princess Mary's face she guessed
the reason of that sadness and suddenly began to cry.

Whatever you tell me, I will do.
.


"Then why are you crying? I am happy for your sake," said Princess Mary,
who because of those tears quite forgave Natasha's joy.


"It won't be just yet--someday.
 Think what fun it will be when I am his
wife and you marry Nicholas!"

"Natasha, I have asked you not to speak of that.
"

They were silent awhile.
 "But no, no, he must.
.
.
 Yes, Mary, He must.
.
.
.
 The storm-tossed sea of European history had
subsided within its shores and seemed to have become calm.


Though the surface of the sea of history seemed motionless, the movement
of humanity went on as unceasingly as the flow of time.
 Various groups
of people formed and dissolved, the coming formation and dissolution of
kingdoms and displacement of peoples was in course of preparation.


The sea of history was not driven spasmodically from shore to shore as
previously.
 Historic figures were not
borne by the waves from one shore to another as before.
 The historical figures at the head of armies,
who formerly reflected the movement of the masses by ordering wars,
campaigns, and battles, now reflected the restless movement by political
and diplomatic combinations, laws, and treaties.


The historians call this activity of the historical figures "the
reaction.
"

In dealing with this period they sternly condemn the historical
personages who, in their opinion, caused what they describe as the
reaction.
 All the well-known people of that period, from Alexander and
Napoleon to Madame de Stael, Photius, Schelling, Fichte, Chateaubriand,
and the rest, pass before their stern judgment seat and are acquitted or
condemned according to whether they conduced to progress or to reaction.


"He ought to have acted in this way and in that way.
 In this case he did
well and in that case badly.
 He behaved admirably at the beginning of
his reign and during 1812, but acted badly by giving a constitution
to Poland, forming the Holy Alliance, entrusting power to Arakcheev,
favoring Golitsyn and mysticism, and afterwards Shishkov and Photius.
"

It would take a dozen pages to enumerate all the reproaches the
historians address to him, based on their knowledge of what is good for
humanity.


What do these reproaches mean?

Do not the very actions for which the historians praise Alexander I
(the liberal attempts at the beginning of his reign, his struggle with
Napoleon, the firmness he displayed in 1812 and the campaign of 1813)
flow from the same sources--the circumstances of his birth, education,
and life--that made his personality what it was and from which the
actions for which they blame him (the Holy Alliance, the restoration of
Poland, and the reaction of 1820 and later) also flowed?

In what does the substance of those reproaches lie?

It lies in the fact that an historic character like Alexander I,
standing on the highest possible pinnacle of human power with the
blinding light of history focused upon him; a character exposed to those
strongest of all influences: the intrigues, flattery, and self-deception
inseparable from power; a character who at every moment of his life
felt a responsibility for all that was happening in Europe; and not
a fictitious but a live character who like every man had his personal
habits, passions, and impulses toward goodness, beauty, and truth--that
this character--though not lacking in virtue (the historians do not
accuse him of that)--had not the same conception of the welfare of
humanity fifty years ago as a present-day professor who from his
youth upwards has been occupied with learning: that is, with books and
lectures and with taking notes from them.


But even if we assume that fifty years ago Alexander I was mistaken in
his view of what was good for the people, we must inevitably assume that
the historian who judges Alexander will also after the lapse of some
time turn out to be mistaken in his view of what is good for humanity.
 And what is
more, we find at one and the same time quite contradictory views as to
what is bad and what is good in history: some people regard giving a
constitution to Poland and forming the Holy Alliance as praiseworthy in
Alexander, while others regard it as blameworthy.


The activity of Alexander or of Napoleon cannot be called useful or
harmful, for it is impossible to say for what it was useful or harmful.

If that activity displeases somebody, this is only because it does
not agree with his limited understanding of what is good.
 Whether the
preservation of my father's house in Moscow, or the glory of the Russian
arms, or the prosperity of the Petersburg and other universities, or the
freedom of Poland or the greatness of Russia, or the balance of power in
Europe, or a certain kind of European culture called "progress" appear
to me to be good or bad, I must admit that besides these things the
action of every historic character has other more general purposes
inaccessible to me.
 What would then have become of the
activity of all those who opposed the tendency that then prevailed in
the government--an activity that in the opinion of the historians was
good and beneficent? Their activity would not have existed: there would
have been no life, there would have been nothing.


If the aim of the European wars at the beginning of the nineteenth
century had been the aggrandizement of Russia, that aim might have been
accomplished without all the preceding wars and without the invasion.
 If
the aim was the aggrandizement of France, that might have been attained
without the Revolution and without the Empire.


Why did it happen in this and not in some other way?

Because it happened so! "Chance created the situation; genius utilized
it," says history.


But what is chance? What is genius?

The words chance and genius do not denote any really existing thing and
therefore cannot be defined.
 Those words only denote a certain stage of
understanding of phenomena.
 I do not know why a certain event occurs; I
think that I cannot know it; so I do not try to know it and I talk about
chance.
 I see a force producing effects beyond the scope of ordinary
human agencies; I do not understand why this occurs and I talk of
genius.


To a herd of rams, the ram the herdsman drives each evening into a
special enclosure to feed and that becomes twice as fat as the others
must seem to be a genius.
 And it must appear an astonishing conjunction
of genius with a whole series of extraordinary chances that this ram,
who instead of getting into the general fold every evening goes into
a special enclosure where there are oats--that this very ram, swelling
with fat, is killed for meat.
 Even if they do not know for what purpose
they are fattened, they will at least know that all that happened to the
ram did not happen accidentally, and will no longer need the conceptions
of chance or genius.


We need only confess that we do not know the purpose of the European
convulsions and that we know only the facts--that is, the murders, first
in France, then in Italy, in Africa, in Prussia, in Austria, in Spain,
and in Russia--and that the movements from the west to the east and from
the east to the west form the essence and purpose of these events, and
not only shall we have no need to see exceptional ability and genius in
Napoleon and Alexander, but we shall be unable to consider them to
be anything but like other men, and we shall not be obliged to have
recourse to chance for an explanation of those small events which made
these people what they were, but it will be clear that all those small
events were inevitable.

For the peoples of the west to be able to make their warlike movement
to Moscow it was necessary: (1) that they should form themselves into
a military group of a size able to endure a collision with the warlike
military group of the east, (2) that they should abandon all established
traditions and customs, and (3) that during their military movement they
should have at their head a man who could justify to himself and to them
the deceptions, robberies, and murders which would have to be committed
during that movement.


And beginning with the French Revolution the old inadequately large
group was destroyed, as well as the old habits and traditions, and step
by step a group was formed of larger dimensions with new customs and
traditions, and a man was produced who would stand at the head of the
coming movement and bear the responsibility for all that had to be done.


A man without convictions, without habits, without traditions, without
a name, and not even a Frenchman, emerges--by what seem the strangest
chances--from among all the seething French parties, and without joining
any one of them is borne forward to a prominent position.


The ignorance of his colleagues, the weakness and insignificance of
his opponents, the frankness of his falsehoods, and the dazzling and
self-confident limitations of this man raise him to the head of the
army.
 The brilliant qualities of the soldiers of the army sent to Italy,
his opponents' reluctance to fight, and his own childish audacity and
self-confidence secure him military fame.
 His attempts to avoid his
predestined path are unsuccessful: he is not received into the Russian
service, and the appointment he seeks in Turkey comes to nothing.
 During
the war in Italy he is several times on the verge of destruction and
each time is saved in an unexpected manner.
 Owing to various diplomatic
considerations the Russian armies--just those which might have destroyed
his prestige--do not appear upon the scene till he is no longer there.
 The enemy's fleet, which subsequently did not let a single boat
pass, allows his entire army to elude it.
 In Africa a whole series of
outrages are committed against the almost unarmed inhabitants.


This ideal of glory and grandeur--which consists not merely in
considering nothing wrong that one does but in priding oneself on every
crime one commits, ascribing to it an incomprehensible supernatural
significance--that ideal, destined to guide this man and his associates,
had scope for its development in Africa.
 Whatever he does succeeds.
 The
plague does not touch him.
 His childishly rash, uncalled-for, and
ignoble departure from Africa, leaving his comrades in distress, is
set down to his credit, and again the enemy's fleet twice lets him slip
past.
 When, intoxicated by the crimes he has committed so successfully,
he reaches Paris, the dissolution of the republican government, which a
year earlier might have ruined him, has reached its extreme limit, and
his presence there now as a newcomer free from party entanglements can
only serve to exalt him--and though he himself has no plan, he is quite
ready for his new role.


He had no plan, he was afraid of everything, but the parties snatched at
him and demanded his participation.


He alone--with his ideal of glory and grandeur developed in Italy and
Egypt, his insane self-adulation, his boldness in crime and frankness in
lying--he alone could justify what had to be done.


He is pushed into a meeting of the legislature.
 He pretends to fall into a swoon and
says senseless things that should have ruined him.
 But the once proud
and shrewd rulers of France, feeling that their part is played out, are
even more bewildered than he, and do not say the words they should have
said to destroy him and retain their power.


Chance, millions of chances, give him power, and all men as if by
agreement co-operate to confirm that power.
 Chance forms the characters
of the rulers of France, who submit to him; chance forms the character
of Paul I of Russia who recognizes his government; chance contrives
a plot against him which not only fails to harm him but confirms his
power.
 Chance and genius give
him the victory at Austerlitz; and by chance all men, not only the
French but all Europe--except England which does not take part in the
events about to happen--despite their former horror and detestation of
his crimes, now recognize his authority, the title he has given
himself, and his ideal of grandeur and glory, which seems excellent and
reasonable to them all.
 In 1811 the group of people that
had formed in France unites into one group with the peoples of Central
Europe.
 The strength of the justification of the man who stands at the
head of the movement grows with the increased size of the group.
 The discredited rulers of the world can
oppose no reasonable ideal to the insensate Napoleonic ideal of
glory and grandeur.
 And when he is ready so
too are the forces.
 The Napoleonic government and army
are destroyed.
 The allies detest Napoleon whom they regard as the cause of
their sufferings.
 But by some
strange chance no one perceives this.
 The man
who ten years before and a year later was considered an outlawed brigand
is sent to an island two days' sail from France, which for some reason
is presented to him as his dominion, and guards are given to him and
millions of money are paid him.
 The
waves of the great movement abate, and on the calm surface eddies are
formed in which float the diplomatists, who imagine that they have
caused the floods to abate.
 The diplomatists
think that their disagreements are the cause of this fresh pressure
of natural forces; they anticipate war between their sovereigns; the
position seems to them insoluble.
 But the wave they feel to be rising
does not come from the quarter they expect.
 Any guard might arrest him, but by
strange chance no one does so and all rapturously greet the man they
cursed the day before and will curse again a month later.


This man is still needed to justify the final collective act.


That act is performed.


The last role is played.


The manager having brought the drama to a close and stripped the actor
shows him to us.


"See what you believed in! This is he! Do you now see that it was not he
but I who moved you?"

But dazed by the force of the movement, it was long before people
understood this.


Still greater coherence and inevitability is seen in the life of
Alexander I, the man who stood at the head of the countermovement from
east to west.


What was needed for him who, overshadowing others, stood at the head of
that movement from east to west?

What was needed was a sense of justice and a sympathy with European
affairs, but a remote sympathy not dulled by petty interests; a moral
superiority over those sovereigns of the day who co-operated with him;
a mild and attractive personality; and a personal grievance against
Napoleon.


During the national war he was inactive because he was not needed.
 But
as soon as the necessity for a general European war presented itself he
appeared in his place at the given moment and, uniting the nations of
Europe, led them to the goal.


The goal is reached.
.
.
 Let me live like a man and think of my soul and of God.
 A botanist notices
that the bee flying with the pollen of a male flower to a pistil
fertilizes the latter, and sees in this the purpose of the bee's
existence.
 Another, observing the migration of plants, notices that the
bee helps in this work, and may say that in this lies the purpose of the
bee.
 The
higher the human intellect rises in the discovery of these purposes,
the more obvious it becomes, that the ultimate purpose is beyond our
comprehension.
 Count Ilya Rostov died
that same year and, as always happens, after the father's death the
family group broke up.


The events of the previous year: the burning of Moscow and the flight
from it, the death of Prince Andrew, Natasha's despair, Petya's death,
and the old countess' grief fell blow after blow on the old count's
head.
 He seemed to be unable to understand the meaning of all these
events, and bowed his old head in a spiritual sense as if expecting and
inviting further blows which would finish him.
 He seemed now frightened
and distraught and now unnaturally animated and enterprising.
 He
ordered dinners and suppers and obviously tried to appear cheerful, but
his cheerfulness was not infectious as it used to be: on the contrary it
evoked the compassion of those who knew and liked him.


When Pierre and his wife had left, he grew very quiet and began to
complain of depression.
 The countess passed a fortnight in an
armchair by his pillow without undressing.
 Every time she gave him
his medicine he sobbed and silently kissed her hand.
 On his last day,
sobbing, he asked her and his absent son to forgive him for having
dissipated their property--that being the chief fault of which he was
conscious.
 All these
acquaintances, who had so often dined and danced at his house and had so
often laughed at him, now said, with a common feeling of self-reproach
and emotion, as if justifying themselves: "Well, whatever he may have
been he was a most worthy man.
 You don't meet such men nowadays.
 And
which of us has not weaknesses of his own?"

It was just when the count's affairs had become so involved that it was
impossible to say what would happen if he lived another year that he
unexpectedly died.
 The debts amounted to
double the value of the property.


Friends and relations advised Nicholas to decline the inheritance.


The creditors who had so long been silent, restrained by a vague
but powerful influence exerted on them while he lived by the count's
careless good nature, all proceeded to enforce their claims at once.
 As
always happens in such cases rivalry sprang up as to which should get
paid first, and those who like Mitenka held promissory notes given them
as presents now became the most exacting of the creditors.
 Nicholas was
allowed no respite and no peace, and those who had seemed to pity
the old man--the cause of their losses (if they were losses)--now
remorselessly pursued the young heir who had voluntarily undertaken the
debts and was obviously not guilty of contracting them.


Not one of the plans Nicholas tried succeeded; the estate was sold by
auction for half its value, and half the debts still remained
unpaid.
 And to avoid being imprisoned for the remainder, as
the creditors threatened, he re-entered the government service.


He could not rejoin the army where he would have been made colonel at
the next vacancy, for his mother now clung to him as her one hold on
life; and so despite his reluctance to remain in Moscow among people who
had known him before, and despite his abhorrence of the civil service,
he accepted a post in Moscow in that service, doffed the uniform of
which he was so fond, and moved with his mother and Sonya to a small
house on the Sivtsev Vrazhek.


Natasha and Pierre were living in Petersburg at the time and had no
clear idea of Nicholas' circumstances.
 The
countess could not conceive of life without the luxurious conditions she
had been used to from childhood and, unable to realize how hard it was
for her son, kept demanding now a carriage (which they did not keep) to
send for a friend, now some expensive article of food for herself, or
wine for her son, or money to buy a present as a surprise for Natasha or
Sonya, or for Nicholas himself.
 Nicholas felt himself irredeemably indebted
to Sonya for all she was doing for his mother and greatly admired her
patience and devotion, but tried to keep aloof from her.


He seemed in his heart to reproach her for being too perfect, and
because there was nothing to reproach her with.
 Not only did he not save
anything, but to comply with his mother's demands he even incurred some
small debts.
 The idea of
marrying some rich woman, which was suggested to him by his female
relations, was repugnant to him.
 He wished for nothing and hoped
for nothing, and deep in his heart experienced a gloomy and stern
satisfaction in an uncomplaining endurance of his position.
 He seemed
carefully to cherish within himself the gloomy mood which alone enabled
him to endure his position.
 From reports
current in town she learned how the Rostovs were situated, and how "the
son has sacrificed himself for his mother," as people were saying.
 But remembering her
relations with Nicholas in Voronezh she was shy about doing so.
 But instead of being greeted with pleasure as she
had expected, at his first glance at her his face assumed a cold, stiff,
proud expression she had not seen on it before.
 He inquired about her
health, led the way to his mother, and having sat there for five minutes
left the room.

To her remarks about his mother's health he made no reply.
 "What's that
to you? Leave me in peace," his looks seemed to say.


"Oh, Nicholas, how can you talk like that?" cried Sonya, hardly able to
conceal her delight.
 "She is so kind and Mamma is so fond of her!"

Nicholas did not reply and tried to avoid speaking of the princess any
more.
 But after her visit the old countess spoke of her several times a
day.


"She is a very admirable and excellent young woman," said she, "and you
must go and call on her.
 You would at least be seeing somebody, and I
think it must be dull for you only seeing us.
"

"But I don't in the least want to, Mamma.
"

"Why, you said yourself you don't want even to see her.
"

"If I were asking you to do something disagreeable now--but I only ask
you to return a call.
.
.

Well, I have asked you, and now I won't interfere any more since you
have secrets from your mother.
"

"Well, then, I'll go if you wish it.


After her visit to the Rostovs and her unexpectedly chilly reception by
Nicholas, Princess Mary confessed to herself that she had been right in
not wishing to be the first to call.


"I expected nothing else," she told herself, calling her pride to her
aid.
 "I have nothing to do with him and I only wanted to see the
old lady, who was always kind to me and to whom I am under many
obligations.
"

But she could not pacify herself with these reflections; a feeling akin
to remorse troubled her when she thought of her visit.
 And when
she asked herself what distressed her, she had to admit that it was her
relation to Rostov.


Her first glance at Nicholas' face told her that he had only come to
fulfill the demands of politeness, and she firmly resolved to maintain
the tone in which he addressed her.


They spoke of the countess' health, of their mutual friends, of the
latest war news, and when the ten minutes required by propriety had
elapsed after which a visitor may rise, Nicholas got up to say good-by.


With Mademoiselle Bourienne's help the princess had maintained the
conversation very well, but at the very last moment, just when he rose,
she was so tired of talking of what did not interest her, and her
mind was so full of the question why she alone was granted so little
happiness in life, that in a fit of absent-mindedness she sat still, her
luminous eyes gazing fixedly before her, not noticing that he had risen.
 She still sat motionless with a look of
suffering on her gentle face.
 He suddenly felt sorry for her and was
vaguely conscious that he might be the cause of the sadness her face
expressed.


"Good-by, Princess!" said he.


"Oh, I beg your pardon," she said as if waking up.
 "Are you going
already, Count? Well then, good-by! Oh, but the cushion for the
countess!"

"Wait a moment, I'll fetch it," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, and she
left the room.


They both sat silent, with an occasional glance at one another.
 but there's no bringing it
back.
"

Princess Mary gazed intently into his eyes with her own luminous ones
as he said this.
 She seemed to be trying to fathom the hidden meaning of
his words which would explain his feeling for her.
.
.
"

"I cannot accept your praise," he interrupted her hurriedly.
 "On the
contrary I continually reproach myself.
 But this is not at all an
interesting or cheerful subject.
 But the
princess had caught a glimpse of the man she had known and loved, and it
was to him that she now spoke.
 "I had come
so near to you.
.
 and to all your family that I thought you would not
consider my sympathy misplaced, but I was mistaken," and suddenly her
voice trembled.
.

"Thank you, Princess," he added softly.
"

"So that's why! That's why!" a voice whispered in Princess Mary's soul.

"No, it was not only that gay, kind, and frank look, not only that
handsome exterior, that I loved in him.
 "Yes, he is poor now
and I am rich.
.
.
.
.
 Yes, were it not for
that.
" And remembering his former tenderness, and looking now at his
kind, sorrowful face, she suddenly understood the cause of his coldness.


"But why, Count, why?" she almost cried, unconsciously moving closer to
him.
 "Why? Tell me.
.
.
 And that hurts me.
" There were tears in her eyes and in her
voice.
.
 Excuse me, good-by!" and suddenly she began to cry
and was hurrying from the room.
 For a few seconds they gazed silently into one
another's eyes--and what had seemed impossible and remote suddenly
became possible, inevitable, and very near.


In another three years, by 1820, he had so managed his affairs that he
was able to buy a small estate adjoining Bald Hills and was negotiating
to buy back Otradnoe--that being his pet dream.
 Nicholas was
a plain farmer: he did not like innovations, especially the English ones
then coming into vogue.
 At first
he watched the serfs, trying to understand their aims and what they
considered good and bad, and only pretended to direct them and give
orders while in reality learning from them their methods, their manner
of speech, and their judgment of what was good and bad.
 Only when he
had understood the peasants' tastes and aspirations, had learned to talk
their language, to grasp the hidden meaning of their words, and felt
akin to them did he begin boldly to manage his serfs, that is, to
perform toward them the duties demanded of him.
 And Nicholas' management
produced very brilliant results.


Guided by some gift of insight, on taking up the management of the
estates he at once unerringly appointed as bailiff, village elder, and
delegate, the very men the serfs would themselves have chosen had they
had the right to choose, and these posts never changed hands.
 When
a decision had to be taken regarding a domestic serf, especially if one
had to be punished, he always felt undecided and consulted everybody in
the house; but when it was possible to have a domestic serf conscripted
instead of a land worker he did so without the least hesitation.
 He
never felt any hesitation in dealing with the peasants.
 He could not have said by what standard he judged what he
should or should not do, but the standard was quite firm and definite in
his own mind.


Yet he loved "our Russian peasants" and their way of life with his whole
soul, and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the one
way and manner of farming which produced good results.


Countess Mary was jealous of this passion of her husband's and regretted
that she could not share it; but she could not understand the joys and
vexations he derived from that world, to her so remote and alien.
 She
could not understand why he was so particularly animated and happy
when, after getting up at daybreak and spending the whole morning in the
fields or on the threshing floor, he returned from the sowing or mowing
or reaping to have tea with her.
 She did not understand
why he stepped out from the window to the veranda and smiled under his
mustache and winked so joyfully, when warm steady rain began to fall
on the dry and thirsty shoots of the young oats, or why when the wind
carried away a threatening cloud during the hay harvest he would return
from the barn, flushed, sunburned, and perspiring, with a smell of
wormwood and gentian in his hair and, gleefully rubbing his hands, would
say: "Well, one more day and my grain and the peasants' will all be
under cover.


Sometimes when, trying to understand him, she spoke of the good work he
was doing for his serfs, he would be vexed and reply: "Not in the least;
it never entered my head and I wouldn't do that for their good! That's
all poetry and old wives' talk--all that doing good to one's neighbor!
What I want is that our children should not have to go begging.
.
 "And fairness, of course," he added, "for
if the peasant is naked and hungry and has only one miserable horse, he
can do no good either for himself or for me.
"

And all Nicholas did was fruitful--probably just because he refused to
allow himself to think that he was doing good to others for virtue's
sake.
 His means increased rapidly; serfs from neighboring estates came
to beg him to buy them, and long after his death the memory of his
administration was devoutly preserved among the serfs.
.
 Of course he was
not to be trifled with either--in a word, he was a real master!"





CHAPTER VIII


One matter connected with his management sometimes worried Nicholas, and
that was his quick temper together with his old hussar habit of making
free use of his fists.
 Nicholas went out into the porch
to question him, and immediately after the elder had given a few replies
the sound of cries and blows were heard.
 Among other things he spoke of the Bogucharovo elder.


"Such an insolent scoundrel!" he cried, growing hot again at the mere
recollection of him.
 "If he had told me he was drunk and did not see.
.

But what is the matter with you, Mary?" he suddenly asked.


Countess Mary raised her head and tried to speak, but hastily looked
down again and her lips puckered.


"Why, whatever is the matter, my dearest?"

The looks of the plain Countess Mary always improved when she was in
tears.
 She never cried from pain or vexation, but always from sorrow or
pity, and when she wept her radiant eyes acquired an irresistible charm.
 he was to blame, but why do you.
 He understood what she was weeping about, but could
not in his heart at once agree with her that what he had regarded
from childhood as quite an everyday event was wrong.
 "Is it just
sentimentality, old wives' tales, or is she right?" he asked himself.
 She took his hand
and kissed it.


"Today--it was the same affair.
 "I give you my word of honor it shan't occur again,
and let this always be a reminder to me," and he pointed to the broken
ring.


After that, when in discussions with his village elders or stewards the
blood rushed to his face and his fists began to clench, Nicholas would
turn the broken ring on his finger and would drop his eyes before the
man who was making him angry.
 But he did forget himself once or twice
within a twelvemonth, and then he would go and confess to his wife, and
would again promise that this should really be the very last time.


"Mary, you must despise me!" he would say.
"

"You should go, go away at once, if you don't feel strong enough to
control yourself," she would reply sadly, trying to comfort her husband.


Among the gentry of the province Nicholas was respected but not liked.
 In autumn he gave himself up to hunting with the same
business like seriousness--leaving home for a month, or even two, with
his hunt.
 In winter he visited his other villages or spent his time
reading.
 He was collecting, as he said, a serious
library, and he made it a rule to read through all the books he bought.

He would sit in his study with a grave air, reading--a task he first
imposed upon himself as a duty, but which afterwards became a habit
affording him a special kind of pleasure and a consciousness of
being occupied with serious matters.
 In winter, except for business
excursions, he spent most of his time at home making himself one with
his family and entering into all the details of his children's relations
with their mother.
 The harmony between him and his wife grew closer and
closer and he daily discovered fresh spiritual treasures in her.


From the time of his marriage Sonya had lived in his house.
 Before
that, Nicholas had told his wife all that had passed between himself and
Sonya, blaming himself and commending her.
 He had asked Princess Mary to
be gentle and kind to his cousin.
 She could not find fault with
Sonya in any way and tried to be fond of her, but often felt ill-will
toward her which she could not overcome.
"

"What?" asked Countess Mary, surprised.


"'To him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be
taken away.

Perhaps she lacks egotism, I don't know, but from her is taken away, and
everything has been taken away.
 Sometimes I am dreadfully sorry for her.
 She waited on the old countess, petted and spoiled the children,
was always ready to render the small services for which she had a gift,
and all this was unconsciously accepted from her with insufficient
gratitude.


The country seat at Bald Hills had been rebuilt, though not on the same
scale as under the old prince.


The buildings, begun under straitened circumstances, were more than
simple.
 The immense house on the old stone foundations was of wood,
plastered only inside.
 Whole
families of the Rostovs' and Bolkonskis' relations sometimes came to
Bald Hills with sixteen horses and dozens of servants and stayed for
months.
 Besides that, four times a year, on the name days and birthdays
of the hosts, as many as a hundred visitors would gather there for a day
or two.
 The rest of the year life pursued its unbroken routine with its
ordinary occupations, and its breakfasts, lunches, dinners, and suppers,
provided out of the produce of the estate.






CHAPTER IX


It was the eve of St.
 Nicholas, the fifth of December, 1820.
 Natasha had
been staying at her brother's with her husband and children since early
autumn.


Besides the Bezukhov family, Nicholas' old friend the retired General
Vasili Dmitrich Denisov was staying with the Rostovs this fifth of
December.
 Having taken precautions against the general
drunkenness to be expected on the morrow because it was a great saint's
day, he returned to dinner, and without having time for a private talk
with his wife sat down at the long table laid for twenty persons, at
which the whole household had assembled.
 At that table were his mother,
his mother's old lady companion Belova, his wife, their three children
with their governess and tutor, his wife's nephew with his tutor, Sonya,
Denisov, Natasha, her three children, their governess, and old Michael
Ivanovich, the late prince's architect, who was living on in retirement
at Bald Hills.


Countess Mary sat at the other end of the table.
 When her husband took
his place she concluded, from the rapid manner in which after taking
up his table napkin he pushed back the tumbler and wineglass standing
before him, that he was out of humor, as was sometimes the case when he
came in to dinner straight from the farm--especially before the soup.
 He replied.
 She again inquired whether
everything was going well on the farm.
 "Why is he cross with
me?" She concluded from his tone that he was vexed with her and wished
to end the conversation.


Thanks to Denisov the conversation at table soon became general and
lively, and she did not talk to her husband.
 When they left the table
and went as usual to thank the old countess, Countess Mary held out her
hand and kissed her husband, and asked him why he was angry with her.


"You always have such strange fancies! I didn't even think of being
angry," he replied.


But the word always seemed to her to imply: "Yes, I am angry but I won't
tell you why.
 Occasionally, and it was always just after they
had been happiest together, they suddenly had a feeling of estrangement
and hostility, which occurred most frequently during Countess Mary's
pregnancies, and this was such a time.
 Tomorrow I
shall have to suffer, so today I'll go and rest.


"That's always the way," thought Countess Mary.
 I see.
.


And everything annoyed her--Denisov's shouting and laughter, Natasha's
talk, and especially a quick glance Sonya gave her.


Sonya was always the first excuse Countess Mary found for feeling
irritated.
 She sat down and played with
them a little, but the thought of her husband and his unreasonable
crossness worried her.


"Perhaps he is not asleep; I'll have an explanation with him," she
said to herself.
 She did not notice him.
 "Andrew may wake him.
 She made no reply, but
to avoid obeying Sonya beckoned to Andrew to follow her quietly and went
to the door.
 Sonya went away by another door.
 From the room in which
Nicholas was sleeping came the sound of his even breathing, every
slightest tone of which was familiar to his wife.
 As she listened to it
she saw before her his smooth handsome forehead, his mustache, and his
whole face, as she had so often seen it in the stillness of the night
when he slept.
 Nicholas suddenly moved and cleared his throat.
 And at
that moment little Andrew shouted from outside the door: "Papa! Mamma's
standing here!" Countess Mary turned pale with fright and made signs
to the boy.
 Then through
the door she heard Nicholas clearing his throat again and stirring, and
his voice said crossly:

"I can't get a moment's peace.
.
.
 Mary, is that you? Why did you bring
him here?"

"I only came in to look and did not notice.
.
 forgive me.
.
 Five minutes later little
black-eyed three-year-old Natasha, her father's pet, having learned from
her brother that Papa was asleep and Mamma was in the sitting room, ran
to her father unobserved by her mother.
 The dark-eyed little girl boldly
opened the creaking door, went up to the sofa with energetic steps of
her sturdy little legs, and having examined the position of her father,
who was asleep with his back to her, rose on tiptoe and kissed the hand
which lay under his head.
 Nicholas turned with a tender smile on his
face.


"Natasha, Natasha!" came Countess Mary's frightened whisper from the
door.
"

"No, Mamma, he doesn't want to sleep," said little Natasha with
conviction.
 "He's laughing.
"

Nicholas lowered his legs, rose, and took his daughter in his arms.


"Come in, Mary," he said to his wife.
 "I just looked
in.
"

Holding his little girl with one arm, Nicholas glanced at his wife and,
seeing her guilty expression, put his other arm around her and kissed
her hair.


"You have no idea how unhappy, how lonely, I feel when you are like
that.
 It always seems to me.
"

"Mary, don't talk nonsense.
 You ought to be ashamed of yourself!" he
said gaily.


"It seems to be that you can't love me, that I am so plain.
 always.
.
.
.
 in this cond.
.
 But do I love my wife? I don't love her, but.
.

I don't know how to put it.
 Without you, or when something comes between
us like this, I seem lost and can't do anything.
 Now do I love my
finger? I don't love it, but just try to cut it off!"

"I'm not like that myself, but I understand.
 And smoothing his hair
he began to pace the room.


He did not ask if she was ready to listen to him.
 He did not care.
 And he told
her of his intention to persuade Pierre to stay with them till spring.


"You can see the woman in her already," she said in French, pointing to
little Natasha.
 I say: 'Papa wants to sleep!' but she says, 'No, he's laughing.
'
And she was right," said Countess Mary with a happy smile.
" And Nicholas, taking his little daughter in his strong hand,
lifted her high, placed her on his shoulder, held her by the legs, and
paced the room with her.


"But you know you may be unfair.


"Yes, but what am I to do?.
.
 I try not to show.
.


"Somebody has come.
 I will go and see," said Countess Mary and left
the room.
 Out of breath, he took the laughing child quickly
from his shoulder and pressed her to his heart.


"It is he, it is he, Nicholas!" said Countess Mary, re-entering the room
a few minutes later.
 "Now our Natasha has come to life.
 You should have
seen her ecstasy, and how he caught it for having stayed away so long.


"I should never, never have believed that one could be so happy," she
whispered to herself.






CHAPTER X


Natasha had married in the early spring of 1813, and in 1820 already had
three daughters besides a son for whom she had longed and whom she was
now nursing.
 She had grown stouter and broader, so that it was difficult
to recognize in this robust, motherly woman the slim, lively Natasha of
former days.
 Her features were more defined and had a calm, soft,
and serene expression.
 All that struck the eye was a strong, handsome, and
fertile woman.
 That
happened only when, as was the case that day, her husband returned home,
or a sick child was convalescent, or when she and Countess Mary spoke of
Prince Andrew (she never mentioned him to her husband, who she imagined
was jealous of Prince Andrew's memory), or on the rare occasions when
something happened to induce her to sing, a practice she had quite
abandoned since her marriage.


Since their marriage Natasha and her husband had lived in Moscow, in
Petersburg, on their estate near Moscow, or with her mother, that is to
say, in Nicholas' house.
 Not that Natasha liked
solitude--she did not know whether she liked it or not, she even thought
that she did not--but with her pregnancies, her confinements, the
nursing of her children, and sharing every moment of her husband's life,
she had demands on her time which could be satisfied only by renouncing
society.
 All who had known Natasha before her marriage wondered at the
change in her as at something extraordinary.
 Only the old countess with
her maternal instinct had realized that all Natasha's outbursts had
been due to her need of children and a husband--as she herself had once
exclaimed at Otradnoe not so much in fun as in earnest--and her mother
was now surprised at the surprise expressed by those who had never
understood Natasha, and she kept saying that she had always known that
Natasha would make an exemplary wife and mother.


"Only she lets her love of her husband and children overflow all
bounds," said the countess, "so that it even becomes absurd.
"

Natasha did not follow the golden rule advocated by clever folk,
especially by the French, which says that a girl should not let herself
go when she marries, should not neglect her accomplishments, should be
even more careful of her appearance than when she was unmarried, and
should fascinate her husband as much as she did before he became her
husband.
 Natasha on the contrary had at once abandoned all her witchery,
of which her singing had been an unusually powerful part.
 She gave it up
just because it was so powerfully seductive.
 She took no pains with
her manners or with delicacy of speech, or with her toilet, or to show
herself to her husband in her most becoming attitudes, or to avoid
inconveniencing him by being too exacting.
 She felt that her unity with her husband was not maintained
by the poetic feelings that had attracted him to her, but by something
else--indefinite but firm as the bond between her own body and soul.


To fluff out her curls, put on fashionable dresses, and sing romantic
songs to fascinate her husband would have seemed as strange as to adorn
herself to attract herself.
 To adorn herself for others might perhaps
have been agreeable--she did not know--but she had no time at all for
it.
 The chief reason for devoting no time either to singing, to dress,
or to choosing her words was that she really had no time to spare for
these things.


The subject which wholly engrossed Natasha's attention was her family:
that is, her husband whom she had to keep so that he should belong
entirely to her and to the home, and the children whom she had to bear,
bring into the world, nurse, and bring up.


There were then as now conversations and discussions about women's
rights, the relations of husband and wife and their freedom and rights,
though these themes were not yet termed questions as they are now; but
these topics were not merely uninteresting to Natasha, she positively
did not understand them.


These questions, then as now, existed only for those who see nothing in
marriage but the pleasure married people get from one another, that is,
only the beginnings of marriage and not its whole significance, which
lies in the family.


Discussions and questions of that kind, which are like the question of
how to get the greatest gratification from one's dinner, did not then
and do not now exist for those for whom the purpose of a dinner is the
nourishment it affords; and the purpose of marriage is the family.


If the purpose of marriage is the family, the person who wishes to have
many wives or husbands may perhaps obtain much pleasure, but in that
case will not have a family.


If the purpose of food is nourishment and the purpose of marriage is the
family, the whole question resolves itself into not eating more than one
can digest, and not having more wives or husbands than are needed for
the family--that is, one wife or one husband.
 Natasha needed a husband.
 She valued the company of those to whom she could come
striding disheveled from the nursery in her dressing gown, and with
joyful face show a yellow instead of a green stain on baby's napkin, and
from whom she could hear reassuring words to the effect that baby was
much better.


To such an extent had Natasha let herself go that the way she dressed
and did her hair, her ill-chosen words, and her jealousy--she was
jealous of Sonya, of the governess, and of every woman, pretty or
plain--were habitual subjects of jest to those about her.
 The general
opinion was that Pierre was under his wife's thumb, which was really
true.
 Pierre was greatly surprised by his wife's view,
to him a perfectly novel one, that every moment of his life belonged to
her and to the family.


Pierre's subjection consisted in the fact that he not only dared not
flirt with, but dared not even speak smilingly to, any other woman; did
not dare dine at the Club as a pastime, did not dare spend money on a
whim, and did not dare absent himself for any length of time, except on
business--in which his wife included his intellectual pursuits, which
she did not in the least understand but to which she attributed great
importance.
 To make up for this, at home Pierre had the right to
regulate his life and that of the whole family exactly as he chose.
 At
home Natasha placed herself in the position of a slave to her husband,
and the whole household went on tiptoe when he was occupied--that is,
was reading or writing in his study.
 Pierre had but to show a partiality
for anything to get just what he liked done always.
 And she
deduced the essentials of his wishes quite correctly, and having once
arrived at them clung to them tenaciously.


Thus in a time of trouble ever memorable to him after the birth of their
first child who was delicate, when they had to change the wet nurse
three times and Natasha fell ill from despair, Pierre one day told her
of Rousseau's view, with which he quite agreed, that to have a wet
nurse is unnatural and harmful.
 He felt the good and bad within himself
inextricably mingled and overlapping.
 She attributed immense importance to all
her husband's intellectual and abstract interests though she did not
understand them, and she always dreaded being a hindrance to him in such
matters.


Ever since that leave of absence had expired, more than a fortnight
before, Natasha had been in a constant state of alarm, depression, and
irritability.


Natasha was sad and irritable all that time, especially when her mother,
her brother, Sonya, or Countess Mary in their efforts to console her
tried to excuse Pierre and suggested reasons for his delay in returning.
 No one
else could tell her anything so comforting or so reasonable as this
little three-month-old creature when he lay at her breast and she was
conscious of the movement of his lips and the snuffling of his little
nose.
 That creature said: "You are angry, you are jealous, you would
like to pay him out, you are afraid--but here am I! And I am he.
.
 It was more than true.


During that fortnight of anxiety Natasha resorted to the baby for
comfort so often, and fussed over him so much, that she overfed him and
he fell ill.
 She was terrified by his illness, and yet that was just
what she needed.


"He's come, ma'am," whispered the nurse.
 The baby again opened his eyes and
looked at her.
 "You're here?" he seemed to be saying, and again lazily
smacked his lips.
 The nurse with
raised elbows was lifting the infant over the rail of his cot.


"Go, ma'am! Don't worry, go!" she whispered, smiling, with the kind of
familiarity that grows up between a nurse and her mistress.


Natasha ran with light footsteps to the anteroom.


Denisov, who had come out of the study into the dancing room with his
pipe, now for the first time recognized the old Natasha.


"He's come!" she exclaimed as she ran past, and Denisov felt that he too
was delighted that Pierre, whom he did not much care for, had returned.


On reaching the vestibule Natasha saw a tall figure in a fur coat
unwinding his scarf.
 "It's he! It's really he! He has come!" she said
to herself, and rushing at him embraced him, pressed his head to her
breast, and then pushed him back and gazed at his ruddy, happy face,
covered with hoarfrost.
.


"Yes, it's all very well for you.
 You are pleased, you've had a good
time.
 But what about me? You might at least have shown consideration
for the children.
 I am nursing and my milk was spoiled.
.
.
 Petya was at
death's door.
 But you were enjoying yourself.
 Yes, enjoying.
.


"I could not, on my honor.
 But how is Petya?"

"All right now.
 Come along! I wonder you're not ashamed! If only you
could see what I was like without you, how I suffered!"

"You are well?"

"Come, come!" she said, not letting go of his arm.


When Nicholas and his wife came to look for Pierre he was in the nursery
holding his baby son, who was again awake, on his huge right palm and
dandling him.
 The storm was long since over and there
was bright, joyous sunshine on Natasha's face as she gazed tenderly at
her husband and child.


"Yes, capitally.
" (She meant the baby's head.
) "But how he did
frighten me.
.
.
.
.


"How sweet!" said Countess Mary, looking at and playing with the baby.

"Now, Nicholas," she added, turning to her husband, "I can't understand
how it is you don't see the charm of these delicious marvels.
"

"I don't and can't," replied Nicholas, looking coldly at the baby.
 "A
lump of flesh.
.
 "He says his hand is
just made for a baby's seat.
 Just look!"

"Only not for this.
.
.






CHAPTER XII


As in every large household, there were at Bald Hills several perfectly
distinct worlds which merged into one harmonious whole, though each
retained its own peculiarities and made concessions to the others.


For instance, Pierre's return was a joyful and important event and they
all felt it to be so.


The servants--the most reliable judges of their masters because they
judge not by their conversation or expressions of feeling but by their
acts and way of life--were glad of Pierre's return because they knew
that when he was there Count Nicholas would cease going every day to
attend to the estate, and would be in better spirits and temper, and
also because they would all receive handsome presents for the holidays.


The children and their governesses were glad of Pierre's return because
no one else drew them into the social life of the household as he did.

He alone could play on the clavichord that ecossaise (his only piece)
to which, as he said, all possible dances could be danced, and they felt
sure he had brought presents for them all.


Young Nicholas, now a slim lad of fifteen, delicate and intelligent,
with curly light-brown hair and beautiful eyes, was delighted because
Uncle Pierre as he called him was the object of his rapturous and
passionate affection.
 No one had instilled into him this love for Pierre
whom he saw only occasionally.
 George like his uncle Nicholas; he wanted to be learned,
wise, and kind like Pierre.
 In Pierre's presence his face always shone
with pleasure and he flushed and was breathless when Pierre spoke to
him.
 He did not miss a single word he uttered, and would afterwards,
with Dessalles or by himself, recall and reconsider the meaning of
everything Pierre had said.
 Pierre's past life and his unhappiness prior
to 1812 (of which young Nicholas had formed a vague poetic picture from
some words he had overheard), his adventures in Moscow, his captivity,
Platon Karataev (of whom he had heard from Pierre), his love for Natasha
(of whom the lad was also particularly fond), and especially Pierre's
friendship with the father whom Nicholas could not remember--all this
made Pierre in his eyes a hero and a saint.
 But the father
whom the boy did not remember appeared to him a divinity who could not
be pictured, and of whom he never thought without a swelling heart and
tears of sadness and rapture.


The guests welcomed Pierre because he always helped to enliven and unite
any company he was in.


The old ladies were pleased with the presents he brought them, and
especially that Natasha would now be herself again.


Though the most absent-minded and forgetful of men, Pierre, with the aid
of a list his wife drew up, had now bought everything, not forgetting
his mother--and brother-in-law's commissions, nor the dress material for
a present to Belova, nor toys for his wife's nephews.
 In the early days
of his marriage it had seemed strange to him that his wife should expect
him not to forget to procure all the things he undertook to buy, and he
had been taken aback by her serious annoyance when on his first trip he
forgot everything.
 But in time he grew used to this demand.
 Knowing that
Natasha asked nothing for herself, and gave him commissions for others
only when he himself had offered to undertake them, he now found an
unexpected and childlike pleasure in this purchase of presents for
everyone in the house, and never forgot anything.


From the time that Pierre began life as a family man on a footing
entailing heavy expenditure, he had noticed to his surprise that he
spent only half as much as before, and that his affairs--which had been
in disorder of late, chiefly because of his first wife's debts--had
begun to improve.


With a merry, smiling face Pierre was sorting his purchases.


"That's for Belova? Excellent!" She felt the quality of the material.


"Too dear!" Natasha remarked.
 "How pleased the children will be and
Mamma too! Only you need not have bought me this," she added, unable to
suppress a smile as she gazed admiringly at a gold comb set with pearls,
of a kind then just coming into fashion.


"Adele tempted me: she kept on telling me to buy it," returned Pierre.


"When am I to wear it?" and Natasha stuck it in her coil of hair.
 "When
I take little Masha into society? Perhaps they will be fashionable again
by then.
 Her face had shriveled, her upper lip
had sunk in, and her eyes were dim.


After the deaths of her son and husband in such rapid succession, she
felt herself a being accidentally forgotten in this world and left
without aim or object for her existence.
 She ate, drank, slept, or kept
awake, but did not live.
 She wanted
nothing from life but tranquillity, and that tranquillity only death
could give her.
 But until death came she had to go on living, that is,
to use her vital forces.
 Her life had
no external aims--only a need to exercise her various functions and
inclinations was apparent.
 She had to eat, sleep, think, speak, weep,
work, give vent to her anger, and so on, merely because she had a
stomach, a brain, muscles, nerves, and a liver.
 She did these things not
under any external impulse as people in the full vigor of life do,
when behind the purpose for which they strive that of exercising their
functions remains unnoticed.
 She talked only because she physically
needed to exercise her tongue and lungs.
 She cried as a child does,
because her nose had to be cleared, and so on.
 What for people in their
full vigor is an aim was for her evidently merely a pretext.


She would begin to say something to her in a low tone from the other end
of the room.


"It seems a little warmer today, my dear," she would murmur.
 After these fits of irritability her face
would grow yellow, and her maids knew by infallible symptoms when Belova
would again be deaf, the snuff damp, and the countess' face yellow.
 Just
as she needed to work off her spleen so she had sometimes to exercise
her still-existing faculty of thinking--and the pretext for that was a
game of patience.
 When she needed to cry, the deceased count would be
the pretext.


The old lady's condition was understood by the whole household though no
one ever spoke of it, and they all made every possible effort to satisfy
her needs.






CHAPTER XIII


When Pierre and his wife entered the drawing room the countess was in
one of her customary states in which she needed the mental exertion of
playing patience, and so--though by force of habit she greeted him
with the words she always used when Pierre or her son returned after an
absence: "High time, my dear, high time! We were all weary of waiting
for you.
 Well, thank God!" and received her presents with another
customary remark: "It's not the gift that's precious, my dear, but that
you give it to me, an old woman.
.
.


She finished her game of patience and only then examined the presents.

They consisted of a box for cards, of splendid workmanship, a
bright-blue Sevres tea cup with shepherdesses depicted on it and with
a lid, and a gold snuffbox with the count's portrait on the lid which
Pierre had had done by a miniaturist in Petersburg.
 The countess had
long wished for such a box, but as she did not want to cry just then she
glanced indifferently at the portrait and gave her attention chiefly to
the box for cards.


"Thank you, my dear, you have cheered me up," said she as she always
did.


Though Pierre, Natasha, Nicholas, Countess Mary, and Denisov had much to
talk about that they could not discuss before the old countess--not
that anything was hidden from her, but because she had dropped so
far behindhand in many things that had they begun to converse in her
presence they would have had to answer inopportune questions and to
repeat what they had already told her many times: that so-and-so was
dead and so-and-so was married, which she would again be unable to
remember--yet they sat at tea round the samovar in the drawing room from
habit, and Pierre answered the countess' questions as to whether Prince
Vasili had aged and whether Countess Mary Alexeevna had sent greetings
and still thought of them, and other matters that interested no one and
to which she herself was indifferent.


Conversation of this kind, interesting to no one yet unavoidable,
continued all through teatime.
 All the grown-up members of the family
were assembled near the round tea table at which Sonya presided beside
the samovar.
 The children with their tutors and governesses had had
tea and their voices were audible from the next room.
 He
told her of external social events and of the people who had formed
the circle of her contemporaries and had once been a real, living, and
distinct group, but who were now for the most part scattered about the
world and like herself were garnering the last ears of the harvests they
had sown in earlier years.
 Natasha saw by
Pierre's animation that his visit had been interesting and that he had
much to tell them but dare not say it before the old countess.


"Well, and all this idiocy--Gossner and Tatawinova?" Denisov asked.
 "Why more than ever! The Bible Society is
the whole government now!"

 "What is that, mon cher ami?" asked the countess, who had
finished her tea and evidently needed a pretext for being angry
after her meal.
 "What are you saying about the government? I don't
understand.
"

"Arakcheev and Golitsyn," incautiously remarked Pierre, "are now the
whole government! And what a government! They see treason everywhere and
are afraid of everything.
"

"Well, and how is Prince Alexander to blame? He is a most estimable
man.
 A Gospel Society! Well, and
what harm is there in that?" and she rose (everybody else got up too)
and with a severe expression sailed back to her table in the sitting
room.


The melancholy silence that followed was broken by the sounds of the
children's voices and laughter from the next room.
 Evidently some jolly
excitement was going on there.


"That's delightful music!" said he.
 "You know," he added,
stopping at the door, "why I'm especially fond of that music? It is
always the first thing that tells me all is well.
 When I was driving
here today, the nearer I got to the house the more anxious I grew.
 As I
entered the anteroom I heard Andrusha's peals of laughter and that meant
that all was well.
"

"I know! I know that feeling," said Nicholas.
 "But I mustn't go
there--those stockings are to be a surprise for me.
.
.
" said Pierre, and a silence followed: "three!" and a rapturously
breathless cry of children's voices filled the room.
 "Two, two!" they
shouted.


This meant two stockings, which by a secret process known only to
herself Anna Makarovna used to knit at the same time on the same
needles, and which, when they were ready, she always triumphantly drew,
one out of the other, in the children's presence.
 They kissed
everyone, the tutors and governesses made their bows, and they went out.

Only young Nicholas and his tutor remained.


"Ma tante, please let me stay," said he, going up to his aunt.


His face expressed entreaty, agitation, and ecstasy.
 "You and I haven't seen anything of one another
yet.
.
.
 How like he is growing, Mary!" he added, addressing Countess
Mary.


"Like my father?" asked the boy, flushing crimson and looking up at
Pierre with bright, ecstatic eyes.
 Countess Mary sat down doing woolwork; Natasha
did not take her eyes off her husband.
 Nicholas and Denisov rose, asked
for their pipes, smoked, went to fetch more tea from Sonya--who
sat weary but resolute at the samovar--and questioned Pierre.
 The
curly-headed, delicate boy sat with shining eyes unnoticed in a corner,
starting every now and then and muttering something to himself, and
evidently experiencing a new and powerful emotion as he turned his curly
head, with his thin neck exposed by his turn-down collar, toward the
place where Pierre sat.


"One used to have to be a German--now one must dance with Tatawinova
and Madame Kwudener, and wead Ecka'tshausen and the bwethwen.


Nicholas, though free from Denisov's readiness to find fault with
everything, also thought that discussion of the government was a very
serious and weighty matter, and the fact that A had been appointed
Minister of This and B Governor General of That, and that the Emperor
had said so-and-so and this minister so-and-so, seemed to him very
important.
 And so he thought it necessary to take an interest in these
things and to question Pierre.

"Everybody sees that things are going so badly that they cannot be
allowed to go on so and that it is the duty of all decent men to
counteract it as far as they can.
"

"What can decent men do?" Nicholas inquired, frowning slightly.
 "What
can be done?"

"Why, this.
.
.
"

"Come into my study," said Nicholas.


Natasha, who had long expected to be fetched to nurse her baby, now
heard the nurse calling her and went to the nursery.
 "He seeks only for peace, and only
these people sans foi ni loi * can give it him--people who recklessly
hack at and strangle everything--Magnitski, Arakcheev, and tutti
quanti.
.
.
 You will agree that if you did not look after your estates
yourself but only wanted a quiet life, the harsher your steward was the
more readily your object might be attained," he said to Nicholas.



"Well, what does that lead up to?" said Nicholas.


"Well, everything is going to ruin! Robbery in the law courts, in the
army nothing but flogging, drilling, and Military Settlements; the
people are tortured, enlightenment is suppressed.
 All that is young and
honest is crushed! Everyone sees that this cannot go on.
 "I told them just one thing in Petersburg.
"

"Told whom?"

"Well, you know whom," said Pierre, with a meaning glance from under
his brows.
 "Prince Theodore and all those.
 To encourage culture and
philanthropy is all very well of course.
 The aim is excellent but in the
present circumstances something else is needed.
"

At that moment Nicholas noticed the presence of his nephew.
 His face
darkened and he went up to the boy.


"Why are you here?"

"Why? Let him be," said Pierre, taking Nicholas by the arm and
continuing.
 "That is not enough, I told them.
 Something else is needed.
 Everything that is young and strong is being enticed away and
depraved.
 One is lured by women, another by honors, a third by ambition
or money, and they go over to that camp.
 No independent men, such as you
or I, are left.
 What I say is widen the scope of our society, let the
mot d'ordre be not virtue alone but independence and action as well!"

Nicholas, who had left his nephew, irritably pushed up an armchair, sat
down in it, and listened to Pierre, coughing discontentedly and frowning
more and more.


"But action with what aim?" he cried.
 "And what position will you adopt
toward the government?"

"Why, the position of assistants.
"

"Yes, but it's a secret society and therefore a hostile and harmful one
which can only cause harm.
"

"Why? Did the Tugendbund which saved Europe" (they did not then venture
to suggest that Russia had saved Europe) "do any harm? The Tugendbund
is an alliance of virtue: it is love, mutual help.
.
 it is what Christ
preached on the Cross.


The boy with the thin neck stretching out from the turn-down
collar--whom everyone had forgotten--gazed at Pierre with even greater
and more rapturous joy.
 Every word of Pierre's burned into his heart,
and with a nervous movement of his fingers he unconsciously broke the
sealing wax and quill pens his hands came upon on his uncle's table.


"It is not at all what you suppose; but that is what the German
Tugendbund was, and what I am proposing.
"

"No, my fwiend! The Tugendbund is all vewy well for the sausage eaters,
but I don't understand it and can't even pwonounce it," interposed
Denisov in a loud and resolute voice.
 "I agwee that evewything here is
wotten and howwible, but the Tugendbund I don't understand.
"


Pierre smiled, Natasha began to laugh, but Nicholas knitted his brows
still more and began proving to Pierre that there was no prospect of
any great change and that all the danger he spoke of existed only in his
imagination.
 This
made him still angrier, for he was fully convinced, not by reasoning
but by something within him stronger than reason, of the justice of his
opinion.
 "I can't prove it to you.
 You say that
everything here is rotten and that an overthrow is coming: I don't
see it.
 But you also say that our oath of allegiance is a conditional
matter, and to that I reply: 'You are my best friend, as you know,
but if you formed a secret society and began working against the
government--be it what it may--I know it is my duty to obey the
government.
 And if Arakcheev ordered me to lead a squadron against you
and cut you down, I should not hesitate an instant, but should do it.
'
And you may argue about that as you like!"

An awkward silence followed these words.
 Natasha was the first to speak,
defending her husband and attacking her brother.
 Her defense was weak
and inapt but she attained her object.


"Uncle Pierre, you.
.
 no.
.
 If Papa were alive.
.


And Pierre suddenly realized what a special, independent, complex, and
powerful process of thought and feeling must have been going on in
this boy during that conversation, and remembering all he had said he
regretted that the lad should have heard him.
 He had, however, to give
him an answer.


"Yes, I think so," he said reluctantly, and left the study.


The lad looked down and seemed now for the first time to notice what he
had done to the things on the table.


"Uncle, forgive me, I did that.
 unintentionally," he said, pointing to
the broken sealing wax and pens.


"All right, all right," he said, throwing the bits under the table.


And evidently suppressing his vexation with difficulty, he turned away
from the boy.


"You ought not to have been here at all," he said.






CHAPTER XV


The conversation at supper was not about politics or societies, but
turned on the subject Nicholas liked best--recollections of 1812.


After supper Nicholas, having undressed in his study and given
instructions to the steward who had been waiting for him, went to the
bedroom in his dressing gown, where he found his wife still at her
table, writing.


Countess Mary blushed.


She had wanted to conceal what she was writing from him, but at the same
time was glad he had surprised her at it and that she would now have to
tell him.


"A diary, Nicholas," she replied, handing him a blue exercise book
filled with her firm, bold writing.


"A diary?" Nicholas repeated with a shade of irony, and he took up the
book.


It was in French.



December 4.
 He was naughty and
obstinate.
 Then I took the
matter in hand: I left him alone and began with nurse's help to get the
other children up, telling him that I did not love him.



"What is a 'ticket'?" Nicholas inquired.


"I have begun giving the elder ones marks every evening, showing how
they have behaved.
 They were for the most part quite insignificant
trifles, but did not seem so to the mother or to the father either, now
that he read this diary about his children for the first time.
 Papa said he was to have no pudding.
 He had
none, but looked so unhappily and greedily at the others while they were
eating! I think that punishment by depriving children of sweets only
develops their greediness.
 Must tell Nicholas this.



Nicholas put down the book and looked at his wife.
 The radiant eyes
gazed at him questioningly: would he approve or disapprove of her
diary? There could be no doubt not only of his approval but also of his
admiration for his wife.


Perhaps it need not be done so pedantically, thought Nicholas, or even
done at all, but this untiring, continual spiritual effort of which the
sole aim was the children's moral welfare delighted him.


"I quite, quite approve, my dearest!" said he with a significant look,
and after a short pause he added: "And I behaved badly today.
 You
weren't in the study.
 We began disputing--Pierre and I--and I lost my
temper.
.
.
.
"

"Yes, I know," said Countess Mary.
 "Natasha told me.
.
 I am sorry you weren't there.
.
 Natasha is absurd.
 How she rules over him!
And yet there need only be a discussion and she has no words of her
own but only repeats his sayings.
.
.
 He forgot that what he was saying about Natasha could
have been applied word for word to himself in relation to his wife.


"Yes, I have noticed that," said Countess Mary.
 Pierre says
everybody is suffering, tortured, and being corrupted, and that it
is our duty to help our neighbor.
"

"Yes, that's it! That's just what I said to him," put in Nicholas, who
fancied he really had said it.
"

"Ah, Nicholas, do you know I am often troubled about little Nicholas,"
said Countess Mary.
"

"Well, I don't think you need reproach yourself on his account.
 He is a fine lad, a fine lad! This
evening he listened to Pierre in a sort of trance, and fancy--as we were
going in to supper I looked and he had broken everything on my table to
bits, and he told me of it himself at once! I never knew him to tell an
untruth.
 A fine lad, a fine lad!" repeated Nicholas, who at heart was
not fond of Nicholas Bolkonski but was always anxious to recognize that
he was a fine lad.
 "I
feel I am not the same and it troubles me.
 A wonderful boy, but I am
dreadfully afraid for him.
 It would be good for him to have companions.
"

"Well it won't be for long.
 "Yes, Pierre always was a dreamer and always will be,"
he continued, returning to the talk in the study which had evidently
disturbed him.
 Is it for my own
pleasure that I am at the farm or in the office from morning to night?
No, but I know I must work to comfort my mother, to repay you, and not
to leave the children such beggars as I was.
 But she knew
she must not say this and that it would be useless to do so.
"

And with an eager face Nicholas began to speak of the possibility of
repurchasing Otradnoe before long, and added: "Another ten years of life
and I shall leave the children.
.
.
 in an excellent position.
"

Countess Mary listened to her husband and understood all that he told
her.
 She knew that when he thought aloud in this way he would sometimes
ask her what he had been saying, and be vexed if he noticed that she
had been thinking about something else.
 But she had to force herself to
attend, for what he was saying did not interest her at all.
 She looked
at him and did not think, but felt, about something different.
 She felt
a submissive tender love for this man who would never understand all
that she understood, and this seemed to make her love for him still
stronger and added a touch of passionate tenderness.
 She thought of her nephew.

Her husband's account of the boy's agitation while Pierre was speaking
struck her forcibly, and various traits of his gentle, sensitive
character recurred to her mind; and while thinking of her nephew she
thought also of her own children.


Sometimes it seemed to her that this difference arose from the
difference in their ages, but she felt herself to blame toward him and
promised in her heart to do better and to accomplish the impossible--in
this life to love her husband, her children, little Nicholas, and all
her neighbors, as Christ loved mankind.
 A stern expression of the lofty, secret
suffering of a soul burdened by the body appeared on her face.
 Nicholas
gazed at her.
 "O God! What will become of us if she dies, as I always
fear when her face is like that?" thought he, and placing himself before
the icon he began to say his evening prayers.






CHAPTER XVI


Natasha and Pierre, left alone, also began to talk as only a husband
and wife can talk, that is, with extraordinary clearness and rapidity,
understanding and expressing each other's thoughts in ways contrary to
all rules of logic, without premises, deductions, or conclusions, and in
a quite peculiar way.
 Natasha was so used to this kind of talk with her
husband that for her it was the surest sign of something being wrong
between them if Pierre followed a line of logical reasoning.
 When he
began proving anything, or talking argumentatively and calmly and she,
led on by his example, began to do the same, she knew that they were on
the verge of a quarrel.


From the moment they were alone and Natasha came up to him with
wide-open happy eyes, and quickly seizing his head pressed it to her
bosom, saying: "Now you are all mine, mine! You won't escape!"--from
that moment this conversation began, contrary to all the laws of logic
and contrary to them because quite different subjects were talked about
at one and the same time.
 This simultaneous discussion of many topics
did not prevent a clear understanding but on the contrary was the surest
sign that they fully understood one another.


Just as in a dream when all is uncertain, unreasoning, and
contradictory, except the feeling that guides the dream, so in this
intercourse contrary to all laws of reason, the words themselves were
not consecutive and clear but only the feeling that prompted them.


Natasha spoke to Pierre about her brother's life and doings, of how she
had suffered and lacked life during his own absence, and of how she
was fonder than ever of Mary, and how Mary was in every way better than
herself.


Pierre, answering Natasha's words, told her how intolerable it had been
for him to meet ladies at dinners and balls in Petersburg.
 "It was
simply dull.
 Besides, I was very busy.
 Yesterday, for instance, Mitya was
naughty.
.
"

"How like his father he is," Pierre interjected.


"Nicholas has the weakness of never agreeing with anything not generally
accepted.
 But I understand that you value what opens up a fresh line,"
said she, repeating words Pierre had once uttered.


"No, the chief point is that to Nicholas ideas and discussions are
an amusement--almost a pastime," said Pierre.
 "For instance, he is
collecting a library and has made it a rule not to buy a new book
till he has read what he had already bought--Sismondi and Rousseau and
Montesquieu," he added with a smile.
 "You know how much I.
.
" he began
to soften down what he had said; but Natasha interrupted him to show
that this was unnecessary.


"So you say ideas are an amusement to him.
.
"

"Yes, and for me nothing else is serious.
 All the time in Petersburg I
saw everyone as in a dream.
"

"Ah, I'm so sorry I wasn't there when you met the children," said
Natasha.
 But I can't help it.
 But I succeeded
in uniting them all; and then my idea is so clear and simple.
 You see,
I don't say that we ought to oppose this and that.
 We may be mistaken.
' Prince Sergey is a fine fellow and
clever.
 "Can a man so important and necessary to
society be also my husband? How did this happen?" She wished to express
this doubt to him.
 "Now who could decide whether he is really cleverer
than all the others?" she asked herself, and passed in review all those
whom Pierre most respected.


"Do you know what I am thinking about?" she asked.
 Would he have approved of you now, do you think?"

Pierre was not at all surprised at this question.
 He understood his
wife's line of thought.
 "He would not have
understood.
.
"

"I love you awfully!" Natasha suddenly said.
 "Awfully, awfully!"

"No, he would not have approved," said Pierre, after reflection.
 "What
he would have approved of is our family life.
 There now--you talk of my absence,
but you wouldn't believe what a special feeling I have for you after a
separation.
.
 I never leave off loving you.
 And one couldn't love
more, but this is something special.
.
.


"What nonsense it is," Natasha suddenly exclaimed, "about honeymoons,
and that the greatest happiness is at first! On the contrary, now is
the best of all.
 Always mine.
.
"

"Don't say it! I can't bear it!" Natasha cried, and her eyes glittered
coldly and vindictively.
 "Did you see her?" she added, after a pause.
"

They were silent for a while.


"Oh, do you know? While you were talking in the study I was looking at
you," Natasha began, evidently anxious to disperse the cloud that had
come over them.
 "You are as like him as two peas--like the boy.
" (She
meant her little son.
) "Oh, it's time to go to him.
.
.
 The milk's
come.
.
 But I'm sorry to leave you.
 Then suddenly turning to one
another at the same time they both began to speak.
 What did you say? Go on, go on.
"

"No, you go on, I was talking nonsense," said Natasha.


Pierre finished what he had begun.
 At that moment it seemed to
him that he was chosen to give a new direction to the whole of Russian
society and to the whole world.
 Now that's simple
enough.
"

"Yes.
"

"And what were you going to say?"

"I? Only nonsense.
"

"But all the same?"

"Oh nothing, only a trifle," said Natasha, smilingly still more
brightly.
 Awfully sweet! There, now he's crying.



Meanwhile downstairs in young Nicholas Bolkonski's bedroom a little lamp
was burning as usual.
 (The boy was afraid of the dark and they could
not cure him of it.
) Dessalles slept propped up on four pillows and his
Roman nose emitted sounds of rhythmic snoring.
 He had dreamed
that he and Uncle Pierre, wearing helmets such as were depicted in
his Plutarch, were leading a huge army.
 The army was made up of white
slanting lines that filled the air like the cobwebs that float about in
autumn and which Dessalles called les fils de la Vierge.
 In front was
Glory, which was similar to those threads but rather thicker.
 He and
Pierre were borne along lightly and joyously, nearer and nearer to their
goal.
 Suddenly the threads that moved them began to slacken and become
entangled and it grew difficult to move.


"Have you done this?" he said, pointing to some broken sealing wax and
pens.
" Little Nicholas turned to look
at Pierre but Pierre was no longer there.
 In his place was his
father--Prince Andrew--and his father had neither shape nor form, but he
existed, and when little Nicholas perceived him he grew faint with love:
he felt himself powerless, limp, and formless.
 His father caressed and
pitied him.
) "My
father has been with me and caressed me.
 He approved of me and of Uncle
Pierre.
 Why should not the same sort of thing happen to me? I know
they want me to learn.
 And I will learn.
 I only pray God that
something may happen to me such as happened to Plutarch's men, and I
will act as they did.


"Are you ill?" he heard Dessalles' voice asking.


"No," answered Nicholas, and lay back on his pillow.


"He is good and kind and I am fond of him!" he thought of Dessalles.
.
.
.
"





SECOND EPILOGUE





CHAPTER I


History is the life of nations and of humanity.
 They described
the activity of individuals who ruled the people, and regarded the
activity of those men as representing the activity of the whole nation.


The question: how did individuals make nations act as they wished and by
what was the will of these individuals themselves guided? the ancients
met by recognizing a divinity which subjected the nations to the will of
a chosen man, and guided the will of that chosen man so as to accomplish
ends that were predestined.


Modern history, in theory, rejects both these principles.


It would seem that having rejected the belief of the ancients in man's
subjection to the Deity and in a predetermined aim toward which nations
are led, modern history should study not the manifestations of power but
the causes that produce it.
 Having
in theory rejected the view held by the ancients, it still follows them
in practice.
 Instead of the
former divinely appointed aims of the Jewish, Greek, or Roman nations,
which ancient historians regarded as representing the progress of
humanity, modern history has postulated its own aims--the welfare of the
French, German, or English people, or, in its highest abstraction, the
welfare and civilization of humanity in general, by which is usually
meant that of the peoples occupying a small northwesterly portion of a
large continent.


At the basis of the works of all the modern historians from Gibbon to
Buckle, despite their seeming disagreements and the apparent novelty of
their outlooks, lie those two old, unavoidable assumptions.


In the first place the historian describes the activity of individuals
who in his opinion have directed humanity (one historian considers
only monarchs, generals, and ministers as being such men, while another
includes also orators, learned men, reformers, philosophers, and poets).

Secondly, it is assumed that the goal toward which humanity is being led
is known to the historians: to one of them this goal is the greatness of
the Roman, Spanish, or French realm; to another it is liberty, equality,
and a certain kind of civilization of a small corner of the world called
Europe.


In 1789 a ferment arises in Paris; it grows, spreads, and is expressed
by a movement of peoples from west to east.

In 1812 it reaches its extreme limit, Moscow, and then, with remarkable
symmetry, a countermovement occurs from east to west, attracting to
it, as the first movement had done, the nations of middle Europe.
 The
counter movement reaches the starting point of the first movement in the
west--Paris--and subsides.


What does all this mean? Why did it happen? What made those people burn
houses and slay their fellow men? What were the causes of these events?
What force made men act so? These are the instinctive, plain, and
most legitimate questions humanity asks itself when it encounters the
monuments and tradition of that period.


For a reply to these questions the common sense of mankind turns to the
science of history, whose aim is to enable nations and humanity to know
themselves.
 One might believe or disbelieve
in the divine significance of Napoleon, but for anyone believing in
it there would have been nothing unintelligible in the history of that
period, nor would there have been any contradictions.


But modern history cannot give that reply.
 Science does not admit the
conception of the ancients as to the direct participation of the Deity
in human affairs, and therefore history ought to give other answers.
 And they had
such and such favorites and such and such mistresses.
 At the end of the eighteenth century
there were a couple of dozen men in Paris who began to talk about all
men being free and equal.
 They killed the king and many other
people.
 At that time there was in France a man of genius--Napoleon.
 He
conquered everybody everywhere--that is, he killed many people because
he was a great genius.
 Having
become an Emperor he again went out to kill people in Italy, Austria,
and Prussia.
 And there too he killed a great many.
 In 1807 he suddenly made friends
with him, but in 1811 they again quarreled and again began killing many
people.
 Napoleon led six hundred thousand men into Russia and captured
Moscow; then he suddenly ran away from Moscow, and the Emperor
Alexander, helped by the advice of Stein and others, united Europe to
arm against the disturber of its peace.

Then Louis XVIII, who till then had been the laughingstock both of the
French and the Allies, began to reign.
 And Napoleon, shedding tears
before his Old Guards, renounced the throne and went into exile.
 Then
the skillful statesmen and diplomatists (especially Talleyrand, who
managed to sit down in a particular chair before anyone else and
thereby extended the frontiers of France) talked in Vienna and by
these conversations made the nations happy or unhappy.
 Suddenly the
diplomatists and monarchs nearly quarreled and were on the point of
again ordering their armies to kill one another, but just then Napoleon
arrived in France with a battalion, and the French, who had been hating
him, immediately all submitted to him.
 But the Allied monarchs were
angry at this and went to fight the French once more.
 And they defeated
the genius Napoleon and, suddenly recognizing him as a brigand, sent him
to the island of St.
 And the exile, separated from the beloved
France so dear to his heart, died a lingering death on that rock and
bequeathed his great deeds to posterity.
 But in Europe a reaction
occurred and the sovereigns once again all began to oppress their
subjects.
"

It would be a mistake to think that this is ironic--a caricature of the
historical accounts.
 On the contrary it is a very mild expression of
the contradictory replies, not meeting the questions, which all the
historians give, from the compilers of memoirs and the histories
of separate states to the writers of general histories and the new
histories of the culture of that period.


The strangeness and absurdity of these replies arise from the fact that
modern history, like a deaf man, answers questions no one has asked.
 All that would be interesting if we recognized a divine
power based on itself and always consistently directing its nations
through Napoleons, Louis-es, and writers; but we do not acknowledge such
a power, and therefore before speaking about Napoleons, Louis-es, and
authors, we ought to be shown the connection existing between these men
and the movement of the nations.


If instead of a divine power some other force has appeared, it should
be explained in what this new force consists, for the whole interest of
history lies precisely in that force.


History seems to assume that this force is self-evident and known to
everyone.
 But in spite of every desire to regard it as known, anyone
reading many historical works cannot help doubting whether this new
force, so variously understood by the historians themselves, is really
quite well known to everybody.
 In their narration
events occur solely by the will of a Napoleon, and Alexander, or in
general of the persons they describe.

As soon as historians of different nationalities and tendencies begin
to describe the same event, the replies they give immediately lose all
meaning, for this force is understood by them all not only differently
but often in quite contradictory ways.
 One historian says that an
event was produced by Napoleon's power, another that it was produced by
Alexander's, a third that it was due to the power of some other person.

Besides this, historians of that kind contradict each other even
in their statement as to the force on which the authority of some
particular person was based.
 Thiers, a Bonapartist, says that Napoleon's
power was based on his virtue and genius.
 Lanfrey, a Republican, says it
was based on his trickery and deception of the people.


Writers of universal history who deal with all the nations seem to
recognize how erroneous is the specialist historians' view of the force
which produces events.
 They do not recognize it as a power inherent in
heroes and rulers, but as the resultant of a multiplicity of variously
directed forces.
 In describing a war or the subjugation of a people, a
general historian looks for the cause of the event not in the power
of one man, but in the interaction of many persons connected with the
event.
 Yet in most cases universal
historians still employ the conception of power as a force that itself
produces events, and treat it as their cause.
 In their exposition, an
historic character is first the product of his time, and his power only
the resultant of various forces, and then his power is itself a force
producing events.
 Not only does it occur at
every step, but the universal historians' accounts are all made up of
a chain of such contradictions.
 This contradiction occurs because after
entering the field of analysis the universal historians stop halfway.


Specialist historians describing the campaign of 1813 or the restoration
of the Bourbons plainly assert that these events were produced by the
will of Alexander.
 That Chateaubriand,
Madame de Stael, and others spoke certain words to one another only
affected their mutual relations but does not account for the submission
of millions.
 And that is
just what the universal historians do, and consequently they not only
contradict the specialist historians but contradict themselves.


Peasants having no clear idea of the cause of rain, say, according to
whether they want rain or fine weather: "The wind has blown the clouds
away," or, "The wind has brought up the clouds.
" And in the same way the
universal historians sometimes, when it pleases them and fits in with
their theory, say that power is the result of events, and sometimes,
when they want to prove something else, say that power produces events.


A third class of historians--the so-called historians of
culture--following the path laid down by the universal historians who
sometimes accept writers and ladies as forces producing events--again
take that force to be something quite different.


The historians of culture are quite consistent in regard to their
progenitors, the writers of universal histories, for if historical
events may be explained by the fact that certain persons treated one
another in such and such ways, why not explain them by the fact that
such and such people wrote such and such books? Of the immense number of
indications accompanying every vital phenomenon, these historians select
the indication of intellectual activity and say that this indication is
the cause.
 But despite their endeavors to prove that the cause of events
lies in intellectual activity, only by a great stretch can one admit
that there is any connection between intellectual activity and the
movement of peoples, and in no case can one admit that intellectual
activity controls people's actions, for that view is not confirmed by
such facts as the very cruel murders of the French Revolution resulting
from the doctrine of the equality of man, or the very cruel wars and
executions resulting from the preaching of love.


But even admitting as correct all the cunningly devised arguments with
which these histories are filled--admitting that nations are governed by
some undefined force called an idea--history's essential question still
remains unanswered, and to the former power of monarchs and to the
influence of advisers and other people introduced by the universal
historians, another, newer force--the idea--is added, the connection of
which with the masses needs explanation.
 It is possible to understand
that Napoleon had power and so events occurred; with some effort one may
even conceive that Napoleon together with other influences was the cause
of an event; but how a book, Le Contrat social, had the effect of making
Frenchmen begin to drown one another cannot be understood without an
explanation of the causal nexus of this new force with the event.


Undoubtedly some relation exists between all who live contemporaneously,
and so it is possible to find some connection between the intellectual
activity of men and their historical movements, just as such a
connection may be found between the movements of humanity and commerce,
handicraft, gardening, or anything else you please.
 But why intellectual
activity is considered by the historians of culture to be the cause or
expression of the whole historical movement is hard to understand.


But not to speak of the intrinsic quality of histories of this kind
(which may possibly even be of use to someone for something) the
histories of culture, to which all general histories tend more and more
to approximate, are significant from the fact that after seriously
and minutely examining various religious, philosophic, and political
doctrines as causes of events, as soon as they have to describe an
actual historic event such as the campaign of 1812 for instance, they
involuntarily describe it as resulting from an exercise of power--and
say plainly that that was the result of Napoleon's will.
 Speaking so,
the historians of culture involuntarily contradict themselves, and show
that the new force they have devised does not account for what happens
in history, and that history can only be explained by introducing a
power which they apparently do not recognize.
 Another man says the locomotive moves because its
wheels go round.
 To
refute him someone would have to prove to him that there is no devil,
or another peasant would have to explain to him that it is not the devil
but a German, who moves the locomotive.
 Only then, as a result of the
contradiction, will they see that they are both wrong.
 But the man who
says that the movement of the wheels is the cause refutes himself, for
having once begun to analyze he ought to go on and explain further why
the wheels go round; and till he has reached the ultimate cause of the
movement of the locomotive in the pressure of steam in the boiler, he
has no right to stop in his search for the cause.
 The man who explains
the movement of the locomotive by the smoke that is carried back has
noticed that the wheels do not supply an explanation and has taken the
first sign that occurs to him and in his turn has offered that as an
explanation.


The only conception that can explain the movement of the peoples is that
of some force commensurate with the whole movement of the peoples.
 Some see it as a force directly inherent in heroes, as the
peasant sees the devil in the locomotive; others as a force resulting
from several other forces, like the movement of the wheels; others again
as an intellectual influence, like the smoke that is blown away.


So long as histories are written of separate individuals, whether
Caesars, Alexanders, Luthers, or Voltaires, and not the histories
of all, absolutely all those who take part in an event, it is quite
impossible to describe the movement of humanity without the conception
of a force compelling men to direct their activity toward a certain end.

And the only such conception known to historians is that of power.


In dealing with humanity's inquiry, the science of history up to now
is like money in circulation--paper money and coin.
 The biographies and
special national histories are like paper money.
 They can be used and
can circulate and fulfill their purpose without harm to anyone and even
advantageously, as long as no one asks what is the security behind them.
 It may indeed make jingling coin, but will do no more than
that.
 Paper money may deceive the ignorant, but nobody is deceived by
tokens of base metal that have no value but merely jingle.
 And as counters
of imitation gold can be used only among a group of people who agree to
accept them as gold, or among those who do not know the nature of
gold, so universal historians and historians of culture, not answering
humanity's essential question, serve as currency for some purposes of
their own, only in universities and among the mass of readers who have a
taste for what they call "serious reading.
"





CHAPTER IV


Having abandoned the conception of the ancients as to the divine
subjection of the will of a nation to some chosen man and the subjection
of that man's will to the Deity, history cannot without contradictions
take a single step till it has chosen one of two things: either a return
to the former belief in the direct intervention of the Deity in human
affairs or a definite explanation of the meaning of the force producing
historical events and termed "power.
"

A return to the first is impossible, the belief has been destroyed; and
so it is essential to explain what is meant by power.


Napoleon ordered an army to be raised and go to war.
 We are so
accustomed to that idea and have become so used to it that the question:
why did six hundred thousand men go to fight when Napoleon uttered
certain words, seems to us senseless.
 He had the power and so what he
ordered was done.
 But as soon as we do not admit that, it becomes essential to
determine what is this power of one man over others.


It cannot be the direct physical power of a strong man over a weak
one--a domination based on the application or threat of physical force,
like the power of Hercules; nor can it be based on the effect of moral
force, as in their simplicity some historians think who say that the
leading figures in history are heroes, that is, men gifted with a
special strength of soul and mind called genius.
 This power cannot be
based on the predominance of moral strength, for, not to mention heroes
such as Napoleon about whose moral qualities opinions differ widely,
history shows us that neither a Louis XI nor a Metternich, who ruled
over millions of people, had any particular moral qualities, but on the
contrary were generally morally weaker than any of the millions they
ruled over.


And that is how power is understood by the science of jurisprudence,
that exchange bank of history which offers to exchange history's
understanding of power for true gold.


In the domain of jurisprudence, which consists of discussions of how a
state and power might be arranged were it possible for all that to
be arranged, it is all very clear; but when applied to history that
definition of power needs explanation.


The science of jurisprudence regards the state and power as the ancients
regarded fire--namely, as something existing absolutely.
 But for
history, the state and power are merely phenomena, just as for modern
physics fire is not an element but a phenomenon.


If power be the collective will of the people transferred to their
ruler, was Pugachev a representative of the will of the people? If not,
then why was Napoleon I? Why was Napoleon III a criminal when he was
taken prisoner at Boulogne, and why, later on, were those criminals whom
he arrested?

Do palace revolutions--in which sometimes only two or three people take
part--transfer the will of the people to a new ruler? In international
relations, is the will of the people also transferred to their
conqueror? Was the will of the Confederation of the Rhine transferred
to Napoleon in 1806? Was the will of the Russian people transferred
to Napoleon in 1809, when our army in alliance with the French went to
fight the Austrians?

To these questions three answers are possible:

Either to assume (1) that the will of the people is always
unconditionally transferred to the ruler or rulers they have chosen, and
that therefore every emergence of a new power, every struggle
against the power once appointed, should be absolutely regarded as an
infringement of the real power; or (2) that the will of the people
is transferred to the rulers conditionally, under definite and known
conditions, and to show that all limitations, conflicts, and even
destructions of power result from a nonobservance by the rulers of the
conditions under which their power was entrusted to them; or (3) that
the will of the people is delegated to the rulers conditionally, but
that the conditions are unknown and indefinite, and that the appearance
of several authorities, their struggles and their falls, result solely
from the greater or lesser fulfillment by the rulers of these unknown
conditions on which the will of the people is transferred from some
people to others.


And these are the three ways in which the historians do explain the
relation of the people to their rulers.


Some historians--those biographical and specialist historians already
referred to--in their simplicity failing to understand the question of
the meaning of power, seem to consider that the collective will of
the people is unconditionally transferred to historical persons, and
therefore when describing some single state they assume that particular
power to be the one absolute and real power, and that any other force
opposing this is not a power but a violation of power--mere violence.


Their theory, suitable for primitive and peaceful periods of history,
has the inconvenience--in application to complex and stormy periods in
the life of nations during which various powers arise simultaneously and
struggle with one another--that a Legitimist historian will prove
that the National Convention, the Directory, and Bonaparte were mere
infringers of the true power, while a Republican and a Bonapartist will
prove: the one that the Convention and the other that the Empire was the
real power, and that all the others were violations of power.


Recognizing the falsity of this view of history, another set of
historians say that power rests on a conditional delegation of the will
of the people to their rulers, and that historical leaders have power
only conditionally on carrying out the program that the will of the
people has by tacit agreement prescribed to them.
 If the conditions under which power is entrusted consist in the
wealth, freedom, and enlightenment of the people, how is it that Louis
XIV and Ivan the Terrible end their reigns tranquilly, while Louis XVI
and Charles I are executed by their people? To this question historians
reply that Louis XIV's activity, contrary to the program, reacted on
Louis XVI.
 But why did it not react on Louis XIV or on Louis XV--why
should it react just on Louis XVI? And what is the time limit for such
reactions? To these questions there are and can be no answers.
 Equally
little does this view explain why for several centuries the collective
will is not withdrawn from certain rulers and their heirs, and
then suddenly during a period of fifty years is transferred to the
Convention, to the Directory, to Napoleon, to Alexander, to Louis XVIII,
to Napoleon again, to Charles X, to Louis Philippe, to a Republican
government, and to Napoleon III.
 When explaining these rapid transfers
of the people's will from one individual to another, especially in view
of international relations, conquests, and alliances, the historians are
obliged to admit that some of these transfers are not normal delegations
of the people's will but are accidents dependent on cunning, on
mistakes, on craft, or on the weakness of a diplomatist, a ruler, or a
party leader.
 So that the greater part of the events of history--civil
wars, revolutions, and conquests--are presented by these historians
not as the results of free transferences of the people's will, but as
results of the ill-directed will of one or more individuals, that is,
once again, as usurpations of power.


Historians of the third class assume that the will of the people
is transferred to historic personages conditionally, but that the
conditions are unknown to us.
 They say that historical personages have
power only because they fulfill the will of the people which has been
delegated to them.


But in that case, if the force that moves nations lies not in the
historic leaders but in the nations themselves, what significance have
those leaders?

The leaders, these historians tell us, express the will of the people:
the activity of the leaders represents the activity of the people.
 If the whole activity of the leaders serves as the expression of
the people's will, as some historians suppose, then all the details
of the court scandals contained in the biographies of a Napoleon or
a Catherine serve to express the life of the nation, which is evident
nonsense; but if it is only some particular side of the activity of an
historical leader which serves to express the people's life, as other
so-called "philosophical" historians believe, then to determine which
side of the activity of a leader expresses the nation's life, we have
first of all to know in what the nation's life consists.


Met by this difficulty historians of that class devise some most
obscure, impalpable, and general abstraction which can cover all
conceivable occurrences, and declare this abstraction to be the aim of
humanity's movement.

But as it is in no way proved that the aim of humanity does consist in
freedom, equality, enlightenment, or civilization, and as the connection
of the people with the rulers and enlighteners of humanity is only based
on the arbitrary assumption that the collective will of the people is
always transferred to the men whom we have noticed, it happens that the
activity of the millions who migrate, burn houses, abandon agriculture,
and destroy one another never is expressed in the account of the
activity of some dozen people who did not burn houses, practice
agriculture, or slay their fellow creatures.


History proves this at every turn.
 Is the ferment of the peoples of
the west at the end of the eighteenth century and their drive eastward
explained by the activity of Louis XIV, XV, and XVI, their mistresses
and ministers, and by the lives of Napoleon, Rousseau, Diderot,
Beaumarchais, and others?

Is the movement of the Russian people eastward to Kazan and Siberia
expressed by details of the morbid character of Ivan the Terrible and by
his correspondence with Kurbski?

Is the movement of the peoples at the time of the Crusades explained by
the life and activity of the Godfreys and the Louis-es and their ladies?
For us that movement of the peoples from west to east, without
leaders, with a crowd of vagrants, and with Peter the Hermit, remains
incomprehensible.
 Popes,
kings, and knights incited the peoples to free the Holy Land; but the
people did not go, for the unknown cause which had previously impelled
them to go no longer existed.
 The history of the Godfreys and the
Minnesingers can evidently not cover the life of the peoples.
 And the
history of the Godfreys and the Minnesingers has remained the history
of Godfreys and Minnesingers, but the history of the life of the peoples
and their impulses has remained unknown.


The history of culture explains to us the impulses and conditions of
life and thought of a writer or a reformer.


If we unite both these kinds of history, as is done by the newest
historians, we shall have the history of monarchs and writers, but not
the history of the life of the peoples.

The theory that this connection is based on the transference of the
collective will of a people to certain historical personages is an
hypothesis unconfirmed by the experience of history.


The theory of the transference of the collective will of the people to
historic persons may perhaps explain much in the domain of jurisprudence
and be essential for its purposes, but in its application to history, as
soon as revolutions, conquests, or civil wars occur--that is, as soon as
history begins--that theory explains nothing.


The theory seems irrefutable just because the act of transference of the
people's will cannot be verified, for it never occurred.


The replies this theory gives to historical questions are like the
replies of a man who, watching the movements of a herd of cattle and
paying no attention to the varying quality of the pasturage in different
parts of the field, or to the driving of the herdsman, should attribute
the direction the herd takes to what animal happens to be at its head.
" This is what historians of the first class say--those who
assume the unconditional transference of the people's will.


"If the animals leading the herd change, this happens because the
collective will of all the animals is transferred from one leader to
another, according to whether the animal is or is not leading them in
the direction selected by the whole herd.
" So say the third class of historians who regard all
historical persons, from monarchs to journalists, as the expression of
their age.


What causes historical events? Power.
 Under what
condition is the will of the people delegated to one person? On
condition that that person expresses the will of the whole people.



If the realm of human knowledge were confined to abstract reasoning,
then having subjected to criticism the explanation of "power" that
juridical science gives us, humanity would conclude that power is merely
a word and has no real existence.
 But to understand phenomena man
has, besides abstract reasoning, experience by which he verifies his
reflections.
 And experience tells us that power is not merely a word but
an actually existing phenomenon.


Not to speak of the fact that no description of the collective activity
of men can do without the conception of power, the existence of power is
proved both by history and by observing contemporary events.


Whenever an event occurs a man appears or men appear, by whose will the
event seems to have taken place.
 Napoleon III issues a decree and the
French go to Mexico.
 The King of Prussia and Bismarck issue decrees and
an army enters Bohemia.
 Experience shows us that whatever event occurs it is always
related to the will of one or of several men who have decreed it.


The historians, in accord with the old habit of acknowledging divine
intervention in human affairs, want to see the cause of events in
the expression of the will of someone endowed with power, but that
supposition is not confirmed either by reason or by experience.


On the one side reflection shows that the expression of a man's
will--his words--are only part of the general activity expressed in an
event, as for instance in a war or a revolution, and so without assuming
an incomprehensible, supernatural force--a miracle--one cannot admit
that words can be the immediate cause of the movements of millions of
men.


Power, from the standpoint of experience, is merely the relation that
exists between the expression of someone's will and the execution of
that will by others.


To explain the conditions of that relationship we must first establish a
conception of the expression of will, referring it to man and not to the
Deity.


If the Deity issues a command, expresses His will, as ancient history
tells us, the expression of that will is independent of time and is not
caused by anything, for the Divinity is not controlled by an event.






CHAPTER VI


Only the expression of the will of the Deity, not dependent on time, can
relate to a whole series of events occurring over a period of years or
centuries, and only the Deity, independent of everything, can by His
sole will determine the direction of humanity's movement; but man acts
in time and himself takes part in what occurs.
 Napoleon could not have commanded
an invasion of Russia and never did so.


If throughout his reign Napoleon gave commands concerning an invasion
of England and expended on no other undertaking so much time and effort,
and yet during his whole reign never once attempted to execute that
design but undertook an expedition into Russia, with which country he
considered it desirable to be in alliance (a conviction he repeatedly
expressed)--this came about because his commands did not correspond to
the course of events in the first case, but did so correspond in the
latter.
 But to know what can and what cannot be
executed is impossible, not only in the case of Napoleon's invasion of
Russia in which millions participated, but even in the simplest event,
for in either case millions of obstacles may arise to prevent its
execution.
 Every order executed is always one of an immense number
unexecuted.
 All the impossible orders inconsistent with the course of
events remain unexecuted.
 Only the possible ones get linked up with a
consecutive series of commands corresponding to a series of events, and
are executed.


Our false conception that an event is caused by a command which precedes
it is due to the fact that when the event has taken place and out of
thousands of others those few commands which were consistent with that
event have been executed, we forget about the others that were not
executed because they could not be.


We say that Napoleon wished to invade Russia and invaded it.
 In
reality in all Napoleon's activity we never find anything resembling an
expression of that wish, but find a series of orders, or expressions of
his will, very variously and indefinitely directed.


So that examining the relation in time of the commands to the events,
we find that a command can never be the cause of the event, but that a
certain definite dependence exists between the two.


To understand in what this dependence consists it is necessary to
reinstate another omitted condition of every command proceeding not from
the Deity but from a man, which is, that the man who gives the command
himself takes part in the event.


This relation of the commander to those he commands is just what is
called power.


Of all the combinations in which men unite for collective action one of
the most striking and definite examples is an army.


Every army is composed of lower grades of the service--the rank and
file--of whom there are always the greatest number; of the next higher
military rank--corporals and noncommissioned officers of whom there are
fewer, and of still-higher officers of whom there are still fewer,
and so on to the highest military command which is concentrated in one
person.


A military organization may be quite correctly compared to a cone, of
which the base with the largest diameter consists of the rank and file;
the next higher and smaller section of the cone consists of the next
higher grades of the army, and so on to the apex, the point of which
will represent the commander in chief.
 The noncommissioned
officers (of whom there are fewer) perform the action itself less
frequently than the soldiers, but they already give commands.
 A general does nothing but command the troops, indicates the
objective, and hardly ever uses a weapon himself.


And so without particularly analyzing all the contiguous sections of
a cone and of the ranks of an army, or the ranks and positions in
any administrative or public business whatever from the lowest to the
highest, we see a law by which men, to take associated action, combine
in such relations that the more directly they participate in performing
the action the less they can command and the more numerous they are,
while the less their direct participation in the action itself, the more
they command and the fewer of them there are; rising in this way from
the lowest ranks to the man at the top, who takes the least direct share
in the action and directs his activity chiefly to commanding.


Having restored the condition of time under which all events occur,
we find that a command is executed only when it is related to a
corresponding series of events.
 Restoring the essential condition of
relation between those who command and those who execute, we find that
by the very nature of the case those who command take the smallest part
in the action itself and that their activity is exclusively directed to
commanding.






CHAPTER VII


When an event is taking place people express their opinions and wishes
about it, and as the event results from the collective activity of
many people, some one of the opinions or wishes expressed is sure to be
fulfilled if but approximately.
 Each of them expresses his opinion as to how and
where to haul it.
 They haul the log away, and it happens that this is
done as one of them said.
 He ordered it.
 There we have command and power
in their primary form.


When some larger concourse of men direct their activity to a common aim
there is a yet sharper division of those who, because their activity is
given to directing and commanding, take less part in the direct work.
 Just the same is
done by a concourse of people, allowing those who do not take a direct
part in the activity to devise considerations, justifications, and
surmises concerning their collective activity.
 People ceased to kill one another, and
this event was accompanied by its justification in the necessity for a
centralization of power, resistance to Europe, and so on.
 Men went
from the west to the east killing their fellow men, and the event
was accompanied by phrases about the glory of France, the baseness of
England, and so on.
 History shows us that these justifications of the
events have no common sense and are all contradictory, as in the case of
killing a man as the result of recognizing his rights, and the killing
of millions in Russia for the humiliation of England.


These justifications release those who produce the events from moral
responsibility.


Without such justification there would be no reply to the simplest
question that presents itself when examining each historical event.
 To those on board the ship the
movement of those waves will be the only perceptible motion.


Only by watching closely moment by moment the movement of that flow and
comparing it with the movement of the ship do we convince ourselves that
every bit of it is occasioned by the forward movement of the ship,
and that we were led into error by the fact that we ourselves were
imperceptibly moving.


When the ship moves in one direction there is one and the same wave
ahead of it, when it turns frequently the wave ahead of it also turns
frequently.
 Wherever the ship may go, the rush of water which neither
directs nor increases its movement foams ahead of it, and at a distance
seems to us not merely to move of itself but to govern the ship's
movement also.
 The incontestable proof of this deduction is that, however many
commands were issued, the event does not take place unless there are
other causes for it, but as soon as an event occurs--be it what it
may--then out of all the continually expressed wishes of different
people some will always be found which by their meaning and their time
of utterance are related as commands to the events.


(2) The movement of nations is caused not by power, nor by intellectual
activity, nor even by a combination of the two as historians have
supposed, but by the activity of all the people who participate in
the events, and who always combine in such a way that those taking
the largest direct share in the event take on themselves the least
responsibility and vice versa.
 But as the moral activity is
inconceivable without the physical, the cause of the event is neither in
the one nor in the other but in the union of the two.


Or in other words, the conception of a cause is inapplicable to the
phenomena we are examining.
 Atoms attract each other and atoms repel one another.
 We only know that to produce the one or the other action,
people combine in a certain formation in which they all take part, and
we say that this is so because it is unthinkable otherwise, or in other
words that it is a law.
 A particle of matter
cannot tell us that it does not feel the law of attraction or repulsion
and that that law is untrue, but man, who is the subject of history,
says plainly: I am free and am therefore not subject to the law.
 All the contradictions and obscurities of history and the
false path historical science has followed are due solely to the lack of
a solution of that question.
 Through his reason man observes himself, but only
through consciousness does he know himself.


Apart from consciousness of self no observation or application of reason
is conceivable.
 A man is only conscious of himself as
a living being by the fact that he wills, that is, is conscious of
his volition.


If, observing himself, man sees that his will is always directed by
one and the same law (whether he observes the necessity of taking
food, using his brain, or anything else) he cannot recognize this
never-varying direction of his will otherwise than as a limitation of
it.
 But I have lifted my hand and let it fall.

Everyone understands that this illogical reply is an irrefutable
demonstration of freedom.


That reply is the expression of a consciousness that is not subject to
reason.


If the consciousness of freedom were not a separate and independent
source of self-consciousness it would be subject to reasoning and
to experience, but in fact such subjection does not exist and is
inconceivable.


A series of experiments and arguments proves to every man that he, as
an object of observation, is subject to certain laws, and man submits to
them and never resists the laws of gravity or impermeability once he
has become acquainted with them.

Having learned from experiment and argument that a stone falls
downwards, a man indubitably believes this and always expects the law
that he has learned to be fulfilled.


But learning just as certainly that his will is subject to laws, he does
not and cannot believe this.


A man having no freedom cannot be conceived of except as deprived of
life.


If the conception of freedom appears to reason to be a senseless
contradiction like the possibility of performing two actions at one and
the same instant of time, or of an effect without a cause, that only
proves that consciousness is not subject to reason.


This unshakable, irrefutable consciousness of freedom, uncontrolled by
experiment or argument, recognized by all thinkers and felt by everyone
without exception, this consciousness without which no conception of man
is possible constitutes the other side of the question.

What is sin, the conception of which arises from the consciousness of
man's freedom? That is a question for theology.


The actions of men are subject to general immutable laws expressed in
statistics.
 What is man's responsibility to society, the conception of
which results from the conception of freedom? That is a question for
jurisprudence.


Man's actions proceed from his innate character and the motives acting
upon him.
 What is conscience and the perception of right and wrong
in actions that follows from the consciousness of freedom? That is a
question for ethics.


Man in connection with the general life of humanity appears subject
to laws which determine that life.
 But the same man apart from that
connection appears to be free.
 How should the past life of nations and
of humanity be regarded--as the result of the free, or as the result of
the constrained, activity of man? That is a question for history.


They say and write and print that the soul and freedom do not exist,
for the life of man is expressed by muscular movements and muscular
movements are conditioned by the activity of the nerves; the soul and
free will do not exist because at an unknown period of time we sprang
from the apes.
 They say this, not at all suspecting that thousands of
years ago that same law of necessity which with such ardor they are now
trying to prove by physiology and comparative zoology was not merely
acknowledged by all the religions and all the thinkers, but has never
been denied.
 For the fact that, from the point of view of
observation, reason and the will are merely secretions of the brain, and
that man following the general law may have developed from lower animals
at some unknown period of time, only explains from a fresh side
the truth admitted thousands of years ago by all the religious and
philosophic theories--that from the point of view of reason man is
subject to the law of necessity; but it does not advance by a hair's
breadth the solution of the question, which has another, opposite, side,
based on the consciousness of freedom.


If men descended from the apes at an unknown period of time, that is
as comprehensible as that they were made from a handful of earth at a
certain period of time (in the first case the unknown quantity is the
time, in the second case it is the origin); and the question of how
man's consciousness of freedom is to be reconciled with the law of
necessity to which he is subject cannot be solved by comparative
physiology and zoology, for in a frog, a rabbit, or an ape, we can
observe only the muscular nervous activity, but in man we observe
consciousness as well as the muscular and nervous activity.


The naturalists and their followers, thinking they can solve this
question, are like plasterers set to plaster one side of the walls of
a church who, availing themselves of the absence of the chief
superintendent of the work, should in an access of zeal plaster over the
windows, icons, woodwork, and still unbuttressed walls, and should be
delighted that from their point of view as plasterers, everything is now
so smooth and regular.


And so for history, the insoluble mystery presented by the
incompatibility of free will and inevitability does not exist as it does
for theology, ethics, and philosophy.
 History surveys a presentation of
man's life in which the union of these two contradictions has already
taken place.


In actual life each historic event, each human action, is very clearly
and definitely understood without any sense of contradiction, although
each event presents itself as partly free and partly compulsory.


Whether we speak of the migration of the peoples and the incursions
of the barbarians, or of the decrees of Napoleon III, or of someone's
action an hour ago in choosing one direction out of several for his
walk, we are unconscious of any contradiction.
 The degree of freedom and
inevitability governing the actions of these people is clearly defined
for us.


Our conception of the degree of freedom often varies according to
differences in the point of view from which we regard the event, but
every human action appears to us as a certain combination of freedom and
inevitability.
 And always the more
freedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive, and
the more inevitability the less freedom.


The proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increases
according to the point of view from which the action is regarded, but
their relation is always one of inverse proportion.
 In all these cases the conception of freedom
is increased or diminished and the conception of compulsion is
correspondingly decreased or increased, according to the point of view
from which the action is regarded.
 So that the greater the conception of
necessity the smaller the conception of freedom and vice versa.


Religion, the common sense of mankind, the science of jurisprudence,
and history itself understand alike this relation between necessity and
freedom.


All cases without exception in which our conception of freedom and
necessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations:

(1) The relation to the external world of the man who commits the deeds.


(2) His relation to time.


(3) His relation to the causes leading to the action.

And the more we perceive of these influences the more our conception of
his freedom diminishes and the more our conception of the necessity that
weighs on him increases.


The second consideration is the more or less evident time relation of
the man to the world and the clearness of our perception of the place
the man's action occupies in time.
 That is the ground which makes the
fall of the first man, resulting in the production of the human race,
appear evidently less free than a man's entry into marriage today.
 It is
the reason why the life and activity of people who lived centuries ago
and are connected with me in time cannot seem to me as free as the life
of a contemporary, the consequences of which are still unknown to me.


The degree of our conception of freedom or inevitability depends in this
respect on the greater or lesser lapse of time between the performance
of the action and our judgment of it.
 But if I examine an act performed a month ago, then being in
different circumstances, I cannot help recognizing that if that act had
not been committed much that resulted from it--good, agreeable, and even
essential--would not have taken place.
 The farther I go back
in memory, or what is the same thing the farther I go forward in my
judgment, the more doubtful becomes my belief in the freedom of my
action.
 A
contemporary event seems to us to be indubitably the doing of all the
known participants, but with a more remote event we already see its
inevitable results which prevent our considering anything else possible.

And the farther we go back in examining events the less arbitrary do
they appear.


The Austro-Prussian war appears to us undoubtedly the result of the
crafty conduct of Bismarck, and so on.
 The Napoleonic wars still seem
to us, though already questionably, to be the outcome of their heroes'
will.
 In regard to the migration
of the peoples it does not enter anyone's head today to suppose that
the renovation of the European world depended on Attila's caprice.


The third consideration is the degree to which we apprehend that
endless chain of causation inevitably demanded by reason, in which each
phenomenon comprehended, and therefore man's every action, must have
its definite place as a result of what has gone before and as a cause of
what will follow.


The better we are acquainted with the physiological, psychological, and
historical laws deduced by observation and by which man is controlled,
and the more correctly we perceive the physiological, psychological,
and historical causes of the action, and the simpler the action we are
observing and the less complex the character and mind of the man in
question, the more subject to inevitability and the less free do our
actions and those of others appear.


When we do not at all understand the cause of an action, whether a
crime, a good action, or even one that is simply nonmoral, we ascribe a
greater amount of freedom to it.
 In an indifferent case we recognize in it
more individuality, originality, and independence.
 That a criminal was reared among male
factors mitigates his fault in our eyes.
 The self-sacrifice of a father
or mother, or self-sacrifice with the possibility of a reward, is more
comprehensible than gratuitous self-sacrifice, and therefore seems less
deserving of sympathy and less the result of free will.
 If we examined simple actions and
had a vast number of such actions under observation, our conception of
their inevitability would be still greater.
 The dishonest conduct of the
son of a dishonest father, the misconduct of a woman who had fallen
into bad company, a drunkard's relapse into drunkenness, and so on are
actions that seem to us less free the better we understand their cause.


On these three considerations alone is based the conception of
irresponsibility for crimes and the extenuating circumstances admitted
by all legislative codes.
 The responsibility appears greater or less
according to our greater or lesser knowledge of the circumstances in
which the man was placed whose action is being judged, and according
to the greater or lesser interval of time between the commission of the
action and its investigation, and according to the greater or lesser
understanding of the causes that led to the action.






CHAPTER X


Thus our conception of free will and inevitability gradually diminishes
or increases according to the greater or lesser connection with the
external world, the greater or lesser remoteness of time, and the
greater or lesser dependence on the causes in relation to which we
contemplate a man's life.
 If we examine a man little dependent on external
conditions, whose action was performed very recently, and the causes of
whose action are beyond our ken, we get the conception of a minimum of
inevitability and a maximum of freedom.


In neither case--however we may change our point of view, however plain
we may make to ourselves the connection between the man and the external
world, however inaccessible it may be to us, however long or short the
period of time, however intelligible or incomprehensible the causes
of the action may be--can we ever conceive either complete freedom or
complete necessity.
 I lift my arm and let it fall.
 My action seems
to me free; but asking myself whether I could raise my arm in every
direction, I see that I raised it in the direction in which there was
least obstruction to that action either from things around me or from
the construction of my own body.
 I chose one out of all the possible
directions because in it there were fewest obstacles.
 For my action
to be free it was necessary that it should encounter no obstacles.
 For if I examine
an action committed a second ago I must still recognize it as not
being free, for it is irrevocably linked to the moment at which it was
committed.
 Can I lift my arm? I lift it, but ask myself: could I have
abstained from lifting my arm at the moment that has already passed? To
convince myself of this I do not lift it the next moment.
 But I am
not now abstaining from doing so at the first moment when I asked the
question.
 Time has gone by which I could not detain, the arm I then
lifted is no longer the same as the arm I now refrain from lifting,
nor is the air in which I lifted it the same that now surrounds me.
 And since I
could make only one movement at that single moment of time, it could not
have been any other.
 To imagine it as free, it is necessary to imagine
it in the present, on the boundary between the past and the future--that
is, outside time, which is impossible.


(3) However much the difficulty of understanding the causes may be
increased, we never reach a conception of complete freedom, that is,
an absence of cause.
 I raise my arm to perform an action
independently of any cause, but my wish to perform an action without a
cause is the cause of my action.


But even if--imagining a man quite exempt from all influences, examining
only his momentary action in the present, unevoked by any cause--we were
to admit so infinitely small a remainder of inevitability as equaled
zero, we should even then not have arrived at the conception of complete
freedom in man, for a being uninfluenced by the external world, standing
outside of time and independent of cause, is no longer a man.


In the same way we can never imagine the action of a man quite devoid of
freedom and entirely subject to the law of inevitability.


(1) However we may increase our knowledge of the conditions of space
in which man is situated, that knowledge can never be complete, for the
number of those conditions is as infinite as the infinity of space.
 And
therefore so long as not all the conditions influencing men are defined,
there is no complete inevitability but a certain measure of freedom
remains.


But besides this, even if, admitting the remaining minimum of freedom to
equal zero, we assumed in some given case--as for instance in that of a
dying man, an unborn babe, or an idiot--complete absence of freedom, by
so doing we should destroy the very conception of man in the case we are
examining, for as soon as there is no freedom there is also no man.


And so to imagine the action of a man entirely subject to the law of
inevitability without any freedom, we must assume the knowledge of an
infinite number of space relations, an infinitely long period of time,
and an infinite series of causes.


To imagine a man perfectly free and not subject to the law of
inevitability, we must imagine him all alone, beyond space, beyond time,
and free from dependence on cause.


In the first case, if inevitability were possible without freedom
we should have reached a definition of inevitability by the laws of
inevitability itself, that is, a mere form without content.


In the second case, if freedom were possible without inevitability we
should have arrived at unconditioned freedom beyond space, time, and
cause, which by the fact of its being unconditioned and unlimited would
be nothing, or mere content without form.


Reason says: (1) space with all the forms of matter that give it
visibility is infinite, and cannot be imagined otherwise.
 (2) Time is
infinite motion without a moment of rest and is unthinkable otherwise.

(3) The connection between cause and effect has no beginning and can
have no end.


Consciousness says: (1) I alone am, and all that exists is but me,
consequently I include space.
 (2) I measure flowing time by the fixed
moment of the present in which alone I am conscious of myself as living,
consequently I am outside time.
 (3) I am beyond cause, for I feel myself
to be the cause of every manifestation of my life.


Reason gives expression to the laws of inevitability.


Freedom not limited by anything is the essence of life, in man's
consciousness.
 Inevitability without content is man's reason in its
three forms.


Freedom is the thing examined.
 Freedom
is the content.


Only by separating the two sources of cognition, related to one another
as form to content, do we get the mutually exclusive and separately
incomprehensible conceptions of freedom and inevitability.


Only by uniting them do we get a clear conception of man's life.


Apart from these two concepts which in their union mutually define one
another as form and content, no conception of life is possible.


All that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relation of free
will to inevitability, that is, of consciousness to the laws of reason.


The great natural forces lie outside us and we are not conscious of
them; we call those forces gravitation, inertia, electricity, animal
force, and so on, but we are conscious of the force of life in man and
we call that freedom.


Man's free will differs from every other force in that man is directly
conscious of it, but in the eyes of reason it in no way differs from
any other force.
 Just so the force of man's free will
is distinguished by reason from the other forces of nature only by the
definition reason gives it.
 Freedom, apart from necessity, that is,
apart from the laws of reason that define it, differs in no way from
gravitation, or heat, or the force that makes things grow; for reason,
it is only a momentary undefinable sensation of life.


And as the undefinable essence of the force moving the heavenly bodies,
the undefinable essence of the forces of heat and electricity, or
of chemical affinity, or of the vital force, forms the content of
astronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, and so on, just in the
same way does the force of free will form the content of history.

But just as the subject of every science is the manifestation of this
unknown essence of life while that essence itself can only be the
subject of metaphysics, even the manifestation of the force of free will
in human beings in space, in time, and in dependence on cause forms
the subject of history, while free will itself is the subject of
metaphysics.


In the experimental sciences what we know we call the laws of
inevitability, what is unknown to us we call vital force.
 Vital force is
only an expression for the unknown remainder over and above what we know
of the essence of life.


So also in history what is known to us we call laws of inevitability,
what is unknown we call free will.
 Free will is for history only an
expression for the unknown remainder of what we know about the laws of
human life.






CHAPTER XI


History examines the manifestations of man's free will in connection
with the external world in time and in dependence on cause, that is, it
defines this freedom by the laws of reason, and so history is a science
only in so far as this free will is defined by those laws.


That assumption would destroy the possibility of the existence of laws,
that is, of any science whatever.
 If there is even a single body
moving freely, then the laws of Kepler and Newton are negatived and no
conception of the movement of the heavenly bodies any longer exists.
 If
any single action is due to free will, then not a single historical law
can exist, nor any conception of historical events.


For history, lines exist of the movement of human wills, one end
of which is hidden in the unknown but at the other end of which a
consciousness of man's will in the present moves in space, time, and
dependence on cause.
 To discover and define those laws
is the problem of history.


Only by reducing this element of free will to the infinitesimal, that
is, by regarding it as an infinitely small quantity, can we convince
ourselves of the absolute inaccessibility of the causes, and then
instead of seeking causes, history will take the discovery of laws as
its problem.


The search for these laws has long been begun and the new methods of
thought which history must adopt are being worked out simultaneously
with the self-destruction toward which--ever dissecting and dissecting
the causes of phenomena--the old method of history is moving.


All human sciences have traveled along that path.


In another form but along the same path of reflection the other sciences
have proceeded.
 History stands on the same path.






CHAPTER XII


From the time the law of Copernicus was discovered and proved, the mere
recognition of the fact that it was not the sun but the earth that moves
sufficed to destroy the whole cosmography of the ancients.
 By disproving
that law it might have been possible to retain the old conception of
the movements of the bodies, but without disproving it, it would seem
impossible to continue studying the Ptolemaic worlds.
 But even after
the discovery of the law of Copernicus the Ptolemaic worlds were still
studied for a long time.
 Theology stood on guard for the
old views and accused the new of violating revelation.
 But when truth
conquered, theology established itself just as firmly on the new
foundation.


Just as prolonged and stubborn is the struggle now proceeding between
the old and the new conception of history, and theology in the same way
stands on guard for the old view, and accuses the new view of subverting
revelation.


In the one case as in the other, on both sides the struggle provokes
passion and stifles truth.
 On the one hand there is fear and regret for
the loss of the whole edifice constructed through the ages, on the other
is the passion for destruction.


To the men who fought against the rising truths of physical philosophy,
it seemed that if they admitted that truth it would destroy faith in
God, in the creation of the firmament, and in the miracle of Joshua the
son of Nun.


Just so it now seems as if we have only to admit the law of
inevitability, to destroy the conception of the soul, of good and evil,
and all the institutions of state and church that have been built up on
those conceptions.


So too, like Voltaire in his time, uninvited defenders of the law of
inevitability today use that law as a weapon against religion, though
the law of inevitability in history, like the law of Copernicus in
astronomy, far from destroying, even strengthens the foundation on which
the institutions of state and church are erected.


As in the question of astronomy then, so in the question of history
now, the whole difference of opinion is based on the recognition or
nonrecognition of something absolute, serving as the measure of visible
phenomena.
 In astronomy it was the immovability of the earth, in history
it is the independence of personality--free will.
"

In the first case it was necessary to renounce the consciousness of an
unreal immobility in space and to recognize a motion we did not feel;
in the present case it is similarly necessary to renounce a freedom
that does not exist, and to recognize a dependence of which we are not
conscious.
