


                     2
  When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
  And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
  Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now,
  Will be a tattered weed of small worth held:  
  Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
  Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
  To say within thine own deep sunken eyes,
  Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.

  How much more praise deserved thy beauty's use,
  If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
  Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse'
  Proving his beauty by succession thine.

    This were to be new made when thou art old,
    And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.

  For where is she so fair whose uneared womb
  Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
  Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
  Of his self-love to stop posterity?  
  Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
  Calls back the lovely April of her prime,
  So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
  Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.

    But if thou live remembered not to be,
    Die single and thine image dies with thee.



                     4
  Unthrifty loveliness why dost thou spend,
  Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
  Nature's bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
  And being frank she lends to those are free:
  Then beauteous niggard why dost thou abuse,
  The bounteous largess given thee to give?
  Profitless usurer why dost thou use
  So great a sum of sums yet canst not live?
  For having traffic with thy self alone,
  Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive,
  Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
  What acceptable audit canst thou leave?  
    Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
    Which used lives th' executor to be.



                     5
  Those hours that with gentle work did frame
  The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell
  Will play the tyrants to the very same,
  And that unfair which fairly doth excel:
  For never-resting time leads summer on
  To hideous winter and confounds him there,
  Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,
  Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:
  Then were not summer's distillation left
  A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
  Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
  Nor it nor no remembrance what it was.

    But flowers distilled though they with winter meet,
    Leese but their show, their substance still lives sweet.



                     8
  Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
  Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
  Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
  Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
  If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
  By unions married do offend thine ear,
  They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
  In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear:  
  Mark how one string sweet husband to another,
  Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
  Resembling sire, and child, and happy mother,
  Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
    Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
    Sings this to thee, 'Thou single wilt prove none'.



                     10
  For shame deny that thou bear'st love to any
  Who for thy self art so unprovident.

  Grant if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
  But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
  For thou art so possessed with murd'rous hate,
  That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
  Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
  Which to repair should be thy chief desire:
  O change thy thought, that I may change my mind,
  Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?
  Be as thy presence is gracious and kind,
  Or to thy self at least kind-hearted prove,
    Make thee another self for love of me,
    That beauty still may live in thine or thee.



                     11  
  As fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow'st,
  In one of thine, from that which thou departest,
  And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st,
  Thou mayst call thine, when thou from youth convertest,
  Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase,
  Without this folly, age, and cold decay,
  If all were minded so, the times should cease,
  And threescore year would make the world away:
  Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
  Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
  Look whom she best endowed, she gave thee more;
  Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
    She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
    Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.



                     13
  O that you were your self, but love you are
  No longer yours, than you your self here live,
  Against this coming end you should prepare,
  And your sweet semblance to some other give.
  
  Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
  Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
  Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
  And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
    O none but unthrifts, dear my love you know,
    You had a father, let your son say so.



                     14
  Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck,
  And yet methinks I have astronomy,
  But not to tell of good, or evil luck,
  Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality,
  Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell;
  Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
  Or say with princes if it shall go well
  By oft predict that I in heaven find.

  But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
  And constant stars in them I read such art
  As truth and beauty shall together thrive
  If from thy self, to store thou wouldst convert:  
    Or else of thee this I prognosticate,
    Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.

  That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
  Whereon the stars in secret influence comment.

  When I perceive that men as plants increase,
  Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky:
  Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
  And wear their brave state out of memory.



                     16  
  But wherefore do not you a mightier way
  Make war upon this bloody tyrant Time?
  And fortify your self in your decay
  With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
  Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
  And many maiden gardens yet unset,
  With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
  Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
  So should the lines of life that life repair
  Which this (Time's pencil) or my pupil pen
  Neither in inward worth nor outward fair
  Can make you live your self in eyes of men.

    To give away your self, keeps your self still,
    And you must live drawn by your own sweet skill.

  So should my papers (yellowed with their age)
  Be scorned, like old men of less truth than tongue,
  And your true rights be termed a poet's rage,
  And stretched metre of an antique song.

    But were some child of yours alive that time,
    You should live twice in it, and in my rhyme.



                     18
  Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
  Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
  Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
  And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
  Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
  And often is his gold complexion dimmed,
  And every fair from fair sometime declines,
  By chance, or nature's changing course untrimmed:  
  But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
  Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
  Nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in his shade,
  When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
    So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
    So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.



                     19
  Devouring Time blunt thou the lion's paws,
  And make the earth devour her own sweet brood,
  Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
  And burn the long-lived phoenix, in her blood,
  Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet'st,
  And do whate'er thou wilt swift-footed Time
  To the wide world and all her fading sweets:
  But I forbid thee one most heinous crime,
  O carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
  Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen,
  Him in thy course untainted do allow,
  For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
  
    Yet do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
    My love shall in my verse ever live young.

    But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure,
    Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.



                     22
  My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
  So long as youth and thou are of one date,
  But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
  Then look I death my days should expiate.

    Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
    Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.

  For through the painter must you see his skill,
  To find where your true image pictured lies,
  Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
  That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes:
  Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done,
  Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
  Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
  Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;  
    Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
    They draw but what they see, know not the heart.



                     25
  Let those who are in favour with their stars,
  Of public honour and proud titles boast,
  Whilst I whom fortune of such triumph bars
  Unlooked for joy in that I honour most;
  Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread,
  But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
  And in themselves their pride lies buried,
  For at a frown they in their glory die.

  The painful warrior famoused for fight,
  After a thousand victories once foiled,
  Is from the book of honour razed quite,
  And all the rest forgot for which he toiled:
    Then happy I that love and am beloved
    Where I may not remove nor be removed.

  Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
  May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it;
  But that I hope some good conceit of thine
  In thy soul's thought (all naked) will bestow it:
  Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
  Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
  And puts apparel on my tattered loving,
  To show me worthy of thy sweet respect,
    Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee,
    Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.



                     27
  Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
  The dear respose for limbs with travel tired,
  But then begins a journey in my head
  To work my mind, when body's work's expired.

  Save that my soul's imaginary sight
  Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
  Which like a jewel (hung in ghastly night)
  Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.



                     28
  How can I then return in happy plight
  That am debarred the benefit of rest?
  When day's oppression is not eased by night,
  But day by night and night by day oppressed.
  
  I tell the day to please him thou art bright,
  And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
  So flatter I the swart-complexioned night,
  When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.

    But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
    And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger


                     29
  When in disgrace with Fortune and men's eyes,
  I all alone beweep my outcast state,
  And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
  And look upon my self and curse my fate,
  Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
  Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
  Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope,
  With what I most enjoy contented least,
  Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
  Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
  (Like to the lark at break of day arising
  From sullen earth) sings hymns at heaven's gate,  
    For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings,
    That then I scorn to change my state with kings.

  Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
  And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
  The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
  Which I new pay as if not paid before.

    But if the while I think on thee (dear friend)
    All losses are restored, and sorrows end.

  How many a holy and obsequious tear
  Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,
  As interest of the dead, which now appear,
  But things removed that hidden in thee lie.



                     32
  If thou survive my well-contented day,
  When that churl death my bones with dust shall cover
  And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
  These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover:  
  Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
  And though they be outstripped by every pen,
  Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
  Exceeded by the height of happier men.

  O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought,
  'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
  A dearer birth than this his love had brought
  To march in ranks of better equipage:
    But since he died and poets better prove,
    Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.



                     34
  Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
  And make me travel forth without my cloak,
  To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
  Hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke?
  'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
  To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
  For no man well of such a salve can speak,
  That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
  Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief,
  Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss,
  Th' offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
  To him that bears the strong offence's cross.



                     36  
  Let me confess that we two must be twain,
  Although our undivided loves are one:
  So shall those blots that do with me remain,
  Without thy help, by me be borne alone.

    If my slight muse do please these curious days,
    The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.



                     39
  O how thy worth with manners may I sing,
  When thou art all the better part of me?
  What can mine own praise to mine own self bring:
  And what is't but mine own when I praise thee?
  Even for this, let us divided live,
  And our dear love lose name of single one,
  That by this separation I may give:
  That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone:
  O absence what a torment wouldst thou prove,
  Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave,
  To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
  Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive.
  
    And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
    By praising him here who doth hence remain.



                     40
  Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all,
  What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
  No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call,
  All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more:
  Then if for my love, thou my love receivest,
  I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest,
  But yet be blamed, if thou thy self deceivest
  By wilful taste of what thy self refusest.

  I do forgive thy robbery gentle thief
  Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
  And yet love knows it is a greater grief
  To bear greater wrong, than hate's known injury.

    Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
    Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.



                     41  
  Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
  When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
  Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
  For still temptation follows where thou art.



                     42
  That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
  And yet it may be said I loved her dearly,
  That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
  A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
  
  Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye,
  Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her,
  And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
  Suff'ring my friend for my sake to approve her.

  Then thou whose shadow shadows doth make bright
  How would thy shadow's form, form happy show,
  To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
  When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!  
  How would (I say) mine eyes be blessed made,
  By looking on thee in the living day,
  When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade,
  Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
    All days are nights to see till I see thee,
    And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
  
    Receiving nought by elements so slow,
    But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.



                     45
  The other two, slight air, and purging fire,
  Are both with thee, wherever I abide,
  The first my thought, the other my desire,
  These present-absent with swift motion slide.

  For when these quicker elements are gone
  In tender embassy of love to thee,
  My life being made of four, with two alone,
  Sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy.

  Until life's composition be recured,
  By those swift messengers returned from thee,
  Who even but now come back again assured,
  Of thy fair health, recounting it to me.

    This told, I joy, but then no longer glad,
    I send them back again and straight grow sad.



                     46  
  Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war,
  How to divide the conquest of thy sight,
  Mine eye, my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
  My heart, mine eye the freedom of that right,
  My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,
  (A closet never pierced with crystal eyes)
  But the defendant doth that plea deny,
  And says in him thy fair appearance lies.

  To side this title is impanelled
  A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,
  And by their verdict is determined
  The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part.

    As thus, mine eye's due is thy outward part,
    And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.



                     47
  Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
  And each doth good turns now unto the other,
  When that mine eye is famished for a look,
  Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother;  
  With my love's picture then my eye doth feast,
  And to the painted banquet bids my heart:
  Another time mine eye is my heart's guest,
  And in his thoughts of love doth share a part.

  So either by thy picture or my love,
  Thy self away, art present still with me,
  For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
  And I am still with them, and they with thee.
'
  The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
  Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
  As if by some instinct the wretch did know
  His rider loved not speed being made from thee:
  The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
  That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
  Which heavily he answers with a groan,
  More sharp to me than spurring to his side,
    For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
    My grief lies onward and my joy behind.

  O what excuse will my poor beast then find,
  When swift extremity can seem but slow?
  Then should I spur though mounted on the wind,
  In winged speed no motion shall I know,
  Then can no horse with my desire keep pace,
  Therefore desire (of perfect'st love being made)
  Shall neigh (no dull flesh) in his fiery race,
  But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,
    Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
    Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.

    Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
    Being had to triumph, being lacked to hope.



                     53
  What is your substance, whereof are you made,
  That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
  Since every one, hath every one, one shade,
  And you but one, can every shadow lend:
  Describe Adonis and the counterfeit,
  Is poorly imitated after you,
  On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
  And you in Grecian tires are painted new:  
  Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
  The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
  The other as your bounty doth appear,
  And you in every blessed shape we know.

    In all external grace you have some part,
    But you like none, none you for constant heart.



                     55
  Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
  Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
  But you shall shine more bright in these contents
  Than unswept stone, besmeared with sluttish time.

  When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
  And broils root out the work of masonry,
  Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn:
  The living record of your memory.

  'Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity
  Shall you pace forth, your praise shall still find room,
  Even in the eyes of all posterity
  That wear this world out to the ending doom.

    So till the judgment that your self arise,
    You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.

  So love be thou, although to-day thou fill
  Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
  To-morrow see again, and do not kill
  The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness:
  Let this sad interim like the ocean be
  Which parts the shore, where two contracted new,
  Come daily to the banks, that when they see:
  Return of love, more blest may be the view.

    Or call it winter, which being full of care,
    Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.
  
  Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
  Whilst I (my sovereign) watch the clock for you,
  Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
  When you have bid your servant once adieu.

    So true a fool is love, that in your will,
    (Though you do any thing) he thinks no ill.



                     58
  That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
  I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
  Or at your hand th' account of hours to crave,
  Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure.

  O let me suffer (being at your beck)
  Th' imprisoned absence of your liberty,
  And patience tame to sufferance bide each check,
  Without accusing you of injury.
  
  Be where you list, your charter is so strong,
  That you your self may privilage your time
  To what you will, to you it doth belong,
  Your self to pardon of self-doing crime.

    I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
    Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.



                     59
  If there be nothing new, but that which is,
  Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
  Which labouring for invention bear amis
  The second burthen of a former child!
  O that record could with a backward look,
  Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
  Show me your image in some antique book,
  Since mind at first in character was done.



                     60
  Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
  So do our minutes hasten to their end,
  Each changing place with that which goes before,
  In sequent toil all forwards do contend.

  Nativity once in the main of light,
  Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned,
  Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
  And Time that gave, doth now his gift confound.

    For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
    From me far off, with others all too near.



                     62
  Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye,
  And all my soul, and all my every part;
  And for this sin there is no remedy,
  It is so grounded inward in my heart.
  
  Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
  No shape so true, no truth of such account,
  And for my self mine own worth do define,
  As I all other in all worths surmount.

  But when my glass shows me my self indeed
  beated and chopt with tanned antiquity,
  Mine own self-love quite contrary I read:
  Self, so self-loving were iniquity.

    'Tis thee (my self) that for my self I praise,
    Painting my age with beauty of thy days.



                     63
  Against my love shall be as I am now
  With Time's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn,
  When hours have drained his blood and filled his brow
  With lines and wrinkles, when his youthful morn
  Hath travelled on to age's steepy night,
  And all those beauties whereof now he's king
  Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
  Stealing away the treasure of his spring:  
  For such a time do I now fortify
  Against confounding age's cruel knife,
  That he shall never cut from memory
  My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life.

    His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
    And they shall live, and he in them still green.



                     64
  When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
  The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age,
  When sometime lofty towers I see down-rased,
  And brass eternal slave to mortal rage.
  
    This thought is as a death which cannot choose
    But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.



                     65
  Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
  But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
  How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
  Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
  O how shall summer's honey breath hold out,
  Against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days,
  When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
  Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays?
  O fearful meditation, where alack,
  Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
  Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back,
  Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
    O none, unless this miracle have might,
    That in black ink my love may still shine bright.



                     66  
  Tired with all these for restful death I cry,
  As to behold desert a beggar born,
  And needy nothing trimmed in jollity,
  And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
  And gilded honour shamefully misplaced,
  And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
  And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
  And strength by limping sway disabled
  And art made tongue-tied by authority,
  And folly (doctor-like) controlling skill,
  And simple truth miscalled simplicity,
  And captive good attending captain ill.



                     68
  Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
  When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
  Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
  Or durst inhabit on a living brow:
  Before the golden tresses of the dead,
  The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
  To live a second life on second head,
  Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:  
  In him those holy antique hours are seen,
  Without all ornament, it self and true,
  Making no summer of another's green,
  Robbing no old to dress his beauty new,
    And him as for a map doth Nature store,
    To show false Art what beauty was of yore.



                     69
  Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view,
  Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:
  All tongues (the voice of souls) give thee that due,
  Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.

  Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned,
  But those same tongues that give thee so thine own,
  In other accents do this praise confound
  By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.



                     70
  That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,
  For slander's mark was ever yet the fair,
  The ornament of beauty is suspect,
  A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.

  So thou be good, slander doth but approve,
  Thy worth the greater being wooed of time,
  For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
  And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.

  Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days,
  Either not assailed, or victor being charged,
  Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
  To tie up envy, evermore enlarged,
    If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
    Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.

    Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
    And mock you with me after I am gone.



                     72
  O lest the world should task you to recite,
  What merit lived in me that you should love
  After my death (dear love) forget me quite,
  For you in me can nothing worthy prove.
  
  Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
  To do more for me than mine own desert,
  And hang more praise upon deceased I,
  Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
  O lest your true love may seem false in this,
  That you for love speak well of me untrue,
  My name be buried where my body is,
  And live no more to shame nor me, nor you.

    For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
    And so should you, to love things nothing worth.
  
  In me thou seest the glowing of such fire,
  That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
  As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
  Consumed with that which it was nourished by.

    This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
    To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.



                     75
  So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
  Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground;
  And for the peace of you I hold such strife
  As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found.

  Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
  Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,
  Now counting best to be with you alone,
  Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure,
  Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
  And by and by clean starved for a look,
  Possessing or pursuing no delight
  Save what is had, or must from you be took.

    Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
    Or gluttoning on all, or all away.



                     77
  Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
  Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste,
  These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
  And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.
  
  The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show,
  Of mouthed graves will give thee memory,
  Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know,
  Time's thievish progress to eternity.

  Look what thy memory cannot contain,
  Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
  Those children nursed, delivered from thy brain,
  To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.



                     78
  So oft have I invoked thee for my muse,
  And found such fair assistance in my verse,
  As every alien pen hath got my use,
  And under thee their poesy disperse.

  Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing,
  And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
  Have added feathers to the learned's wing,
  And given grace a double majesty.

  Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
  Whose influence is thine, and born of thee,
  In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
  And arts with thy sweet graces graced be.

    But thou art all my art, and dost advance
    As high as learning, my rude ignorance.

  I grant (sweet love) thy lovely argument
  Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
  Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent,
  He robs thee of, and pays it thee again,
  He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word,
  From thy behaviour, beauty doth he give
  And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
  No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
  
    Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
    Since what he owes thee, thou thy self dost pay.



                     80
  O how I faint when I of you do write,
  Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
  And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
  To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame.

  But since your worth (wide as the ocean is)
  The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
  My saucy bark (inferior far to his)
  On your broad main doth wilfully appear.

  Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
  Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride,
  Or (being wrecked) I am a worthless boat,
  He of tall building, and of goodly pride.



                     81  
  Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
  Or you survive when I in earth am rotten,
  From hence your memory death cannot take,
  Although in me each part will be forgotten.

  Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
  Though I (once gone) to all the world must die,
  The earth can yield me but a common grave,
  When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie,
  Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
  Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read,
  And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
  When all the breathers of this world are dead,
    You still shall live (such virtue hath my pen)
    Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.



                     82
  I grant thou wert not married to my muse,
  And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
  The dedicated words which writers use
  Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
  
  Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
  Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
  And therefore art enforced to seek anew,
  Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.

    And their gross painting might be better used,
    Where cheeks need blood, in thee it is abused.

    There lives more life in one of your fair eyes,
    Than both your poets can in praise devise.



                     84
  Who is it that says most, which can say more,
  Than this rich praise, that you alone, are you?
  In whose confine immured is the store,
  Which should example where your equal grew.

  Let him but copy what in you is writ,
  Not making worse what nature made so clear,
  And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
  Making his style admired every where.



                     85
  My tongue-tied muse in manners holds her still,
  While comments of your praise richly compiled,
  Reserve their character with golden quill,
  And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.

  I think good thoughts, whilst other write good words,
  And like unlettered clerk still cry Amen,
  To every hymn that able spirit affords,
  In polished form of well refined pen.



                     86  
  Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
  Bound for the prize of (all too precious) you,
  That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
  Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
  Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
  Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
  No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
  Giving him aid, my verse astonished.

  He nor that affable familiar ghost
  Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
  As victors of my silence cannot boast,
  I was not sick of any fear from thence.

    But when your countenance filled up his line,
    Then lacked I matter, that enfeebled mine.



                     87
  Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
  And like enough thou know'st thy estimate,
  The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing:
  My bonds in thee are all determinate.
  
  For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
  And for that riches where is my deserving?
  The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
  And so my patent back again is swerving.

  Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
  Or me to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking,
  So thy great gift upon misprision growing,
  Comes home again, on better judgement making.

    Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter,
    In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.

    Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
    That for thy right, my self will bear all wrong.



                     89
  Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
  And I will comment upon that offence,
  Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt:
  Against thy reasons making no defence.

  Thou canst not (love) disgrace me half so ill,
  To set a form upon desired change,
  As I'll my self disgrace, knowing thy will,
  I will acquaintance strangle and look strange:
  Be absent from thy walks and in my tongue,
  Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
  Lest I (too much profane) should do it wronk:
  And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
  
    For thee, against my self I'll vow debate,
    For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.



                     90
  Then hate me when thou wilt, if ever, now,
  Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
  join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
  And do not drop in for an after-loss:
  Ah do not, when my heart hath 'scaped this sorrow,
  Come in the rearward of a conquered woe,
  Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
  To linger out a purposed overthrow.

    And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
    Compared with loss of thee, will not seem so.



                     91  
  Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
  Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
  Some in their garments though new-fangled ill:
  Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse.



                     92
  But do thy worst to steal thy self away,
  For term of life thou art assured mine,
  And life no longer than thy love will stay,
  For it depends upon that love of thine.
  
  Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
  When in the least of them my life hath end,
  I see, a better state to me belongs
  Than that, which on thy humour doth depend.

  Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
  Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie,
  O what a happy title do I find,
  Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
    But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
    Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.



                     93
  So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
  Like a deceived husband, so love's face,
  May still seem love to me, though altered new:
  Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.

  For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
  Therefore in that I cannot know thy change,
  In many's looks, the false heart's history
  Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.
  
  But heaven in thy creation did decree,
  That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell,
  Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be,
  Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.



                     94
  They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
  That do not do the thing, they most do show,
  Who moving others, are themselves as stone,
  Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow:
  They rightly do inherit heaven's graces,
  And husband nature's riches from expense,
  Tibey are the lords and owners of their faces,
  Others, but stewards of their excellence:
  The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
  Though to it self, it only live and die,
  But if that flower with base infection meet,
  The basest weed outbraves his dignity:  
    For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds,
    Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.



                     95
  How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame,
  Which like a canker in the fragrant rose,
  Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
  O in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
  That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
  (Making lascivious comments on thy sport)
  Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise,
  Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.

  O what a mansion have those vices got,
  Which for their habitation chose out thee,
  Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot,
  And all things turns to fair, that eyes can see!
    Take heed (dear heart) of this large privilege,
    The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.

    Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
    That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.



                     98
  From you have I been absent in the spring,
  When proud-pied April (dressed in all his trim)
  Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing:
  That heavy Saturn laughed and leaped with him.

  The lily I condemned for thy hand,
  And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair,
  The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
  One blushing shame, another white despair:
  A third nor red, nor white, had stol'n of both,
  And to his robbery had annexed thy breath,
  But for his theft in pride of all his growth  
  A vengeful canker eat him up to death.

    More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
    But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee.



                     100
  Where art thou Muse that thou forget'st so long,
  To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
  Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
  Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
  Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
  In gentle numbers time so idly spent,
  Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem,
  And gives thy pen both skill and argument.

  Rise resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,
  If time have any wrinkle graven there,
  If any, be a satire to decay,
  And make time's spoils despised everywhere.

    Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
    So thou prevent'st his scythe, and crooked knife.


  
                     101
  O truant Muse what shall be thy amends,
  For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?
  Both truth and beauty on my love depends:
  So dost thou too, and therein dignified:
  Make answer Muse, wilt thou not haply say,
  'Truth needs no colour with his colour fixed,
  Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay:
  But best is best, if never intermixed'?
  Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
  Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee,
  To make him much outlive a gilded tomb:
  And to be praised of ages yet to be.



                     103
  Alack what poverty my muse brings forth,
  That having such a scope to show her pride,
  The argument all bare is of more worth
  Than when it hath my added praise beside.

  O blame me not if I no more can write!
  Look in your glass and there appears a face,
  That over-goes my blunt invention quite,  
  Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.

  Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
  To mar the subject that before was well?
  For to no other pass my verses tend,
  Than of your graces and your gifts to tell.

    And more, much more than in my verse can sit,
    Your own glass shows you, when you look in it.

    For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred,
    Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.



                     105
  Let not my love be called idolatry,
  Nor my beloved as an idol show,
  Since all alike my songs and praises be
  To one, of one, still such, and ever so.

  Fair, kind, and true, is all my argument,
  Fair, kind, and true, varying to other words,
  And in this change is my invention spent,
  Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.

    Which three till now, never kept seat in one.


  
                     106
  When in the chronicle of wasted time,
  I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
  And beauty making beautiful old rhyme,
  In praise of ladies dead, and lovely knights,
  Then in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
  Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
  I see their antique pen would have expressed,
  Even such a beauty as you master now.

  So all their praises are but prophecies
  Of this our time, all you prefiguring,
  And for they looked but with divining eyes,
  They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
    For we which now behold these present days,
    Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.



                     107
  Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul,
  Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come,
  Can yet the lease of my true love control,  
  Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.

  Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
  My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
  Since spite of him I'll live in this poor rhyme,
  While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes.



                     108
  What's in the brain that ink may character,
  Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit,
  What's new to speak, what now to register,
  That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
  Nothing sweet boy, but yet like prayers divine,
  I must each day say o'er the very same,
  Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,  
  Even as when first I hallowed thy fair name.



                     109
  O never say that I was false of heart,
  Though absence seemed my flame to qualify,
  As easy might I from my self depart,
  As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:
  That is my home of love, if I have ranged,
  Like him that travels I return again,
  Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
  So that my self bring water for my stain,
  Never believe though in my nature reigned,
  All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
  That it could so preposterously be stained,  
  To leave for nothing all thy sum of good:
    For nothing this wide universe I call,
    Save thou my rose, in it thou art my all.



                     110
  Alas 'tis true, I have gone here and there,
  And made my self a motley to the view,
  Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
  Made old offences of affections new.

  Most true it is, that I have looked on truth
  Askance and strangely: but by all above,
  These blenches gave my heart another youth,
  And worse essays proved thee my best of love.

    Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
    Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.


  
                     111
  O for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
  The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
  That did not better for my life provide,
  Than public means which public manners breeds.

  Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
  And almost thence my nature is subdued
  To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
  Pity me then, and wish I were renewed,
  Whilst like a willing patient I will drink,
  Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection,
  No bitterness that I will bitter think,
  Nor double penance to correct correction.

  In so profound abysm I throw all care
  Of others' voices, that my adder's sense,
  To critic and to flatterer stopped are:
  Mark how with my neglect I do dispense.



                     113
  Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind,
  And that which governs me to go about,
  Doth part his function, and is partly blind,
  Seems seeing, but effectually is out:
  For it no form delivers to the heart
  Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch,
  Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,  
  Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch:
  For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
  The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature,
  The mountain, or the sea, the day, or night:
  The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.

    Incapable of more, replete with you,
    My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.

    If it be poisoned, 'tis the lesser sin,
    That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.



                     115
  Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
  Even those that said I could not love you dearer,
  Yet then my judgment knew no reason why,
  My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer,
  But reckoning time, whose millioned accidents
  Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings,
  Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
  Divert strong minds to the course of alt'ring things:
  Alas why fearing of time's tyranny,
  Might I not then say 'Now I love you best,'
  When I was certain o'er incertainty,
  Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
    Love is a babe, then might I not say so
    To give full growth to that which still doth grow.


  
                     116
  Let me not to the marriage of true minds
  Admit impediments, love is not love
  Which alters when it alteration finds,
  Or bends with the remover to remove.

  Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
  And on just proof surmise, accumulate,
  Bring me within the level of your frown,
  But shoot not at me in your wakened hate:
    Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
    The constancy and virtue of your love.

  Thus policy in love t' anticipate
  The ills that were not, grew to faults assured,
  And brought to medicine a healthful state
  Which rank of goodness would by ill be cured.

    But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
    Drugs poison him that so feil sick of you.

  And ruined love when it is built anew  
  Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.

    So I return rebuked to my content,
    And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent.



                     120
  That you were once unkind befriends me now,
  And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
  Needs must I under my transgression bow,
  Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel.

  For if you were by my unkindness shaken
  As I by yours, y'have passed a hell of time,
  And I a tyrant have no leisure taken
  To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.

  O that our night of woe might have remembered
  My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
  And soon to you, as you to me then tendered
  The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits!
    But that your trespass now becomes a fee,
    Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.


  
                     121
  'Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed,
  When not to be, receives reproach of being,
  And the just pleasure lost, which is so deemed,
  Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing.

  For why should others' false adulterate eyes
  Give salutation to my sportive blood?
  Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
  Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
  No, I am that I am, and they that level
  At my abuses, reckon up their own,
  I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
  By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown
    Unless this general evil they maintain,
    All men are bad and in their badness reign.

  Or at the least, so long as brain and heart
  Have faculty by nature to subsist,
  Till each to razed oblivion yield his part
  Of thee, thy record never can be missed:
  That poor retention could not so much hold,
  Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score,
  Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
  To trust those tables that receive thee more:
    To keep an adjunct to remember thee
    Were to import forgetfulness in me.



                     124
  If my dear love were but the child of state,
  It might for Fortune's bastard be unfathered,
  As subject to time's love or to time's hate,
  Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gathered.

    To this I witness call the fools of time,
    Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.


  
                     126
  O thou my lovely boy who in thy power,
  Dost hold Time's fickle glass his fickle hour:
  Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st,
  Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st.

  If Nature (sovereign mistress over wrack)
  As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back,
  She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
  May time disgrace, and wretched minutes kill.

  Yet fear her O thou minion of her pleasure,
  She may detain, but not still keep her treasure!
    Her audit (though delayed) answered must be,
    And her quietus is to render thee.



                     127
  In the old age black was not counted fair,
  Or if it were it bore not beauty's name:
  But now is black beauty's successive heir,
  And beauty slandered with a bastard shame,
  For since each hand hath put on nature's power,  
  Fairing the foul with art's false borrowed face,
  Sweet beauty hath no name no holy bower,
  But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.

  Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black,
  Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem,
  At such who not born fair no beauty lack,
  Slandering creation with a false esteem,
    Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
    That every tongue says beauty should look so.



                     128
  How oft when thou, my music, music play'st,
  Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
  With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st
  The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
  Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap,
  To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
  Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
  At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand.

  Mad in pursuit and in possession so,
  Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme,
  A bliss in proof and proved, a very woe,
  Before a joy proposed behind a dream.

    All this the world well knows yet none knows well,  
    To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.

    And yet by heaven I think my love as rare,
    As any she belied with false compare.



                     131
  Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,  
  As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
  For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
  Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.

  And to be sure that is not false I swear,
  A thousand groans but thinking on thy face,
  One on another's neck do witness bear
  Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.

  And truly not the morning sun of heaven  
  Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
  Nor that full star that ushers in the even
  Doth half that glory to the sober west
  As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
  O let it then as well beseem thy heart
  To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
  And suit thy pity like in every part.



                     133
  Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
  For that deep wound it gives my friend and me;
  Is't not enough to torture me alone,
  But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
  Me from my self thy cruel eye hath taken,
  And my next self thou harder hast engrossed,
  Of him, my self, and thee I am forsaken,
  A torment thrice three-fold thus to be crossed:
  Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,  
  But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail,
  Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard,
  Thou canst not then use rigour in my gaol.



                     134
  So now I have confessed that he is thine,
  And I my self am mortgaged to thy will,
  My self I'll forfeit, so that other mine,
  Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
  But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
  For thou art covetous, and he is kind,
  He learned but surety-like to write for me,
  Under that bond that him as fist doth bind.

    Him have I lost, thou hast both him and me,  
    He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.



                     135
  Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy will,
  And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in over-plus,
  More than enough am I that vex thee still,
  To thy sweet will making addition thus.

  Wilt thou whose will is large and spacious,
  Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
  Shall will in others seem right gracious,
  And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
  The sea all water, yet receives rain still,
  And in abundance addeth to his store,
  So thou being rich in will add to thy will
  One will of mine to make thy large will more.

    Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill,
    Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.

    Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
    And then thou lov'st me for my name is Will.



                     137
  Thou blind fool Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
  That they behold and see not what they see?
  They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
  Yet what the best is, take the worst to be.

  If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks,  
  Be anchored in the bay where all men ride,
  Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
  Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
  Why should my heart think that a several plot,
  Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
  Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not
  To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
    In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
    And to this false plague are they now transferred.



                     138
  When my love swears that she is made of truth,
  I do believe her though I know she lies,
  That she might think me some untutored youth,
  Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.

    Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
    And in our faults by lies we flattered be.

  For if I should despair I should grow mad,
  And in my madness might speak ill of thee,
  Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
  Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.

    That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
    Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.

  Nor are mine cars with thy tongue's tune delighted,
  Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
  Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
  To any sensual feast with thee alone:
  But my five wits, nor my five senses can
  Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
  Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man,
  Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be:
    Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
    That she that makes me sin, awards me pain.

  Be it lawful I love thee as thou lov'st those,
  Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee,
  Root pity in thy heart that when it grows,
  Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.

    If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
    By self-example mayst thou be denied.



                     143
  Lo as a careful huswife runs to catch,
  One of her feathered creatures broke away,
  Sets down her babe and makes all swift dispatch
  In pursuit of the thing she would have stay:
  Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
  Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent,
  To follow that which flies before her face:
  Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
  So run'st thou after that which flies from thee,  
  Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind,
  But if thou catch thy hope turn back to me:
  And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind.

    So will I pray that thou mayst have thy Will,
    If thou turn back and my loud crying still.



                     144
  Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
  Which like two spirits do suggest me still,
  The better angel is a man right fair:
  The worser spirit a woman coloured ill.

  And whether that my angel be turned fiend,
  Suspect I may, yet not directly tell,
  But being both from me both to each friend,
  I guess one angel in another's hell.

    Yet this shall I ne'er know but live in doubt,  
    Till my bad angel fire my good one out.

    'I hate', from hate away she threw,
    And saved my life saying 'not you'.



                     146
  Poor soul the centre of my sinful earth,  
  My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
  Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth
  Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
  Why so large cost having so short a lease,
  Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
  Shall worms inheritors of this excess
  Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end?
  Then soul live thou upon thy servant's loss,
  And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
  Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
  Within be fed, without be rich no more,
    So shall thou feed on death, that feeds on men,
    And death once dead, there's no more dying then.



                     147
  My love is as a fever longing still,
  For that which longer nurseth the disease,
  Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
  Th' uncertain sickly appetite to please:
  My reason the physician to my love,  
  Angry that his prescriptions are not kept
  Hath left me, and I desperate now approve,
  Desire is death, which physic did except.

  Past cure I am, now reason is past care,
  And frantic-mad with evermore unrest,
  My thoughts and my discourse as mad men's are,
  At random from the truth vainly expressed.

    For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
    Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.

    O cunning love, with tears thou keep'st me blind,
    Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.



                     149
  Canst thou O cruel, say I love thee not,
  When I against my self with thee partake?
  Do I not think on thee when I forgot
  Am of my self, all-tyrant, for thy sake?
  Who hateth thee that I do call my friend,
  On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon,
  Nay if thou lour'st on me do I not spend
  Revenge upon my self with present moan?
  What merit do I in my self respect,
  That is so proud thy service to despise,
  When all my best doth worship thy defect,
  Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
    But love hate on for now I know thy mind,  
    Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind.

    If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
    More worthy I to be beloved of thee.

    No want of conscience hold it that I call,
    Her love, for whose dear love I rise and fall.

    But found no cure, the bath for my help lies,
    Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress' eyes.

  This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
  Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
  Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
  For men discased, but I my mistress' thrall,
    Came there for cure and this by that I prove,  
    Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.



THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

  DIANA, daughter to the Widow


  VIOLENTA, neighbour and friend to the Widow
  MARIANA, neighbour and friend to the Widow

  Lords, Officers, Soldiers, etc.
, French and Florentine  



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>




SCENE:
Rousillon; Paris; Florence; Marseilles


ACT I.
 SCENE 1.

Rousillon.
 The COUNT'S palace

Enter BERTRAM, the COUNTESS OF ROUSILLON, HELENA, and LAFEU, all in black

  COUNTESS.
 And I in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death anew;
    but I must attend his Majesty's command, to whom I am now in
    ward, evermore in subjection.

  LAFEU.
 You shall find of the King a husband, madam; you, sir, a
    father.
 He that so generally is at all times good must of
    necessity hold his virtue to you, whose worthiness would stir it
    up where it wanted, rather than lack it where there is such
    abundance.
 What hope is there of his Majesty's amendment?
  LAFEU.
 He hath abandon'd his physicians, madam; under whose
    practices he hath persecuted time with hope, and finds no other
    advantage in the process but only the losing of hope by time.

  COUNTESS.
 Would, for
    the King's sake, he were living! I think it would be the death of
    the King's disease.

  LAFEU.
 How call'd you the man you speak of, madam?
  COUNTESS.
 He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it was his
    great right to be so- Gerard de Narbon.

  BERTRAM.

  BERTRAM.

  LAFEU.
 Was this gentlewoman the
    daughter of Gerard de Narbon?
  COUNTESS.
 His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my
    overlooking.
 In her they are the better for their simpleness; she derives  
    her honesty, and achieves her goodness.
 Your commendations, madam, get from her tears.
 'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise in.

    The remembrance of her father never approaches her heart but the
    tyranny of her sorrows takes all livelihood from her cheek.
 Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead: excessive
    grief the enemy to the living.

  COUNTESS.

  BERTRAM.
 Madam, I desire your holy wishes.
 How understand we that?
  COUNTESS.
 My lord,
    'Tis an unseason'd courtier; good my lord,
    Advise him.

  LAFEU.
 He cannot want the best
    That shall attend his love.
 Heaven bless him! Farewell, Bertram.
            Exit
  BERTRAM.
 The best wishes that can be forg'd in your thoughts be
    servants to you!  [To HELENA]  Be comfortable to my mother, your
    mistress, and make much of her.

  LAFEU.
 Farewell, pretty lady; you must hold the credit of your
    father.
                             Exeunt BERTRAM and LAFEU
  HELENA.
 O, were that all! I think not on my father;
    And these great tears grace his remembrance more
    Than those I shed for him.
 What was he like?
    I have forgot him; my imagination
    Carries no favour in't but Bertram's.

    I am undone; there is no living, none,  
    If Bertram be away.

    In his bright radiance and collateral light
    Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.

    Th' ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
    The hind that would be mated by the lion
    Must die for love.
 'Twas pretty, though a plague,
    To see him every hour; to sit and draw
    His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
    In our heart's table-heart too capable
    Of every line and trick of his sweet favour.

    But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
    Must sanctify his relics.
 Who comes here?

                       Enter PAROLLES

    [Aside]  One that goes with him.

  PAROLLES.
 Save you, fair queen!
  HELENA.
 No.

  HELENA.
 And no.

  PAROLLES.
 Are you meditating on virginity?
  HELENA.
 You have some stain of soldier in you; let me ask you a
    question.
 Man is enemy to virginity; how may we barricado it
    against him?
  PAROLLES.

  HELENA.
 But he assails; and our virginity, though valiant in the
    defence, yet is weak.
 There is none.
 Man, setting down before you, will
    undermine you and blow you up.

  HELENA.
 It is not politic in the commonwealth
    of nature to preserve virginity.
 Loss of virginity is rational
    increase; and there was never virgin got till virginity was first
    lost.
 Virginity
    by being once lost may be ten times found; by being ever kept, it
    is ever lost.
 'Tis too cold a companion; away with't.

  HELENA.

  PAROLLES.
 There's little can be said in 't; 'tis against the rule
    of nature.
 To speak on the part of virginity is to accuse your
    mothers; which is most infallible disobedience.
 He that hangs
    himself is a virgin; virginity murders itself, and should be
    buried in highways, out of all sanctified limit, as a desperate
    offendress against nature.
 Besides, virginity is peevish, proud,
    idle, made of self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the
    canon.
 Out with't.
 Away
    with't.

  HELENA.
 How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?
  PAROLLES.
 Let me see.
 Marry, ill to like him that ne'er it likes.
 Off with't while 'tis vendible; answer the time
    of request.
 Virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap out of
    fashion, richly suited but unsuitable; just like the brooch and
    the toothpick, which wear not now.
 Your date is better in your
    pie and your porridge than in your cheek.
 And your virginity,
    your old virginity, is like one of our French wither'd pears: it
    looks ill, it eats drily; marry, 'tis a wither'd pear; it was
    formerly better; marry, yet 'tis a wither'd pear.
 Will you
    anything with it?
  HELENA.
 Not my virginity yet.

    There shall your master have a thousand loves,
    A mother, and a mistress, and a friend,
    A phoenix, captain, and an enemy,
    A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
    A counsellor, a traitress, and a dear;  
    His humble ambition, proud humility,
    His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
    His faith, his sweet disaster; with a world
    Of pretty, fond, adoptious christendoms
    That blinking Cupid gossips.
 God send him well!
    The court's a learning-place, and he is one-
  PAROLLES.
 'Tis pity-
  PAROLLES.
 What's pity?
  HELENA.
 That wishing well had not a body in't
    Which might be felt; that we, the poorer born,
    Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
    Might with effects of them follow our friends
    And show what we alone must think, which never
    Returns us thanks.
 Little Helen, farewell; if I can remember thee, I will
    think of thee at court.

  PAROLLES.
 Under Mars, I.

  HELENA.
 The wars hath so kept you under that you must needs be born
    under Mars.
 When he was predominant.
 That's for advantage.

  PAROLLES.
 I
    will return perfect courtier; in the which my instruction shall
    serve to naturalize thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtier's
    counsel, and understand what advice shall thrust upon thee; else  
    thou diest in thine unthankfulness, and thine ignorance makes
    thee away.
 Farewell.
 When thou hast leisure, say thy prayers;
    when thou hast none, remember thy friends.
 Get thee a good
    husband and use him as he uses thee.
 So, farewell.

 Exit
  HELENA.
 Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,
    Which we ascribe to heaven.
 The fated sky
    Gives us free scope; only doth backward pull
    Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.

    What power is it which mounts my love so high,
    That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
    The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
    To join like likes, and kiss like native things.

    Impossible be strange attempts to those
    That weigh their pains in sense, and do suppose
    What hath been cannot be.
 Who ever strove
    To show her merit that did miss her love?
    The King's disease-my project may deceive me,
    But my intents are fix'd, and will not leave me.
        Exit




ACT I.

Paris.
 Enter the KING OF FRANCE, with letters,
and divers ATTENDANTS

  KING.

  FIRST LORD.
 Nay, 'tis most credible.

  KING.
 He hath arm'd our answer,
    And Florence is denied before he comes;
    Yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see  
    The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
    To stand on either part.

  KING.
 What's he comes here?

              Enter BERTRAM, LAFEU, and PAROLLES

  FIRST LORD.
 It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord,
    Young Bertram.

  KING.
 Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face;
    Frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
    Hath well compos'd thee.
 Thy father's moral parts
    Mayst thou inherit too! Welcome to Paris.

  KING.
 I would I had that corporal soundness now,
    As when thy father and myself in friendship
    First tried our soldiership.
 He did look far
    Into the service of the time, and was  
    Discipled of the bravest.
 It much repairs me
    To talk of your good father.
 In his youth
    He had the wit which I can well observe
    To-day in our young lords; but they may jest
    Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
    Ere they can hide their levity in honour.
 Such a man
    Might be a copy to these younger times;
    Which, followed well, would demonstrate them now  
    But goers backward.
' This he wish'd.

    I, after him, do after him wish too,
    Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
    I quickly were dissolved from my hive,  
    To give some labourers room.

  SECOND LORD.
 You're loved, sir;
    They that least lend it you shall lack you first.

  KING.
 I fill a place, I know't.
 How long is't, Count,
    Since the physician at your father's died?
    He was much fam'd.

  BERTRAM.

  KING.
 Nature and sickness
    Debate it at their leisure.
 Welcome, Count;
    My son's no dearer.

  BERTRAM.
 SCENE 3.
 I will now hear; what say you of this gentlewoman?
  STEWARD.

  COUNTESS.
 What does this knave here? Get you gone, sirrah.
 The
    complaints I have heard of you I do not all believe; 'tis my
    slowness that I do not, for I know you lack not folly to commit
    them and have ability enough to make such knaveries yours.

  CLOWN.
 'Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor fellow.
 Well, sir.

  COUNTESS.
 In what case?  
  CLOWN.
 Service is no heritage; and I
    think I shall never have the blessing of God till I have issue o'
    my body; for they say bames are blessings.

  COUNTESS.
 Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.
 My poor body, madam, requires it.

  COUNTESS.
 Is this all your worship's reason?
  CLOWN.
 Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons, such as they are.

  COUNTESS.
 Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.

  CLOWN.
 Y'are shallow, madam-in great friends; for the knaves come
    to do that for me which I am aweary of.
 He that ears my land
    spares my team, and gives me leave to in the crop.
 If I be his
    cuckold, he's my drudge.
 If men
    could be contented to be what they are, there were no fear in
    marriage; for young Charbon the puritan and old Poysam the
    papist, howsome'er their hearts are sever'd in religion, their
    heads are both one; they may jowl horns together like any deer
    i' th' herd.

  COUNTESS.
 Get you gone, sir; I'll talk with you more anon.

  STEWARD.

    Of her I am to speak.

  COUNTESS.
 Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her; Helen
    I mean.
  
  CLOWN.
  [Sings]

               'Was this fair face the cause' quoth she
                 'Why the Grecians sacked Troy?
               Fond done, done fond,
                 Was this King Priam's joy?'
               With that she sighed as she stood,
               With that she sighed as she stood,
                 And gave this sentence then:
               'Among nine bad if one be good,
               Among nine bad if one be good,
                 There's yet one good in ten.
'

  COUNTESS.
 Would God would serve the world so all the year! We'd find
    no fault with the tithe-woman, if I were the parson.
 One in ten,
    quoth 'a! An we might have a good woman born before every blazing
    star, or at an earthquake, 'twould mend the lottery well: a man
    may draw his heart out ere 'a pluck one.

  COUNTESS.
  
  CLOWN.
 That man should be at woman's command, and yet no hurt done!
    Though honesty be no puritan, yet it will do no hurt; it will
    wear the surplice of humility over the black gown of a big heart.
 The business is for Helen to come hither.
 I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.

  COUNTESS.
 Faith I do.

  STEWARD.
 Fortune, she said, was no goddess, that had put such
    difference betwixt their two estates; Love no god, that would not
    extend his might only where qualities were level; Diana no queen
    of virgins, that would suffer her poor knight surpris'd without
    rescue in the first assault, or ransom afterward.
 This she  
    deliver'd in the most bitter touch of sorrow that e'er I heard
    virgin exclaim in; which I held my duty speedily to acquaint you
    withal; sithence, in the loss that may happen, it concerns you
    something to know it.

  COUNTESS.
 YOU have discharg'd this honestly; keep it to yourself.
 Pray you leave me.
 Stall this in your bosom; and I
    thank you for your honest care.
 I will speak with you further
    anon.

    If ever we are nature's, these are ours; this thorn
    Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong;
    Our blood to us, this to our blood is born.

    By our remembrances of days foregone,  
    Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.

    Her eye is sick on't; I observe her now.

  HELENA.
 What is your pleasure, madam?
  COUNTESS.
 You know, Helen,
    I am a mother to you.
 Nay, a mother.
 What's in 'mother'
    That you start at it? I say I am your mother,
    And put you in the catalogue of those
    That were enwombed mine.

    You ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan,
    Yet I express to you a mother's care.

  COUNTESS.

  HELENA.
 Pardon, madam.

    The Count Rousillon cannot be my brother:
    I am from humble, he from honoured name;
    No note upon my parents, his all noble.

    My master, my dear lord he is; and I
    His servant live, and will his vassal die.

    He must not be my brother.

  COUNTESS.
 Nor I your mother?
  HELENA.
 You are my mother, madam; would you were-
    So that my lord your son were not my brother-
    Indeed my mother! Or were you both our mothers,
    I care no more for than I do for heaven,
    So I were not his sister.
 Can't no other,
    But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?
  COUNTESS.
 What! pale again?  
    My fear hath catch'd your fondness.
 Now I see
    The myst'ry of your loneliness, and find
    Your salt tears' head.
 Therefore tell me true;
    But tell me then, 'tis so; for, look, thy cheeks
    Confess it, th' one to th' other; and thine eyes
    See it so grossly shown in thy behaviours
    That in their kind they speak it; only sin
    And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue,
    That truth should be suspected.
 Do you love my son?
  HELENA.
 Your pardon, noble mistress.

  COUNTESS.
 Come, come, disclose
    The state of your affection; for your passions
    Have to the full appeach'd.
 Then I confess,
    Here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
    That before you, and next unto high heaven,
    I love your son.

    My friends were poor, but honest; so's my love.

    Be not offended, for it hurts not him
    That he is lov'd of me; I follow him not
    By any token of presumptuous suit,
    Nor would I have him till I do deserve him;
    Yet never know how that desert should be.

    I know I love in vain, strive against hope;
    Yet in this captious and intenible sieve
    I still pour in the waters of my love,
    And lack not to lose still.
 Thus, Indian-like,
    Religious in mine error, I adore  
    The sun that looks upon his worshipper
    But knows of him no more.
 My dearest madam,
    Let not your hate encounter with my love,
    For loving where you do; but if yourself,
    Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
    Did ever in so true a flame of liking
    Wish chastely and love dearly that your Dian
    Was both herself and Love; O, then, give pity
    To her whose state is such that cannot choose
    But lend and give where she is sure to lose;
    That seeks not to find that her search implies,
    But, riddle-like, lives sweetly where she dies!
  COUNTESS.
 Madam, I had.

  COUNTESS.
 Wherefore? Tell true.

  HELENA.
 I will tell truth; by grace itself I swear.

    You know my father left me some prescriptions
    Of rare and prov'd effects, such as his reading
    And manifest experience had collected  
    For general sovereignty; and that he will'd me
    In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them,
    As notes whose faculties inclusive were
    More than they were in note.
 Amongst the rest
    There is a remedy, approv'd, set down,
    To cure the desperate languishings whereof
    The King is render'd lost.

  COUNTESS.
 This was your motive
    For Paris, was it? Speak.

  HELENA.
 My lord your son made me to think of this,
    Else Paris, and the medicine, and the King,
    Had from the conversation of my thoughts
    Haply been absent then.
 There's something in't
    More than my father's skill, which was the great'st
    Of his profession, that his good receipt
    Shall for my legacy be sanctified
    By th' luckiest stars in heaven; and, would your honour
    But give me leave to try success, I'd venture
    The well-lost life of mine on his Grace's cure.

    By such a day and hour.

  COUNTESS.
 Dost thou believe't?
  HELENA.
 Ay, madam, knowingly.

  COUNTESS.
 Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
    Means and attendants, and my loving greetings
    To those of mine in court.

    Be gone to-morrow; and be sure of this,
    What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>




ACT II.

Paris.
 The KING'S palace

Flourish of cornets.
 Enter the KING with divers young LORDS taking leave
for the Florentine war; BERTRAM and PAROLLES; ATTENDANTS

  KING.
 Farewell, young lords; these war-like principles
    Do not throw from you.

  FIRST LORD.
 'Tis our hope, sir,
    After well-ent'red soldiers, to return
    And find your Grace in health.

  KING.
 I say farewell.
 Our hearts receive your warnings.

  KING.
 Farewell.
  [To ATTENDANTS]  Come hither to me.
 'Tis not his fault, the spark.
 O, 'tis brave wars!
  PAROLLES.
'
  PAROLLES.
 An thy mind stand to 't, boy, steal away bravely.

  BERTRAM.
 I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
    Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,  
    Till honour be bought up, and no sword worn
    But one to dance with.
 By heaven, I'll steal away.
 There's honour in the theft.
 Commit it, Count.

  SECOND LORD.

  BERTRAM.

  FIRST LORD.
 Farewell, Captain.

  SECOND LORD.
 Sweet Monsieur Parolles!
  PAROLLES.
 Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin.

  FIRST LORD.
 We shall, noble Captain.

  PAROLLES.
 Mars dote on you for his novices!       Exeunt LORDS
    What will ye do?

                            Re-enter the KING

  BERTRAM.
 Stay; the King!  
  PAROLLES.
 Use a more spacious ceremony to the noble lords; you have
    restrain'd yourself within the list of too cold an adieu.
 After them, and take a more
    dilated farewell.

  BERTRAM.
 And I will do so.
 Worthy fellows; and like to prove most sinewy sword-men.

                                     Exeunt BERTRAM and PAROLLES

                              Enter LAFEU

  LAFEU.

  KING.
 I'll fee thee to stand up.

  KING.
 I would I had; so I had broke thy pate,
    And ask'd thee mercy for't.
  
  LAFEU.
 No.

  LAFEU.
 O, will you eat
    No grapes, my royal fox? Yes, but you will
    My noble grapes, an if my royal fox
    Could reach them: I have seen a medicine
    That's able to breathe life into a stone,
    Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
    With spritely fire and motion; whose simple touch
    Is powerful to araise King Pepin, nay,
    To give great Charlemain a pen in's hand
    And write to her a love-line.
 What her is this?
  LAFEU.
 Why, Doctor She! My lord, there's one arriv'd,
    If you will see her.
 Now, by my faith and honour,
    If seriously I may convey my thoughts
    In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
    With one that in her sex, her years, profession,  
    Wisdom, and constancy, hath amaz'd me more
    Than I dare blame my weakness.
 Will you see her,
    For that is her demand, and know her business?
    That done, laugh well at me.

  KING.
                       Exit LAFEU
  KING.
 Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.


                   Re-enter LAFEU with HELENA

  LAFEU.
 Nay, come your ways.
 Nay, come your ways;
    This is his Majesty; say your mind to him.

    A traitor you do look like; but such traitors
    His Majesty seldom fears.
 I am Cressid's uncle,  
    That dare leave two together.
            Exit
  KING.

    Gerard de Narbon was my father,
    In what he did profess, well found.

  KING.

  KING.
 We thank you, maiden;
    But may not be so credulous of cure,  
    When our most learned doctors leave us, and
    The congregated college have concluded
    That labouring art can never ransom nature
    From her inaidable estate-I say we must not
    So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
    To prostitute our past-cure malady
    To empirics; or to dissever so
    Our great self and our credit to esteem
    A senseless help, when help past sense we deem.
 My duty then shall pay me for my pains.

    I will no more enforce mine office on you;
    Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
    A modest one to bear me back again.

  KING.
 I cannot give thee less, to be call'd grateful.

    Thou thought'st to help me; and such thanks I give
    As one near death to those that wish him live.

    But what at full I know, thou know'st no part;
    I knowing all my peril, thou no art.

  HELENA.
 What I can do can do no hurt to try,
    Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy.

    So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown,
    When judges have been babes.
 Great floods have flown
    From simple sources, and great seas have dried
    When miracles have by the greatest been denied.

    Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
    Where most it promises; and oft it hits
    Where hope is coldest, and despair most fits.

  KING.

  HELENA.

    It is not so with Him that all things knows,
    As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows;
    But most it is presumption in us when
    The help of heaven we count the act of men.

    Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent;
    Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.

    I am not an impostor, that proclaim  
    Myself against the level of mine aim;
    But know I think, and think I know most sure,
    My art is not past power nor you past cure.
 Art thou so confident? Within what space
    Hop'st thou my cure?
  HELENA.
 The greatest Grace lending grace.

  KING.
 Upon thy certainty and confidence
    What dar'st thou venture?
  HELENA.

  KING.

    Thy life is dear; for all that life can rate
    Worth name of life in thee hath estimate:
    Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
    That happiness and prime can happy call.

    Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
    Skill infinite or monstrous desperate.

  HELENA.
 If I break time, or flinch in property
    Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die;
    And well deserv'd.
 Not helping, death's my fee;
    But, if I help, what do you promise me?
  KING.
 Make thy demand.

  HELENA.
 But will you make it even?
  KING.
 Ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven.
  
  HELENA.

    Exempted be from me the arrogance
    To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
    My low and humble name to propagate
    With any branch or image of thy state;
    But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know
    Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.

  KING.
 Here is my hand; the premises observ'd,
    Thy will by my performance shall be serv'd.

    More should I question thee, and more I must,
    Though more to know could not be more to trust,
    From whence thou cam'st, how tended on.

    Give me some help here, ho! If thou proceed
    As high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.

                                              [Flourish.
 SCENE 2.

Rousillon.
 The COUNT'S palace

Enter COUNTESS and CLOWN

  COUNTESS.
 Come on, sir; I shall now put you to the height of your
    breeding.

  CLOWN.
 To the court! Why, what place make you special, when you
    put off that with such contempt? But to the court!
  CLOWN.
 Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners, he may
    easily put it off at court.
 He that cannot make a leg, put off's
    cap, kiss his hand, and say nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip,
    nor cap; and indeed such a fellow, to say precisely, were not for
    the court; but for me, I have an answer will serve all men.

  COUNTESS.
 Marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits all questions.

  CLOWN.
 Will your answer serve fit to all questions?
  CLOWN.
 As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney, as your
    French crown for your taffety punk, as Tib's rush for Tom's
    forefinger, as a pancake for Shrove Tuesday, a morris for Mayday,
    as the nail to his hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding
    quean to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the friar's
    mouth; nay, as the pudding to his skin.
 Have you, I, say, an answer of such fitness for all
    questions?
  CLOWN.
 From below your duke to beneath your constable, it will fit
    any question.
 It must be an answer of most monstrous size that must fit
    all demands.

  CLOWN.
 But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned should
    speak truth of it.
 Here it is, and all that belongs to't.

  COUNTESS.
 I pray you, sir,
    are you a courtier?
  CLOWN.
 More, more, a
    hundred of them.
 Sir, I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.

  CLOWN.
 O Lord, sir!-Thick, thick; spare not me.
 O Lord, sir!-Nay, put me to't, I warrant you.

  COUNTESS.
 You were lately whipp'd, sir, as I think.

  COUNTESS.
 Do you cry 'O Lord, sir!' at your whipping, and 'spare
    not me'? Indeed your 'O Lord, sir!' is very sequent to your
    whipping.

  CLOWN.

  COUNTESS.

  COUNTESS.
 An end, sir! To your business: give Helen this,
    And urge her to a present answer back;
    Commend me to my kinsmen and my son.
 This is not much.
 You understand me?
  CLOWN.
 Most fruitfully; I am there before my legs.

  COUNTESS.
 Haste you again.
 SCENE 3.
 The KING'S palace

Enter BERTRAM, LAFEU, and PAROLLES

  LAFEU.

  PAROLLES.
 Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath shot
    out in our latter times.
 And so 'tis.
 Right; so I say.
 That gave him out incurable-
  PAROLLES.
 Not to be help'd-
  PAROLLES.
 Right; as 'twere a man assur'd of a-
  LAFEU.
  
  PAROLLES.
 Just; you say well; so would I have said.

  LAFEU.
 I may truly say it is a novelty to the world.

  PAROLLES.
 It is indeed.
  [Reading the ballad title]  'A Showing of a Heavenly
    Effect in an Earthly Actor.
'
  PAROLLES.
 'Fore me, I speak in
    respect-
  PAROLLES.
 Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange; that is the brief
    and the tedious of it; and he's of a most facinerious spirit that
    will not acknowledge it to be the-
  LAFEU.
 Very hand of heaven.

  PAROLLES.
 Ay; so I say.

  LAFEU.
 In a most weak-
  PAROLLES.
 And debile minister, great power, great transcendence;
    which should, indeed, give us a further use to be made than alone
    the recov'ry of the King, as to be-
  LAFEU.

  
                 Enter KING, HELENA, and ATTENDANTS

  PAROLLES.
 I would have said it; you say well.
 Here comes the King.

  LAFEU.
 I'll like a maid the better,
    whilst I have a tooth in my head.
 Mort du vinaigre! Is not this Helen?
  LAFEU.
 'Fore God, I think so.
 Go, call before me all the lords in court.
 This youthful parcel
    Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,  
    O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice
    I have to use.
 Thy frank election make;
    Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.

  HELENA.
 To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
    Fall, when love please.
 Marry, to each but one!
  LAFEU.
 I'd give bay Curtal and his furniture
    My mouth no more were broken than these boys',
    And writ as little beard.
 Peruse them well.

    Not one of those but had a noble father.

  HELENA.
 Gentlemen,
    Heaven hath through me restor'd the King to health.

  ALL.
 I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest
    That I protest I simply am a maid.

    The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me:
    'We blush that thou shouldst choose; but, be refused,
    Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever,
    We'll ne'er come there again.
'  
  KING.
 Make choice and see:
    Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.
 And grant it.
 Thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.

  LAFEU.
 The honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
    Before I speak, too threat'ningly replies.

    Love make your fortunes twenty times above
    Her that so wishes, and her humble love!
  SECOND LORD.
 My wish receive,
    Which great Love grant; and so I take my leave.
 Do all they deny her? An they were sons of mine I'd have
    them whipt; or I would send them to th' Turk to make eunuchs of.
 Be not afraid that I your hand should take;
    I'll never do you wrong for your own sake.
 These boys are boys of ice; they'll none have her.
 You are too young, too happy, and too good,
    To make yourself a son out of my blood.
 Fair one, I think not so.

  LAFEU.
 There's one grape yet; I am sure thy father drunk wine-but
    if thou be'st not an ass, I am a youth of fourteen; I have known
    thee already.

  HELENA.
  [To BERTRAM]  I dare not say I take you; but I give
    Me and my service, ever whilst I live,
    Into your guiding power.
 This is the man.

  KING.

  BERTRAM.
 Know'st thou not, Bertram,
    What she has done for me?
  BERTRAM.
 Thou know'st she has rais'd me from my sickly bed.

  BERTRAM.
 But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
    Must answer for your raising? I know her well:
    She had her breeding at my father's charge.

    A poor physician's daughter my wife! Disdain
    Rather corrupt me ever!
  KING.
 'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which
    I can build up.
 Strange is it that our bloods,
    Of colour, weight, and heat, pour'd all together,
    Would quite confound distinction, yet stand off
    In differences so mighty.
 If she be
    All that is virtuous-save what thou dislik'st,
    A poor physician's daughter-thou dislik'st
    Of virtue for the name; but do not so.

    From lowest place when virtuous things proceed,
    The place is dignified by the doer's deed;
    Where great additions swell's, and virtue none,
    It is a dropsied honour.
 Good alone
    Is good without a name.
 Vileness is so:  
    The property by what it is should go,
    Not by the title.
 She is young, wise, fair;
    In these to nature she's immediate heir;
    And these breed honour.
 Virtue and she
    Is her own dower; honour and wealth from me.
 I cannot love her, nor will strive to do 't.

  KING.
 Thou wrong'st thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.

  HELENA.
 That you are well restor'd, my lord, I'm glad.

    Let the rest go.
 My honour's at the stake; which to defeat,  
    I must produce my power.
 Here, take her hand,
    Proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
    That dost in vile misprision shackle up
    My love and her desert; that canst not dream
    We, poising us in her defective scale,
    Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know
    It is in us to plant thine honour where
    We please to have it grow.
 Speak; thine answer.
 Pardon, my gracious lord; for I submit
    My fancy to your eyes.
 When I consider
    What great creation and what dole of honour  
    Flies where you bid it, I find that she which late
    Was in my nobler thoughts most base is now
    The praised of the King; who, so ennobled,
    Is as 'twere born so.
 Take her by the hand,
    And tell her she is thine; to whom I promise
    A counterpoise, if not to thy estate
    A balance more replete.

  BERTRAM.
 I take her hand.
 As thou lov'st her,
    Thy love's to me religious; else, does err.
 Do you hear, monsieur? A word with you.

  PAROLLES.
 Your pleasure, sir?  
  LAFEU.

  PAROLLES.
 Ay; is it not a language I speak?
  PAROLLES.
 A most harsh one, and not to be understood without bloody
    succeeding.
 Are you companion to the Count Rousillon?
  PAROLLES.
 To any count; to all counts; to what is man.

  LAFEU.
 To what is count's man: count's master is of another style.

  LAFEU.
 I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man; to which title age
    cannot bring thee.

  PAROLLES.

  LAFEU.
 I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a pretty wise
    fellow; thou didst make tolerable vent of thy travel; it might
    pass.
 Do not plunge thyself too far in anger, lest thou hasten thy
    trial; which if-Lord have mercy on thee for a hen! So, my good
    window of lattice, fare thee well; thy casement I need not open,
    for I look through thee.
 Give me thy hand.

  PAROLLES.
 My lord, you give me most egregious indignity.

  LAFEU.
 Ay, with all my heart; and thou art worthy of it.

  PAROLLES.
 I have not, my lord, deserv'd it.

  LAFEU.
 Yes, good faith, ev'ry dram of it; and I will not bate thee
    a scruple.
 Well, I shall be wiser.
 Ev'n as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to pull at a smack
    o' th' contrary.
 I
    have a desire to hold my acquaintance with thee, or rather my
    knowledge, that I may say in the default 'He is a man I know.

  LAFEU.
                                 Exit  
  PAROLLES.
 I'll beat him, by my life, if I can
    meet him with any convenience, an he were double and double a
    lord.
 Sirrah, your lord and master's married; there's news for
    you; you have a new mistress.
 He is my good lord: whom I serve
    above is my master.
 Who? God?
  PAROLLES.
 Ay, sir.
 Why dost thou garter up
    thy arms o' this fashion? Dost make hose of thy sleeves? Do other
    servants so? Thou wert best set thy lower part where thy nose
    stands.
 This is hard and undeserved measure, my lord.

  LAFEU.
 Go to, sir; you were beaten in Italy for picking a kernel
    out of a pomegranate; you are a vagabond, and no true traveller;
    you are more saucy with lords and honourable personages than the
    commission of your birth and virtue gives you heraldry.
 You are
    not worth another word, else I'd call you knave.
 I leave you.

 Exit

                           Enter BERTRAM

  PAROLLES.
 Good, very, good, it is so then.
 Good, very good; let it
    be conceal'd awhile.

  PAROLLES.
 What, what, sweetheart?  
  BERTRAM.

  PAROLLES.
 To th' wars!
  BERTRAM.

  PAROLLES.
 To th' wars, my boy, to th'
      wars!
    He wears his honour in a box unseen
    That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
    Spending his manly marrow in her arms,
    Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
    Of Mars's fiery steed.
 It shall be so; I'll send her to my house,
    Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
    And wherefore I am fled; write to the King
    That which I durst not speak.
 His present gift
    Shall furnish me to those Italian fields  
    Where noble fellows strike.
 War is no strife
    To the dark house and the detested wife.

  PAROLLES.
 Go with me to my chamber and advise me.

    I'll send her straight away.
 To-morrow
    I'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.

  PAROLLES.
 'Tis hard:
    A young man married is a man that's marr'd.

    Therefore away, and leave her bravely; go.

    The King has done you wrong; but, hush, 'tis so.
 The KING'S palace

Enter HELENA and CLOWN

  HELENA.
 But thanks be given, she's very
    well, and wants nothing i' th' world; but yet she is not well.

  HELENA.
 If she be very well, what does she ail that she's not very
    well?
  CLOWN.
 Truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.

  HELENA.
 What two things?
  CLOWN.
 One, that she's not in heaven, whither God send her quickly!
    The other, that she's in earth, from whence God send her quickly!

                        Enter PAROLLES

  PAROLLES.
 Bless you, my fortunate lady!
  HELENA.
 I hope, sir, I have your good will to have mine own good
    fortunes.

  PAROLLES.
 You had my prayers to lead them on; and to keep them on,  
    have them still.
 O, my knave, how does my old lady?
  CLOWN.

  PAROLLES.
 Why, I say nothing.

  CLOWN.
 To say nothing, to do nothing, to know
    nothing, and to have nothing, is to be a great part of your
    title, which is within a very little of nothing.

  PAROLLES.
 Away! th'art a knave.

  CLOWN.
 You should have said, sir, 'Before a knave th'art a knave';
    that's 'Before me th'art a knave.
' This had been truth, sir.

  PAROLLES.
 A good knave, i' faith, and well fed.

    Madam, my lord will go away to-night:
    A very serious business calls on him.

    The great prerogative and rite of love,  
    Which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge;
    But puts it off to a compell'd restraint;
    Whose want, and whose delay, is strew'd with sweets,
    Which they distil now in the curbed time,
    To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
    And pleasure drown the brim.

  HELENA.
 What's his else?
  PAROLLES.
 That you will take your instant leave o' th' King,
    And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
    Strength'ned with what apology you think
    May make it probable need.
 What more commands he?
  PAROLLES.

  HELENA.
 In everything I wait upon his will.
 I shall report it so.

  HELENA.
 I pray you.
                              Exit PAROLLES
    Come, sirrah.
                                         Exeunt




ACT II.
 SCENE 5.

Paris.
 The KING'S palace

Enter LAFEU and BERTRAM

  LAFEU.
 But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.

  BERTRAM.
 Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.
 And by other warranted testimony.

  LAFEU.
 Here he comes; I pray you
    make us friends; I will pursue the amity

                         Enter PAROLLES

  PAROLLES.
  [To BERTRAM]  These things shall be done, sir.

  LAFEU.
 Pray you, sir, who's his tailor?
  PAROLLES.
 Sir!  
  LAFEU.

  BERTRAM.
  [Aside to PAROLLES]  Is she gone to the King?
  PAROLLES.
 She is.

  BERTRAM.
 Will she away to-night?
  PAROLLES.
 As you'll have her.

  BERTRAM.
 I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
    Given order for our horses; and to-night,
    When I should take possession of the bride,
    End ere I do begin.
 A good traveller is something at the latter end of a dinner;
    but one that lies three-thirds and uses a known truth to pass a
    thousand nothings with, should be once heard and thrice beaten.

  BERTRAM.
 Is there any unkindness between my lord and you, monsieur?
  PAROLLES.
 I know not how I have deserved to run into my lord's
    displeasure.
 You have made shift to run into 't, boots and spurs and all,
    like him that leapt into the custard; and out of it you'll run
    again, rather than suffer question for your residence.
 It may be you have mistaken him, my lord.
 And shall do so ever, though I took him at's prayers.
 Farewell, monsieur; I have spoken
    better of you than you have or will to deserve at my hand; but we
    must do good against evil.
                              Exit
  PAROLLES.

  BERTRAM.
 I think so.

  PAROLLES.
 Yes, I do know him well; and common speech
    Gives him a worthy pass.


                          Enter HELENA

  HELENA.
  
  BERTRAM.

    You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
    Which holds not colour with the time, nor does
    The ministration and required office
    On my particular.
 Prepar'd I was not
    For such a business; therefore am I found
    So much unsettled.
 Come, come, no more of that.
 And ever shall  
    With true observance seek to eke out that
    Wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd
    To equal my great fortune.

  BERTRAM.

    My haste is very great.
 Farewell; hie home.

  BERTRAM.

  BERTRAM.
 Something; and scarce so much; nothing, indeed.

    I would not tell you what I would, my lord.

    Faith, yes:
    Strangers and foes do sunder and not kiss.

  BERTRAM.
 I pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse.
 I shall not break your bidding, good my lord.

  BERTRAM.
 Where are my other men, monsieur?
    Farewell!                                        Exit HELENA  
    Go thou toward home, where I will never come
    Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.
 Bravely, coragio!                             Exeunt



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.

Florence.
 The DUKE's palace

        Flourish.
 Enter the DUKE OF FLORENCE, attended; two
               FRENCH LORDS, with a TROOP OF SOLDIERS

  DUKE.

  FIRST LORD.

  DUKE.

  DUKE.
 Be it his pleasure.

  FIRST LORD.
 But I am sure the younger of our nature,
    That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
    Come here for physic.
 Welcome shall they be
    And all the honours that can fly from us
    Shall on them settle.

    To-morrow to th' field.
                     Exeunt




ACT III.
 SCENE 2.
 The COUNT'S palace

Enter COUNTESS and CLOWN

  COUNTESS.
 It hath happen'd all as I would have had it, save that he
    comes not along with her.

  CLOWN.

  COUNTESS.
 Why, he will look upon his boot and sing; mend the ruff and
    sing; ask questions and sing; pick his teeth and sing.
 I know a
    man that had this trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for a
    song.

  COUNTESS.
 Let me see what he writes, and when he means to come.
 E'en that you have there.
                          Exit  
  COUNTESS.
  [Reads]  'I have sent you a daughter-in-law; she hath
    recovered the King and undone me.
 You shall hear I am run
    away; know it before the report come.
 My duty to you.

                                           Your unfortunate son,
                                                       BERTRAM.
'
    This is not well, rash and unbridled boy,
    To fly the favours of so good a king,
    To pluck his indignation on thy head
    By the misprizing of a maid too virtuous
    For the contempt of empire.


                           Re-enter CLOWN

  CLOWN.

  COUNTESS.
 Nay, there is some comfort in the news, some comfort; your
    son will not be kill'd so soon as I thought he would.
 Here they come will tell you more.
 For my
    part, I only hear your son was run away.
 Madam, my lord is gone, for ever gone.
 Do not say so.
 Think upon patience.
 Where is my son, I pray you?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 Madam, he's gone to serve the Duke of Florence.

    We met him thitherward; for thence we came,
    And, after some dispatch in hand at court,
    Thither we bend again.
  
    [Reads]  'When thou canst get the ring upon my finger, which
    never shall come off, and show me a child begotten of thy body
    that I am father to, then call me husband; but in such a "then" I
    write a "never.
 I prithee, lady, have a better cheer;
    If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
    Thou robb'st me of a moiety.
 Ay, madam.

  COUNTESS.
 And to be a soldier?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 Such is his noble purpose; and, believe 't,
    The Duke will lay upon him all the honour
    That good convenience claims.

  COUNTESS.
 Return you thither?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
  
  HELENA.
  [Reads]  'Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France.

  COUNTESS.
 Find you that there?
  HELENA.
 'Tis but the boldness of his hand haply, which
    his heart was not consenting to.
 A servant only, and a gentleman
    Which I have sometime known.

  COUNTESS.
 Parolles, was it not?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Ay, my good lady, he.
 A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.

    My son corrupts a well-derived nature
    With his inducement.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Indeed, good lady,
    The fellow has a deal of that too much  
    Which holds him much to have.

    Will you draw near?            Exeunt COUNTESS and GENTLEMEN
  HELENA.
'
    Nothing in France until he has no wife!
    Thou shalt have none, Rousillon, none in France
    Then hast thou all again.
 Poor lord! is't
    That chase thee from thy country, and expose
    Those tender limbs of thine to the event
    Of the non-sparing war? And is it I
    That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
    Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
    Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers,  
    That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
    Fly with false aim; move the still-piecing air,
    That sings with piercing; do not touch my lord.
 Better 'twere
    I met the ravin lion when he roar'd
    With sharp constraint of hunger; better 'twere
    That all the miseries which nature owes
    Were mine at once.
 I will be gone,
    That pitiful rumour may report my flight
    To consolate thine ear.
 Come, night; end, day.
 SCENE 3.

Florence.

  BERTRAM.
 Then go thou forth;
    And Fortune play upon thy prosperous helm,
    As thy auspicious mistress!
  BERTRAM.
 This very day,
    Great Mars, I put myself into thy file;
    Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
    A lover of thy drum, hater of love.
 SCENE 4.
 Alas! and would you take the letter of her?
    Might you not know she would do as she has done
    By sending me a letter? Read it again.

  STEWARD.
  [Reads]  'I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone.

    Ambitious love hath so in me offended
    That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon,
    With sainted vow my faults to have amended.

    Write, write, that from the bloody course of war
    My dearest master, your dear son, may hie.

    Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far
    His name with zealous fervour sanctify.

    His taken labours bid him me forgive;
    I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth
    From courtly friends, with camping foes to live,
    Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth.

    He is too good and fair for death and me;
    Whom I myself embrace to set him free.

  STEWARD.
 Pardon me, madam;
    If I had given you this at over-night,
    She might have been o'er ta'en; and yet she writes
    Pursuit would be but vain.
 What angel shall
    Bless this unworthy husband? He cannot thrive,
    Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear
    And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath
    Of greatest justice.

    Dispatch the most convenient messenger.

    When haply he shall hear that she is gone  
    He will return; and hope I may that she,
    Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
    Led hither by pure love.
 Which of them both
    Is dearest to me I have no skill in sense
    To make distinction.

    My heart is heavy, and mine age is weak;
    Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.
     Exeunt




ACT III.
 Enter an old WIDOW OF FLORENCE, her daughter DIANA,
VIOLENTA, and MARIANA, with other CITIZENS

  WIDOW.

  DIANA.
 It is reported that he has taken their great'st commander;
    and that with his own hand he slew the Duke's brother.
 Hark! you
    may know by their trumpets.
 Well, Diana, take heed of this French earl; the
    honour of a maid is her name, and no legacy is so rich as
    honesty.
 I have told my neighbour how you have been solicited by a
    gentleman his companion.

  MARIANA.
 Beware of  
    them, Diana: their promises, enticements, oaths, tokens, and all
    these engines of lust, are not the things they go under; many a
    maid hath been seduced by them; and the misery is, example, that
    so terrible shows in the wreck of maidenhood, cannot for all that
    dissuade succession, but that they are limed with the twigs that
    threatens them.

  DIANA.
 I know she will lie
    at my house: thither they send one another.
 I'll question her.
 To Saint Jaques le Grand.
 Ay, marry, is't.

  HELENA.
 Is it yourself?
  WIDOW.
 If you shall please so, pilgrim.

  HELENA.
 I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.

  WIDOW.
 You came, I think, from France?
  HELENA.
 I did so.

  WIDOW.
 Here you shall see a countryman of yours
    That has done worthy service.

  HELENA.
 Know you such a one?
  HELENA.
 But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him;
    His face I know not.

  DIANA.
 What some'er he is,
    He's bravely taken here.
 Ay, surely, mere the truth; I know his lady.

  DIANA.
 There is a gentleman that serves the Count
    Reports but coarsely of her.

  HELENA.
 What's his name?
  DIANA.

  HELENA.
 O, I believe with him,
    In argument of praise, or to the worth
    Of the great Count himself, she is too mean
    To have her name repeated; all her deserving
    Is a reserved honesty, and that
    I have not heard examin'd.

  DIANA.
 Alas, poor lady!
    'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife
    Of a detesting lord.

  WIDOW.
 I sweet, good creature, wheresoe'er she is
    Her heart weighs sadly.
 This young maid might do her
    A shrewd turn, if she pleas'd.

  HELENA.
 How do you mean?
    May be the amorous Count solicits her  
    In the unlawful purpose.

  WIDOW.
 The gods forbid else!
  WIDOW.
 He-
    That with the plume; 'tis a most gallant fellow.

    I would he lov'd his wife; if he were honester
    He were much goodlier.
 'Tis pity he is not honest.
 Yond's that same knave
    That leads him to these places; were I his lady
    I would poison that vile rascal.

  HELENA.
 Which is he?
  DIANA.
 That jack-an-apes with scarfs.
 Why is he melancholy?
  HELENA.
 Perchance he's hurt i' th' battle.
 Lose our drum! well.
 He's shrewdly vex'd at something.

    Look, he has spied us.

  WIDOW.
 And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier!
                              Exeunt BERTRAM, PAROLLES, and ARMY
  WIDOW.
 Come, pilgrim, I will bring you
    Where you shall host.

  HELENA.
 I humbly thank you.

    Please it this matron and this gentle maid
    To eat with us to-night; the charge and thanking
    Shall be for me, and, to requite you further,  
    I will bestow some precepts of this virgin,
    Worthy the note.

    BOTH.
 We'll take your offer kindly.
                   Exeunt




ACT III.
 SCENE 6.

Camp before Florence

Enter BERTRAM, and the two FRENCH LORDS

  SECOND LORD.
 Nay, good my lord, put him to't; let him have his way.

  FIRST LORD.
 If your lordship find him not a hiding, hold me no more
    in your respect.
 Do you think I am so far deceived in him?
  SECOND LORD.

  FIRST LORD.
 It were fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far in his
    virtue, which he hath not, he might at some great and trusty
    business in a main danger fail you.

  BERTRAM.
 I would I knew in what particular action to try him.
 None better than to let him fetch off his drum, which
    you hear him so confidently undertake to do.

  SECOND LORD.
 Be but your lordship present at
    his examination; if he do not, for the promise of his life and in
    the highest compulsion of base fear, offer to betray you and
    deliver all the intelligence in his power against you, and that
    with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never trust my
    judgment in anything.
 O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum; he
    says he has a stratagem for't.


                      Enter PAROLLES

  SECOND LORD.
 O, for the love of laughter, hinder not the honour of
    his design; let him fetch off his drum in any hand.
 How now, monsieur! This drum sticks sorely in your  
    disposition.
 A pox on 't; let it go; 'tis but a drum.

  PAROLLES.
 But a drum! Is't but a drum? A drum so lost! There was
    excellent command: to charge in with our horse upon our own
    wings, and to rend our own soldiers!
  FIRST LORD.

  BERTRAM.
 It might have been recovered.

  BERTRAM.
 It might, but it is not now.

  PAROLLES.
 But that the merit of service is
    seldom attributed to the true and exact performer, I would have
    that drum or another, or 'hic jacet.
'
  BERTRAM.
 Why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur.
 If you think
    your mystery in stratagem can bring this instrument of honour
    again into his native quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise,
    and go on; I will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit.
 If you  
    speed well in it, the Duke shall both speak of it and extend to
    you what further becomes his greatness, even to the utmost
    syllable of our worthiness.

  PAROLLES.
 I'll about it this evening; and I will presently pen
    down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my certainty, put myself
    into my mortal preparation; and by midnight look to hear further
    from me.
 May I be bold to acquaint his Grace you are gone about it?
  PAROLLES.
 I know not what the success will be, my lord, but the
    attempt I vow.
 I know th' art valiant; and, to the of thy soldiership,
    will subscribe for thee.
 Farewell.

  PAROLLES.
 No more than a fish loves water.

  FIRST LORD.
 You do not know him, my lord, as we do.

  BERTRAM.
 None in the world; but return with an invention, and
    clap upon you two or three probable lies.
 But we have almost
    emboss'd him.
 When his disguise and
    he is parted, tell me what a sprat you shall find him; which you
    shall see this very night.

  SECOND LORD.
 I must go look my twigs; he shall be caught.

  BERTRAM.
 As't please your lordship.
 I'll leave you.
   Exit
  BERTRAM.
 Now will I lead you to the house, and show you
    The lass I spoke of.

  FIRST LORD.
 But you say she's honest.

  BERTRAM.
 That's all the fault.
 I spoke with her but once,  
    And found her wondrous cold; but I sent to her,
    By this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
    Tokens and letters which she did re-send;
    And this is all I have done.
 She's a fair creature;
    Will you go see her?
  FIRST LORD.
 With all my heart, my lord.

Florence.
 The WIDOW'S house

Enter HELENA and WIDOW

  HELENA.

  WIDOW.
 Though my estate be fall'n, I was well born,
    Nothing acquainted with these businesses;
    And would not put my reputation now
    In any staining act.
 Nor would I wish you.

  FIRST give me trust the Count he is my husband,
    And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken
    Is so from word to word; and then you cannot,
    By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
    Err in bestowing it.

  WIDOW.

  HELENA.
 Take this purse of gold,  
    And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
    Which I will over-pay and pay again
    When I have found it.
 Now I see
    The bottom of your purpose.

  HELENA.
 It is no more
    But that your daughter, ere she seems as won,
    Desires this ring; appoints him an encounter;
    In fine, delivers me to fill the time,  
    Herself most chastely absent.
 After this,
    To marry her, I'll add three thousand crowns
    To what is pass'd already.

    Instruct my daughter how she shall persever,
    That time and place with this deceit so lawful
    May prove coherent.

  HELENA.

    But let's about it.
                                   Exeunt



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>




ACT IV.
 SCENE 1.

Without the Florentine camp

Enter SECOND FRENCH LORD with five or six other SOLDIERS in ambush

  SECOND LORD.

    When you sally upon him, speak what terrible language you will;
    though you understand it not yourselves, no matter; for we must
    not seem to understand him, unless some one among us, whom we
    must produce for an interpreter.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Good captain, let me be th' interpreter.
 No, sir, I warrant you.

  SECOND LORD.
 But what linsey-woolsey has thou to speak to us again?
  FIRST SOLDIER.
 E'en such as you speak to me.
 He must think us some band of strangers i' th'
    adversary's entertainment.
 As for you, interpreter, you must  
    seem very politic.
 But couch, ho! here he comes; to beguile two
    hours in a sleep, and then to return and swear the lies he forges.


                         Enter PAROLLES

  PAROLLES.
 What shall I say I have done? It must be a
    very plausive invention that carries it.

  SECOND LORD.

  PAROLLES.
 Yet slight ones will not carry it.

    They will say 'Came you off with so little?' And great ones I
    dare not give.
 I would the cutting of my garments would serve the turn,
    or the breaking of my Spanish sword.

  SECOND LORD.
 We cannot afford you so.
 Or the baring of my beard; and to say it was in
    stratagem.
 'Twould not do.

  PAROLLES.
 Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripp'd.
 Hardly serve.

  PAROLLES.
 Though I swore I leap'd from the window of the citadel-
  SECOND LORD.
 How deep?
  PAROLLES.

  SECOND LORD.
 Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed.
 I would I had any drum of the enemy's; I would swear I
    recover'd it.

  SECOND LORD.
          [Alarum within]
  PAROLLES.
 A drum now of the enemy's!  
  SECOND LORD.
 Throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo.

  PAROLLES.
 O, ransom, ransom! Do not hide mine eyes.

                                            [They blindfold him]
  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Boskos thromuldo boskos.

  PAROLLES.
 I know you are the Muskos' regiment,
    And I shall lose my life for want of language.

    If there be here German, or Dane, Low Dutch,
    Italian, or French, let him speak to me;
    I'll discover that which shall undo the Florentine.
 I understand thee, and can speak thy
    tongue.
 O!
  FIRST SOLDIER.

  SECOND LORD.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Haply thou mayst inform
    Something to save thy life.
  
  PAROLLES.
 O, let me live,
    And all the secrets of our camp I'll show,
    Their force, their purposes.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 But wilt thou faithfully?
  PAROLLES.
 If I do not, damn me.
 Acordo linta.

    Come on; thou art granted space.

                   Exit, PAROLLES guarded.
 A short alarum within
  SECOND LORD.

  SECOND SOLDIER.

  SECOND LORD.
 Till then I'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
 SCENE 2.

Florence.
 They told me that your name was Fontibell.

  DIANA.
 No, my good lord, Diana.
 Titled goddess;
    And worth it, with addition! But, fair soul,
    In your fine frame hath love no quality?
    If the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
    You are no maiden, but a monument;
    When you are dead, you should be such a one
    As you are now, for you are cold and stern;
    And now you should be as your mother was
    When your sweet self was got.

  DIANA.
 She then was honest.

  BERTRAM.

    My mother did but duty; such, my lord,
    As you owe to your wife.
 No more o'that!  
    I prithee do not strive against my vows.

  BERTRAM.
 'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
    But the plain single vow that is vow'd true.
  
  BERTRAM.
 Stand no more off,
    But give thyself unto my sick desires,
    Who then recovers.

  DIANA.
 I see that men make ropes in such a scarre
    That we'll forsake ourselves.
 Give me that ring.

  DIANA.
 Will you not, my lord?
  BERTRAM.

  BERTRAM.
 Here, take my ring;
    My house, mine honour, yea, my life, be thine,
    And I'll be bid by thee.

    Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
    When you have conquer'd my yet maiden bed,
    Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me:
    My reasons are most strong; and you shall know them
    When back again this ring shall be deliver'd.

    And on your finger in the night I'll put
    Another ring, that what in time proceeds
    May token to the future our past deeds.

    Adieu till then; then fail not.

  BERTRAM.
 A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.

 Exit  
  DIANA.
 He had sworn to marry me
    When his wife's dead; therefore I'll lie with him
    When I am buried.
 Since Frenchmen are so braid,
    Marry that will, I live and die a maid.

    Only, in this disguise, I think't no sin
    To cozen him that would unjustly win.
                   Exit




ACT IV.
 SCENE 3.

The Florentine camp

Enter the two FRENCH LORDS, and two or three SOLDIERS

  SECOND LORD.
 You have not given him his mother's letter?
  FIRST LORD.
 I have deliv'red it an hour since.

  SECOND LORD.
 He has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking off
    so good a wife and so sweet a lady.

  FIRST LORD.
 Especially he hath incurred the everlasting displeasure
    of the King, who had even tun'd his bounty to sing happiness to
    him.

  SECOND LORD.
 When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and I am the grave
    of it.
 He hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in Florence,
    of a most chaste renown; and this night he fleshes his will in
    the spoil of her honour.
 Merely our own traitors.

  SECOND LORD.

  SECOND LORD.

  SECOND LORD.
 In the meantime, what hear you of these wars?
  FIRST LORD.
 I hear there is an overture of peace.

  SECOND LORD.
 Nay, I assure you, a peace concluded.

  FIRST LORD.
 What will Count Rousillon do then? Will he travel
    higher, or return again into France?
  SECOND LORD.
 I perceive, by this demand, you are not altogether  
    of his counsel.

  FIRST LORD.
 Let it be forbid, sir! So should I be a great deal
    of his act.

  FIRST LORD.
 Her death
    itself, which could not be her office to say is come, was
    faithfully confirm'd by the rector of the place.

  FIRST LORD.

  FIRST LORD.

  SECOND LORD.
 How mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our
    losses!  
  FIRST LORD.

  SECOND LORD.
 The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and ill
    together.
 Our virtues would be proud if our faults whipt them
    not; and our crimes would despair if they were not cherish'd by
    our virtues.


                      Enter a MESSENGER

    How now? Where's your master?
  SERVANT.
 His lordship will next morning for France.

  SECOND LORD.
 They shall be no more than needful there, if they were
    more than they can commend.

  FIRST LORD.
 They cannot be too sweet for the King's tartness.


                        Enter BERTRAM  

    How now, my lord, is't not after midnight?
  BERTRAM.
 I have to-night dispatch'd sixteen businesses, a month's
    length apiece; by an abstract of success: I have congied with the
    Duke, done my adieu with his nearest; buried a wife, mourn'd for
    her; writ to my lady mother I am returning; entertain'd my
    convoy; and between these main parcels of dispatch effected many
    nicer needs.
 The last was the greatest, but that I have not ended
    yet.
 If the business be of any difficulty and this morning
    your departure hence, it requires haste of your lordship.

  BERTRAM.
 I mean the business is not ended, as fearing to hear of it
    hereafter.
 But shall we have this dialogue between the Fool and
    the Soldier? Come, bring forth this counterfeit module has
    deceiv'd me like a double-meaning prophesier.

  SECOND LORD.
 Bring him forth.
  [Exeunt SOLDIERS]  Has sat i' th'
    stocks all night, poor gallant knave.
 How does he carry himself?
  SECOND LORD.
 I have told your lordship already the stocks carry  
    him.
 And what think you he hath confess'd?
  BERTRAM.
 Nothing of me, has 'a?
  SECOND LORD.
 His confession is taken, and it shall be read to his
    face; if your lordship be in't, as I believe you are, you must
    have the patience to hear it.
 A plague upon him! muffled! He can say nothing of me.

  SECOND LORD.
 Hush, hush! Hoodman comes.
 Portotartarossa.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 What will you say without
    'em?
  PAROLLES.
 Bosko chimurcho.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 YOU are a merciful general.
 Our General bids you
    answer to what I shall ask you out of a note.
 And truly, as I hope to live.
 'First demand of him how many horse the Duke is
    strong.

    The troops are all scattered, and the commanders very poor
    rogues, upon my reputation and credit, and as I hope to live.

  FIRST SOLDIER.

  BERTRAM.
 All's one to him.
 Y'are deceiv'd, my lord; this is Monsieur Parolles,
    the gallant militarist-that was his own phrase-that had the whole
    theoric of war in the knot of his scarf, and the practice in the
    chape of his dagger.
  
  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Well, that's set down.

  PAROLLES.

  SECOND LORD.

  BERTRAM.
 But I con him no thanks for't in the nature he delivers it.

  PAROLLES.
 'Poor rogues' I pray you say.

  FIRST SOLDIER.

  PAROLLES.
 I humbly thank you, sir.
'
    What say you to that?
  PAROLLES.
 By my troth, sir, if I were to live this present hour, I
    will tell true.
 Let me see: Spurio, a hundred and fifty;
    Sebastian, so many; Corambus, so many; Jaques, so many; Guiltian,
    Cosmo, Lodowick, and Gratii, two hundred fifty each; mine own
    company, Chitopher, Vaumond, Bentii, two hundred fifty each; so
    that the muster-file, rotten and sound, upon my life, amounts not
    to fifteen thousand poll; half of the which dare not shake the
    snow from off their cassocks lest they shake themselves to
    pieces.
 What shall be done to him?
  SECOND LORD.
 Nothing, but let him have thanks.
 Demand of him my
    condition, and what credit I have with the Duke.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Well, that's set down.
 I beseech you, let me answer to the particular of the
    inter'gatories.
 I know him: 'a was a botcher's prentice in Paris, from
    whence he was whipt for getting the shrieve's fool with child-a
    dumb innocent that could not say him nay.

  BERTRAM.
 Upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.
 Nay, look not so upon me; we shall hear of your
    lordship anon.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 The Duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of
    mine; and writ to me this other day to turn him out o' th' band.

  PAROLLES.
 Here 'tis; here's a paper.
 I do not know if it be it or no.

  SECOND LORD.
 Excellently.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 That is not the Duke's letter, sir; that is an
    advertisement to a proper maid in Florence, one Diana, to take
    heed of the allurement of one Count Rousillon, a foolish idle
    boy, but for all that very ruttish.
  
  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Nay, I'll read it first by your favour.
 My meaning in't, I protest, was very honest in the behalf
    of the maid; for I knew the young Count to be a dangerous and
    lascivious boy, who is a whale to virginity, and devours up all
    the fry it finds.

  BERTRAM.
 Damnable both-sides rogue!
  FIRST SOLDIER.
                                         [Reads]
    'When he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and take it;
    After he scores, he never pays the score.

    Half won is match well made; match, and well make it;
    He ne'er pays after-debts, take it before.

    And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this:
    Men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss;
    For count of this, the Count's a fool, I know it,
    Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.

    Thine, as he vow'd to thee in thine ear,
                                                   PAROLLES.
 He shall be whipt through the army with this rhyme in's
    forehead.

  BERTRAM.
 I could endure anything before but a cat, and now he's a
    cat to me.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 My life, sir, in any case! Not that I am afraid to die,
    but that, my offences being many, I would repent out the
    remainder of nature.
 Let me live, sir, in a dungeon, i' th'
    stocks, or anywhere, so I may live.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 We'll see what may be done, so you confess freely;
    therefore, once more to this Captain Dumain: you have answer'd to
    his reputation with the Duke, and to his valour; what is his
    honesty?
  PAROLLES.
 He professes not keeping of
    oaths; in breaking 'em he is stronger than Hercules.

    Drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be swine-drunk; and
    in his sleep he does little harm, save to his bedclothes about
    him; but they know his conditions and lay him in straw.
 I have  
    but little more to say, sir, of his honesty.
 I begin to love him for this.
 For this description of thine honesty? A pox upon him! For
    me, he's more and more a cat.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Faith, sir, has led the drum before the English
    tragedians-to belie him I will not-and more of his soldier-ship
    I know not, except in that country he had the honour to be the
    officer at a place there called Mile-end to instruct for the
    doubling of files-I would do the man what honour I can-but of
    this I am not certain.
 He hath out-villain'd villainy so far that the rarity
    redeems him.

  BERTRAM.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 His qualities being at this poor price, I need not
    to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt.

  PAROLLES.
 Sir, for a cardecue he will sell the fee-simple of his
    salvation, the inheritance of it; and cut th' entail from all  
    remainders and a perpetual succession for it perpetually.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Why does he ask him of me?
  FIRST SOLDIER.
 What's he?
  PAROLLES.
 E'en a crow o' th' same nest; not altogether so great as
    the first in goodness, but greater a great deal in evil.
 He
    excels his brother for a coward; yet his brother is reputed one
    of the best that is.
 If your life be saved, will you undertake to betray
    the Florentine?
  PAROLLES.
 Ay, and the Captain of his Horse, Count Rousillon.

  FIRST SOLDIER.

    Yet who would have suspected an ambush where I was taken?
  FIRST SOLDIER.
 There is no remedy, sir, but you must die.

  PAROLLES.
 O Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death!
  FIRST SOLDIER.
  [Unmuffling him]  So look about you; know you any here?
  BERTRAM.

  FIRST LORD.
 God bless you, Captain Parolles.

  SECOND LORD.

  FIRST LORD.
 Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafeu? I am
    for France.

  SECOND LORD.

                                        Exeunt BERTRAM and LORDS
  FIRST SOLDIER.
 You are undone, Captain, all but your scarf; that
    has a knot on 't yet.

  PAROLLES.
 Who cannot be crush'd with a plot?
  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Fare ye well, sir; I am for France too; we shall speak of
    you there.
                                Exit with SOLDIERS
  PAROLLES.
 Yet am I thankful.
 If my heart were great,
    'Twould burst at this.
 Captain I'll be no more;
    But I will eat, and drink, and sleep as soft
    As captain shall.
 Simply the thing I am
    Shall make me live.
 Who knows himself a braggart,
    Let him fear this; for it will come to pass
    That every braggart shall be found an ass.

    Rust, sword; cool, blushes; and, Parolles, live
    Safest in shame.
 Being fool'd, by fool'ry thrive.

    There's place and means for every man alive.

    I'll after them.
                                        Exit




ACT IV SCENE 4.

The WIDOW'S house

Enter HELENA, WIDOW, and DIANA

  HELENA.
 That you may well perceive I have not wrong'd you!
    One of the greatest in the Christian world
    Shall be my surety; fore whose throne 'tis needful,
    Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel.

    Time was I did him a desired office,
    Dear almost as his life; which gratitude
    Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth,
    And answer 'Thanks.
' I duly am inform'd
    His Grace is at Marseilles, to which place
    We have convenient convoy.
 The army breaking,
    My husband hies him home; where, heaven aiding,
    And by the leave of my good lord the King,
    We'll be before our welcome.
  
  HELENA.
 Nor you, mistress,
    Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour
    To recompense your love.
 Doubt not but heaven
    Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower,
    As it hath fated her to be my motive
    And helper to a husband.
 But, O strange men!
    That can such sweet use make of what they hate,
    When saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts
    Defiles the pitchy night.
 You, Diana,
    Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
    Something in my behalf.

  DIANA.
 Let death and honesty
    Go with your impositions, I am yours
    Upon your will to suffer.

  HELENA.
 Still the fine's the crown.

    Whate'er the course, the end is the renown.

Rousillon.
 No, no, no, son was misled with a snipt-taffeta fellow
    there, whose villainous saffron would have made all the unbak'd
    and doughy youth of a nation in his colour.

  COUNTESS.
 I would I had not known him.
 It was the death of the most
    virtuous gentlewoman that ever nature had praise for creating.
 I could not have owed her a more rooted love.

  LAFEU.

  CLOWN.
 They are not sallet-herbs, you knave; they are nose-herbs.

  CLOWN.
 Your distinction?
  CLOWN.
 I would cozen the man of his wife, and do his service.
 And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do her service.

  LAFEU.

  CLOWN.

  LAFEU.
 No, no, no.

  CLOWN.

  LAFEU.
 Faith, sir, 'a has an English name; but his fisnomy is more
    hotter in France than there.

  LAFEU.

  LAFEU.
 Hold thee, there's my purse.
 I give thee not this to suggest
    thee from thy master thou talk'st of; serve him still.

  CLOWN.
 I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a great fire;  
    and the master I speak of ever keeps a good fire.
 I
    am for the house with the narrow gate, which I take to be too
    little for pomp to enter.
 Some that humble themselves may; but
    the many will be too chill and tender: and they'll be for the
    flow'ry way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire.
 Go thy ways;
    let my horses be well look'd to, without any tricks.
 A shrewd knave, and an unhappy.

  COUNTESS.
 By his authority he remains here, which he thinks is
    a patent for his sauciness; and indeed he has no pace, but runs
    where he will.
 I like him well; 'tis not amiss.
 His Highness hath promis'd me to do it; and, to
    stop up the displeasure he hath conceived against your son, there
    is no fitter matter.
 It rejoices me that I hope I shall see him ere I die.

    I have letters that my son will be here to-night.
 I shall beseech
    your lordship to remain with me tal they meet together.

  LAFEU.
 You need but plead your honourable privilege.

  LAFEU.
 Lady, of that I have made a bold charter; but, I thank my
    God, it holds yet.


                         Re-enter CLOWN  

  CLOWN.

  LAFEU.

  CLOWN.
 But it is your carbonado'd face.

  LAFEU.

  CLOWN.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>




ACT V.
 A street

Enter HELENA, WIDOW, and DIANA, with two ATTENDANTS

  HELENA.
 But this exceeding posting day and night
    Must wear your spirits low; we cannot help it.

    But since you have made the days and nights as one,
    To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
    Be bold you do so grow in my requital
    As nothing can unroot you.


                      Enter a GENTLEMAN

    In happy time!
    This man may help me to his Majesty's ear,
    If he would spend his power.
 God save you, sir.
 And you.

  HELENA.
 Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.

  GENTLEMAN.
 I have been sometimes there.

  HELENA.
 I do presume, sir, that you are not fall'n
    From the report that goes upon your goodness;  
    And therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions,
    Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
    The use of your own virtues, for the which
    I shall continue thankful.

  GENTLEMAN.
 That it will please you
    To give this poor petition to the King;
    And aid me with that store of power you have
    To come into his presence.

  GENTLEMAN.
 The King's not here.

  WIDOW.

    I do beseech you, whither is he gone?
  GENTLEMAN.
  
  HELENA.

    I will come after you with what good speed
    Our means will make us means.

  GENTLEMAN.
 This I'll do for you.
                                      Exeunt




ACT V SCENE 2.
 The inner court of the COUNT'S palace

Enter CLOWN and PAROLLES

  PAROLLES.
 I
    have ere now, sir, been better known to you, when I have held
    familiarity with fresher clothes; but I am now, sir, muddied in
    Fortune's mood, and smell somewhat strong of her strong
    displeasure.
 I will henceforth eat no fish
    of Fortune's butt'ring.
 Prithee, allow the wind.
 Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir; I spake but by
    a metaphor.

  PAROLLES.
 Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.

  CLOWN.
 Foh! prithee stand away.
 A paper from Fortune's close-stool
    to give to a nobleman! Look here he comes himself.


                           Enter LAFEU  

    Here is a pur of Fortune's, sir, or of Fortune's cat, but not
    a musk-cat, that has fall'n into the unclean fishpond of her
    displeasure, and, as he says, is muddied withal.
 Pray you, sir,
    use the carp as you may; for he looks like a poor, decayed,
    ingenious, foolish, rascally knave.
 I do pity his distress
    in my similes of comfort, and leave him to your lordship.

 Exit
  PAROLLES.

  LAFEU.
 And what would you have me to do? 'Tis too late to pare her
    nails now.
 Wherein have you played the knave with Fortune, that
    she should scratch you, who of herself is a good lady and would
    not have knaves thrive long under her? There's a cardecue for
    you.

  PAROLLES.
 I beseech your honour to hear me one single word.

  LAFEU.
 You beg a single penny more; come, you shall ha't; save your
    word.

  PAROLLES.

  LAFEU.
 How does your drum?
  PAROLLES.
 O my good lord, you were the first that found me.

  LAFEU.
 Was I, in sooth? And I was the first that lost thee.

  PAROLLES.

  LAFEU.
 Out upon thee, knave! Dost thou put upon me at once both the
    office of God and the devil? One brings the in grace, and the
    other brings thee out.
 Sirrah, inquire further after me; I had
    talk of you last night.
 Go to; follow.

  PAROLLES.
 I praise God for you.

Rousillon.
 Enter KING, COUNTESS, LAFEU, the two FRENCH LORDS, with ATTENDANTS

  KING.
 We lost a jewel of her, and our esteem
    Was made much poorer by it; but your son,
    As mad in folly, lack'd the sense to know
    Her estimation home.
 'Tis past, my liege;
    And I beseech your Majesty to make it
    Natural rebellion, done i' th' blaze of youth,
    When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force,
    O'erbears it and burns on.
 This I must say-
    But first, I beg my pardon: the young lord
    Did to his Majesty, his mother, and his lady,  
    Offence of mighty note; but to himself
    The greatest wrong of all.
 Well, call him hither;
    We are reconcil'd, and the first view shall kill
    All repetition.
 Let him not ask our pardon;
    The nature of his great offence is dead,
    And deeper than oblivion do we bury
    Th' incensing relics of it; let him approach,
    A stranger, no offender; and inform him
    So 'tis our will he should.

  GENTLEMAN.
 I shall, my liege.
                 Exit GENTLEMAN
  KING.
 All that he is hath reference to your Highness.
 Then shall we have a match.

  KING.
 But to the brightest beams
    Distracted clouds give way; so stand thou forth;
    The time is fair again.
 My high-repented blames,
    Dear sovereign, pardon to me.

  KING.

    Let's take the instant by the forward top;
    For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
    Th' inaudible and noiseless foot of Time
    Steals ere we can effect them.
 Admiringly, my liege.
 At first
    I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart  
    Durst make too bold herald of my tongue;
    Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
    Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
    Which warp'd the line of every other favour,
    Scorn'd a fair colour or express'd it stol'n,
    Extended or contracted all proportions
    To a most hideous object.
 Thence it came
    That she whom all men prais'd, and whom myself,
    Since I have lost, have lov'd, was in mine eye
    The dust that did offend it.

  KING.
 Well excus'd.

    That thou didst love her, strikes some scores away
    From the great compt; but love that comes too late,
    Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
    To the great sender turns a sour offence,
    Crying 'That's good that's gone.

    Be this sweet Helen's knell.
 And now forget her.

  COUNTESS.
 Come on, my son, in whom my house's name
    Must be digested; give a favour from you,
    To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
    That she may quickly come.

  BERTRAM.

  KING.
 Now, pray you, let me see it; for mine eye,  
    While I was speaking, oft was fasten'd to't.

    This ring was mine; and when I gave it Helen
    I bade her, if her fortunes ever stood
    Necessitied to help, that by this token
    I would relieve her.
 Had you that craft to reave her
    Of what should stead her most?
  BERTRAM.

  COUNTESS.
 I am sure I saw her wear it.

  BERTRAM.
 You are deceiv'd, my lord; she never saw it.

    In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
    Wrapp'd in a paper, which contain'd the name
    Of her that threw it.
 Noble she was, and thought
    I stood engag'd; but when I had subscrib'd
    To mine own fortune, and inform'd her fully
    I could not answer in that course of honour  
    As she had made the overture, she ceas'd,
    In heavy satisfaction, and would never
    Receive the ring again.
 Plutus himself,
    That knows the tinct and multiplying med'cine,
    Hath not in nature's mystery more science
    Than I have in this ring.
 'Twas mine, 'twas Helen's,
    Whoever gave it you.
 Then, if you know
    That you are well acquainted with yourself,
    Confess 'twas hers, and by what rough enforcement
    You got it from her.
 She call'd the saints to surety
    That she would never put it from her finger
    Unless she gave it to yourself in bed-
    Where you have never come- or sent it us
    Upon her great disaster.

  BERTRAM.

  KING.
 If it should prove
    That thou art so inhuman- 'twill not prove so.
  
    And yet I know not- thou didst hate her deadly,
    And she is dead; which nothing, but to close
    Her eyes myself, could win me to believe
    More than to see this ring.

                                          [GUARDS seize BERTRAM]
    My fore-past proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
    Shall tax my fears of little vanity,
    Having vainly fear'd too little.
 Away with him.

  BERTRAM.
 If you shall prove
    This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
    Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
    Where she yet never was.
                       Exit, guarded
  KING.
 I am wrapp'd in dismal thinkings.
 I undertook it,
    Vanquish'd thereto by the fair grace and speech
    Of the poor suppliant, who by this, I know,
    Is here attending; her business looks in her
    With an importing visage; and she told me
    In a sweet verbal brief it did concern
    Your Highness with herself.

  KING.
 Now is the
    Count Rousillon a widower; his vows are forfeited to me, and my
    honour's paid to him.
 Grant it me, O King!
    in you it best lies; otherwise a seducer flourishes, and a poor
    maid is undone.

                                                DIANA CAPILET.

    I'll none of him.

  KING.
 The heavens have thought well on thee, Lafeu,
    To bring forth this discov'ry.
 Seek these suitors.
  
    Go speedily, and bring again the Count.

  COUNTESS.
 Now, justice on the doers!

                       Enter BERTRAM, guarded

  KING.
 I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine,
    Derived from the ancient Capilet.
 Come hither, Count; do you know these women?
  BERTRAM.
 Do they charge me further?
  DIANA.
 Why do you look so strange upon your wife?
  BERTRAM.

  DIANA.
 If you shall marry,
    You give away this hand, and that is mine;
    You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine;
    You give away myself, which is known mine;
    For I by vow am so embodied yours
    That she which marries you must marry me,
    Either both or none.
  [To BERTRAM]  Your reputation comes too short for
    my daughter; you are no husband for her.

  BERTRAM.
 My lord, this is a fond and desp'rate creature
    Whom sometime I have laugh'd with.
 Let your Highness
    Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour
    Than for to think that I would sink it here.

  KING.
 Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
    Till your deeds gain them.
 Fairer prove your honour  
    Than in my thought it lies!
  DIANA.

  KING.
 What say'st thou to her?
  BERTRAM.

  DIANA.
 He does me wrong, my lord; if I were so
    He might have bought me at a common price.

    Do not believe him.

  COUNTESS.

  KING.
 Methought you said  
    You saw one here in court could witness it.

  LAFEU.
 I saw the man to-day, if man he be.
 Find him, and bring him hither.
 What of him?
    He's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
    With all the spots o' th' world tax'd and debauch'd,
    Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.

    Am I or that or this for what he'll utter
    That will speak anything?
  KING.
 She hath that ring of yours.
 Certain it is I lik'd her,
    And boarded her i' th' wanton way of youth.

  DIANA.
 I must be patient.

    You that have turn'd off a first so noble wife
    May justly diet me.
 I have it not.
 What ring was yours, I pray you?
  DIANA.
 Sir, much like
    The same upon your finger.

  KING.
 Know you this ring? This ring was his of late.

  DIANA.
 And this was it I gave him, being abed.

  KING.

  DIANA.
 I have spoke the truth.

  KING.

  KING.
 Tell me, sirrah-but tell me true I charge you,
    Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
    Which, on your just proceeding, I'll keep off-
    By him and by this woman here what know you?
  PAROLLES.
 Come, come, to th' purpose.
 Did he love this woman?
  PAROLLES.
 Faith, sir, he did love her; but how?
  KING.
 He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman.

  KING.
 How is that?
  PAROLLES.
 He lov'd her, sir, and lov'd her not.

  KING.
 I am a poor man, and at your Majesty's command.

  LAFEU.
 He's a good drum, my lord, but a naughty orator.
  
  DIANA.
 Faith, I know more than I'll speak.

  KING.
 Yes, so please your Majesty.
 Yet I was in that credit with them at that time that I
    knew of their going to bed; and of other motions, as promising
    her marriage, and things which would derive me ill will to speak
    of; therefore I will not speak what I know.

    This ring, you say, was yours?
  DIANA.

  KING.
 Where did you buy it? Or who gave it you?
  DIANA.
 It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.

  KING.
 Who lent it you?
  DIANA.

  KING.
 Where did you find it then?  
  DIANA.

  KING.
 If it were yours by none of all these ways,
    How could you give it him?
  DIANA.
 I never gave it him.

  LAFEU.
 This woman's an easy glove, my lord; she goes of and on at
    pleasure.

  KING.
 This ring was mine, I gave it his first wife.

  KING.
 Take her away, I do not like her now;
    To prison with her.
 And away with him.

    Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring,
    Thou diest within this hour.

  DIANA.
 I'll never tell you.

  KING.
 Take her away.

  DIANA.
 I'll put in bail, my liege.

  KING.

  KING.
 Wherefore hast thou accus'd him all this while?
  DIANA.

    He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to't:  
    I'll swear I am a maid, and he knows not.

    Great King, I am no strumpet, by my life;
    I am either maid, or else this old man's wife.
 Good mother, fetch my bail.

    He knows himself my bed he hath defil'd;
    And at that time he got his wife with child.


                     Re-enter WIDOW with HELENA

  KING.
 Is there no exorcist  
    Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
    Is't real that I see?
  HELENA.
 This is done.

    Will you be mine now you are doubly won?
  BERTRAM.
 If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
    I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.
 Mine eyes smell onions; I shall weep anon.
 [To PAROLLES]
    Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher.
 So, I
    thank thee.
 Wait on me home, I'll make sport with thee;  
    let thy curtsies alone, they are scurvy ones.

  KING.

    [To DIANA]  If thou beest yet a fresh uncropped flower,
    Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower;
    For I can guess that by thy honest aid
    Thou kept'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.
-
    Of that and all the progress, more and less,
    Resolvedly more leisure shall express.

    All yet seems well; and if it end so meet,
    The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.

    All is well ended if this suit be won,
    That you express content; which we will pay
    With strife to please you, day exceeding day.

                                                    Exeunt omnes


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1607

THE TRAGEDY OF ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  MARK ANTONY,         Triumvirs
  OCTAVIUS CAESAR,         "
  M.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.

Alexandria.
 CLEOPATRA'S palace

Enter DEMETRIUS and PHILO

  PHILO.
 Nay, but this dotage of our general's
    O'erflows the measure.
 His captain's heart,
    Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst
    The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper,
    And is become the bellows and the fan
    To cool a gipsy's lust.


     Flourish.
 Behold and see.

  CLEOPATRA.
 There's beggary in the love that can be reckon'd.

  CLEOPATRA.
 I'll set a bourn how far to be belov'd.

  ANTONY.


                       Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER.
 News, my good lord, from Rome.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Nay, hear them, Antony.

    Fulvia perchance is angry; or who knows
    If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent
    His pow'rful mandate to you: 'Do this or this;
    Take in that kingdom and enfranchise that;
    Perform't, or else we damn thee.
 Let Rome in Tiber melt, and the wide arch
    Of the rang'd empire fall! Here is my space.

    Kingdoms are clay; our dungy earth alike
    Feeds beast as man.

  ANTONY.

    Now for the love of Love and her soft hours,
    Let's not confound the time with conference harsh;  
    There's not a minute of our lives should stretch
    Without some pleasure now.
 What sport to-night?
  CLEOPATRA.
 Hear the ambassadors.
 Fie, wrangling queen!
    Whom everything becomes- to chide, to laugh,
    To weep; whose every passion fully strives
    To make itself in thee fair and admir'd.
 Come, my queen;
    Last night you did desire it.

                     Exeunt ANTONY and CLEOPATRA, with the train
  DEMETRIUS.
 Sir, sometimes when he is not Antony,
    He comes too short of that great property
    Which still should go with Antony.
 I am full sorry
    That he approves the common liar, who
    Thus speaks of him at Rome; but I will hope
    Of better deeds to-morrow.

Alexandria.
 CLEOPATRA'S palace

Enter CHARMIAN, IRAS, ALEXAS, and a SOOTHSAYER

  CHARMIAN.
 Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most anything Alexas, almost
    most absolute Alexas, where's the soothsayer that you prais'd so
    to th' Queen? O that I knew this husband, which you say must
    charge his horns with garlands!
  ALEXAS.
 Soothsayer!
  SOOTHSAYER.
 In nature's infinite book of secrecy
    A little I can read.

  ALEXAS.
 Show him your hand.


                       Enter ENOBARBUS

  ENOBARBUS.

  CHARMIAN.

  SOOTHSAYER.
 I make not, but foresee.
  
  CHARMIAN.
 Pray, then, foresee me one.
 You shall be yet far fairer than you are.

  CHARMIAN.
 He means in flesh.
 No, you shall paint when you are old.
 Wrinkles forbid!
  ALEXAS.
 Vex not his prescience; be attentive.
 Hush!
  SOOTHSAYER.
 You shall be more beloving than beloved.
 I had rather heat my liver with drinking.

  ALEXAS.
 Nay, hear him.
 Good now, some excellent fortune! Let me be married to
    three kings in a forenoon, and widow them all.
 O, excellent! I love long life better than figs.

  SOOTHSAYER.

  CHARMIAN.
 Then belike my children shall have no names.

    Prithee, how many boys and wenches must I have?  
  SOOTHSAYER.
 If every of your wishes had a womb,
    And fertile every wish, a million.

  CHARMIAN.

  ALEXAS.
 Nay, come, tell Iras hers.
 We'll know all our fortunes.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Mine, and most of our fortunes, to-night, shall be-
    drunk to bed.

  IRAS.
 There's a palm presages chastity, if nothing else.

  CHARMIAN.
 E'en as the o'erflowing Nilus presageth famine.
 Prithee, tell her but worky-day fortune.

  SOOTHSAYER.
 Your fortunes are alike.

  IRAS.
 But how, but how? Give me particulars.

  IRAS.
 Am I not an inch of fortune better than she?
  CHARMIAN.
 Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better than I,
    where would you choose it?
  IRAS.
  
  CHARMIAN.
 Our worser thoughts heavens mend! Alexas- come, his
    fortune, his fortune! O, let him marry a woman that cannot go,
    sweet Isis, I beseech thee! And let her die too, and give him a
    worse! And let worse follow worse, till the worst of all follow
    him laughing to his grave, fiftyfold a cuckold! Good Isis, hear
    me this prayer, though thou deny me a matter of more weight; good
    Isis, I beseech thee!
  IRAS.
 Dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people! For, as
    it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome man loose-wiv'd, so it is
    a deadly sorrow to behold a foul knave uncuckolded.
 Amen.

  ALEXAS.

  CHARMIAN.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Saw you my lord?  
  ENOBARBUS.
 No, lady.
 No, madam.

  CLEOPATRA.
 He was dispos'd to mirth; but on the sudden
    A Roman thought hath struck him.
 Enobarbus!
  ENOBARBUS.
 Madam?
  CLEOPATRA.
 Seek him, and bring him hither.
 We will not look upon him.
 Go with us.

                       Exeunt CLEOPATRA, ENOBARBUS, and the rest
  MESSENGER.
 Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.

  ANTONY.
  
  ANTONY.
 Well, what worst?
  MESSENGER.
 When it concerns the fool or coward.
 On!
    Things that are past are done with me.

  MESSENGER.
 Antony, thou wouldst say.

  MESSENGER.
 O, my lord!
  ANTONY.
 Speak to me home; mince not the general tongue;
    Name Cleopatra as she is call'd in Rome.

    Rail thou in Fulvia's phrase, and taunt my faults
    With such full licence as both truth and malice
    Have power to utter.
 O, then we bring forth weeds
    When our quick minds lie still, and our ills told us  
    Is as our earing.
 Fare thee well awhile.

  MESSENGER.
                        Exit
  ANTONY.

    These strong Egyptian fetters I must break,
    Or lose myself in dotage.
 Fulvia thy wife is dead.

  ANTONY.
 In Sicyon.
       [Gives the letter]
  ANTONY.
                             Exit MESSENGER
    There's a great spirit gone! Thus did I desire it.

    What our contempts doth often hurl from us  
    We wish it ours again; the present pleasure,
    By revolution low'ring, does become
    The opposite of itself.
 She's good, being gone;
    The hand could pluck her back that shov'd her on.

    I must from this enchanting queen break off.

    Ten thousand harms, more than the ills I know,
    My idleness doth hatch.
 How now, Enobarbus!

                    Re-enter ENOBARBUS

  ENOBARBUS.
 What's your pleasure, sir?
  ANTONY.
 I must with haste from hence.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Why, then we kill all our women.
 We see how mortal an
    unkindness is to them; if they suffer our departure, death's the
    word.

  ANTONY.
 I must be gone.

  ENOBARBUS.
 It were pity
    to cast them away for nothing, though between them and a great
    cause they should be esteemed nothing.

  ANTONY.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Alack, sir, no! Her passions are made of nothing but the
    finest part of pure love.
 We cannot call her winds and waters
    sighs and tears; they are greater storms and tempests than
    almanacs can report.

  ANTONY.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Sir?
  ANTONY.
 Fulvia is dead.
 Fulvia?
  ANTONY.
 Dead.
 This grief is crown'd with
    consolation: your old smock brings forth a new petticoat; and
    indeed the tears live in an onion that should water this sorrow.

  ANTONY.
 The business she hath broached in the state
    Cannot endure my absence.
 And the business you have broach'd here cannot be
    without you; especially that of Cleopatra's, which wholly depends
    on your abode.
 Let our officers
    Have notice what we purpose.
 I shall break
    The cause of our expedience to the Queen,
    And get her leave to part.
 Say our pleasure,
    To such whose place is under us, requires
    Our quick remove from hence.
 CLEOPATRA'S palace

Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS

  CLEOPATRA.
 I did not see him since.

  CLEOPATRA.
 See where he is, who's with him, what he does.
 Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly,
    You do not hold the method to enforce
    The like from him.

  CLEOPATRA.

  CLEOPATRA.

  CHARMIAN.


                            Enter ANTONY
  
    But here comes Antony.

  CLEOPATRA.
 I am sick and sullen.
 Help me away, dear Charmian; I shall fall.

    It cannot be thus long; the sides of nature
    Will not sustain it.
 Now, my dearest queen-
  CLEOPATRA.
 Pray you, stand farther from me.

  ANTONY.
 What's the matter?
  CLEOPATRA.
 I know by that same eye there's some good news.
 Cleopatra-
  CLEOPATRA.
 Why should I think you can be mine and true,  
    Though you in swearing shake the throned gods,
    Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness,
    To be entangled with those mouth-made vows,
    Which break themselves in swearing!
  ANTONY.
 Most sweet queen-
  CLEOPATRA.
 No going then!
    Eternity was in our lips and eyes,
    Bliss in our brows' bent, none our parts so poor
    But was a race of heaven.
 They are so still,
    Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world,
    Art turn'd the greatest liar.
 I would I had thy inches.
 Thou shouldst know
    There were a heart in Egypt.

  ANTONY.
 Hear me, queen:
    The strong necessity of time commands
    Our services awhile; but my full heart
    Remains in use with you.
 Can Fulvia die?
  ANTONY.
 At the last, best.

    See when and where she died.
 O most false love!
    Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill  
    With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
    In Fulvia's death how mine receiv'd shall be.
 Quarrel no more, but be prepar'd to know
    The purposes I bear; which are, or cease,
    As you shall give th' advice.
 Cut my lace, Charmian, come!
    But let it be; I am quickly ill and well-
    So Antony loves.

  CLEOPATRA.
 So Fulvia told me.

    I prithee turn aside and weep for her;
    Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
    Belong to Egypt.
  
  ANTONY.
 You'll heat my blood; no more.

  ANTONY.
 Now, by my sword-
  CLEOPATRA.
 Look, prithee, Charmian,
    How this Herculean Roman does become
    The carriage of his chafe.

  ANTONY.
 I'll leave you, lady.
 Courteous lord, one word.

    Sir, you and I have lov'd- but there's not it.
 Something it is I would-
    O, my oblivion is a very Antony,
    And I am all forgotten!
  ANTONY.

  CLEOPATRA.
 'Tis sweating labour
    To bear such idleness so near the heart
    As Cleopatra this.
 But, sir, forgive me;  
    Since my becomings kill me when they do not
    Eye well to you.
 Your honour calls you hence;
    Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly,
    And all the gods go with you! Upon your sword
    Sit laurel victory, and smooth success
    Be strew'd before your feet!
  ANTONY.
 Let us go.

    Our separation so abides and flies
    That thou, residing here, goes yet with me,
    And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee.

    Away!                                                 Exeunt




SCENE IV.

Rome.
 You shall find there
    A man who is the abstract of all faults
    That all men follow.

  LEPIDUS.

    His faults, in him, seem as the spots of heaven,
    More fiery by night's blackness; hereditary
    Rather than purchas'd; what he cannot change
    Than what he chooses.
  
  CAESAR.
 You are too indulgent.


                   Enter a MESSENGER  

  LEPIDUS.
 Here's more news.

  MESSENGER.
 Thy biddings have been done; and every hour,
    Most noble Caesar, shalt thou have report
    How 'tis abroad.

  CAESAR.
 I should have known no less.
 This common body,
    Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream,
    Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide,
    To rot itself with motion.
 Many hot inroads
    They make in Italy; the borders maritime
    Lack blood to think on't, and flush youth revolt.

    No vessel can peep forth but 'tis as soon
    Taken as seen; for Pompey's name strikes more
    Than could his war resisted.

  CAESAR.
 Thou didst drink
    The stale of horses and the gilded puddle
    Which beasts would cough at.
 Thy palate then did deign
    The roughest berry on the rudest hedge;
    Yea, like the stag when snow the pasture sheets,
    The barks of trees thou brows'd.
 On the Alps
    It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh,
    Which some did die to look on.
 And all this-  
    It wounds thine honour that I speak it now-
    Was borne so like a soldier that thy cheek
    So much as lank'd not.

  LEPIDUS.
 'Tis pity of him.

  CAESAR.
 Let his shames quickly
    Drive him to Rome.
 To-morrow, Caesar,
    I shall be furnish'd to inform you rightly
    Both what by sea and land I can be able
    To front this present time.
 Till which encounter
    It is my business too.
 Farewell.

  LEPIDUS.
 Farewell, my lord.
 What you shall know meantime
    Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir,
    To let me be partaker.

  CAESAR.
 Doubt not, sir;
    I knew it for my bond.
                                Exeunt




SCENE V.

Alexandria.
 Madam?
  CLEOPATRA.
 That I might sleep out this great gap of time
    My Antony is away.

  CHARMIAN.
 You think of him too much.

  CLEOPATRA.
 O, 'tis treason!
  CHARMIAN.
 Madam, I trust, not so.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Thou, eunuch Mardian!
  MARDIAN.
 Not now to hear thee sing; I take no pleasure
    In aught an eunuch has.
 Hast thou affections?
  MARDIAN.
 Yes, gracious madam.
  
  CLEOPATRA.
 Not in deed, madam; for I can do nothing
    But what indeed is honest to be done.

  CLEOPATRA.
 He's speaking now,
    Or murmuring 'Where's my serpent of old Nile?'
    For so he calls me.


                         Enter ALEXAS

  ALEXAS.
 Sovereign of Egypt, hail!
  CLEOPATRA.
 His speech sticks in my heart.

  ALEXAS.
 'Good friend,' quoth he
    'Say the firm Roman to great Egypt sends
    This treasure of an oyster; at whose foot,
    To mend the petty present, I will piece
    Her opulent throne with kingdoms.
 All the East,
    Say thou, shall call her mistress.
' So he nodded,  
    And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed,
    Who neigh'd so high that what I would have spoke
    Was beastly dumb'd by him.
 What, was he sad or merry?
  ALEXAS.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Met'st thou my posts?
  ALEXAS.
 Ay, madam, twenty several messengers.
 Who's born that day
    When I forget to send to Antony
    Shall die a beggar.
 Ink and paper, Charmian.
 Did I, Charmian,
    Ever love Caesar so?
  CHARMIAN.
 O that brave Caesar!
  CLEOPATRA.
 The valiant Caesar!
  CLEOPATRA.

  CHARMIAN.
 My salad days,
    When I was green in judgment, cold in blood,
    To say as I said then.
 But come, away!
    Get me ink and paper.

    He shall have every day a several greeting,
    Or I'll unpeople Egypt.
                               Exeunt



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>




ACT II.
 SCENE I.

Messina.
 POMPEY'S house

Enter POMPEY, MENECRATES, and MENAS, in warlike manner

  POMPEY.

  MENECRATES.

  POMPEY.
 Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
    The thing we sue for.

  MENECRATES.
 We, ignorant of ourselves,
    Beg often our own harms, which the wise pow'rs
    Deny us for our good; so find we profit
    By losing of our prayers.

  POMPEY.

    The people love me, and the sea is mine;
    My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope
    Says it will come to th' full.
 Mark Antony
    In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
    No wars without doors.
 Caesar and Lepidus
    Are in the field.

  POMPEY.

  MENAS.

  POMPEY.
 He dreams.
 I know they are in Rome together,
    Looking for Antony.
 But all the charms of love,
    Salt Cleopatra, soften thy wan'd lip!
    Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both;
    Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts,
    Keep his brain fuming.
 Epicurean cooks
    Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite,
    That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honour
    Even till a Lethe'd dullness-

                       Enter VARRIUS

    How now, Varrius!  
  VARRIUS.
 Since he went from Egypt 'tis
    A space for farther travel.

  POMPEY.
 I could have given less matter
    A better ear.
 But let us rear
    The higher our opinion, that our stirring
    Can from the lap of Egypt's widow pluck
    The ne'er-lust-wearied Antony.
 I cannot hope
    Caesar and Antony shall well greet together.

  POMPEY.

    Were't not that we stand up against them all,  
    'Twere pregnant they should square between themselves;
    For they have entertained cause enough
    To draw their swords.
 But how the fear of us
    May cement their divisions, and bind up
    The petty difference we yet not know.
 The house of LEPIDUS

Enter ENOBARBUS and LEPIDUS

  LEPIDUS.

  ENOBARBUS.
 I shall entreat him
    To answer like himself.
 If Caesar move him,
    Let Antony look over Caesar's head
    And speak as loud as Mars.
 By Jupiter,
    Were I the wearer of Antonius' beard,
    I would not shave't to-day.

  ENOBARBUS.
 But small to greater matters must give way.
 Not if the small come first.
 Your speech is passion;
    But pray you stir no embers up.


                Enter ANTONY and VENTIDIUS

  ENOBARBUS.


            Enter CAESAR, MAECENAS, and AGRIPPA

  ANTONY.
 If we compose well here, to Parthia.

  CAESAR.
 Noble friends,
    That which combin'd us was most great, and let not
    A leaner action rend us.
 What's amiss,
    May it be gently heard.
 When we debate
    Our trivial difference loud, we do commit
    Murder in healing wounds.
 Then, noble partners,
    The rather for I earnestly beseech,
    Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,
    Nor curstness grow to th' matter.
 'Tis spoken well.

    Were we before our arinies, and to fight,
    I should do thus.
                                 [Flourish]
  CAESAR.

  ANTONY.
 Thank you.

  CAESAR.
 Sit.

  CAESAR.
 Nay, then.

  CAESAR.
 I must be laugh'd at
    If, or for nothing or a little,
    Should say myself offended, and with you
    Chiefly i' the world; more laugh'd at that I should
    Once name you derogately when to sound your name
    It not concern'd me.

  ANTONY.
 Yet, if you there  
    Did practise on my state, your being in Egypt
    Might be my question.
 How intend you- practis'd?
  CAESAR.
 Your wife and brother
    Made wars upon me, and their contestation
    Was theme for you; you were the word of war.

  ANTONY.
 I did inquire it,
    And have my learning from some true reports
    That drew their swords with you.
 Did he not rather
    Discredit my authority with yours,
    And make the wars alike against my stomach,
    Having alike your cause? Of this my letters
    Before did satisfy you.

  CAESAR.
 Not so, not so;
    I know you could not lack, I am certain on't,
    Very necessity of this thought, that I,
    Your partner in the cause 'gainst which he fought,
    Could not with graceful eyes attend those wars
    Which fronted mine own peace.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Would we had all such wives, that the men might go to
    wars with the women!
  ANTONY.
 For that you must
    But say I could not help it.
  
  ANTONY.
 Sir,
    He fell upon me ere admitted.
 Then
    Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want
    Of what I was i' th' morning; but next day
    I told him of myself, which was as much
    As to have ask'd him pardon.
 Let this fellow
    Be nothing of our strife; if we contend,
    Out of our question wipe him.
 You have broken
    The article of your oath, which you shall never
    Have tongue to charge me with.

  LEPIDUS.
 Soft, Caesar!
  ANTONY.

    The honour is sacred which he talks on now,
    Supposing that I lack'd it.
 But on, Caesar:
    The article of my oath-
  CAESAR.

  ANTONY.
 Neglected, rather;  
    And then when poisoned hours had bound me up
    From mine own knowledge.
 Truth is, that Fulvia,
    To have me out of Egypt, made wars here;
    For which myself, the ignorant motive, do
    So far ask pardon as befits mine honour
    To stoop in such a case.
 'Tis noble spoken.

  MAECENAS.

  LEPIDUS.
 Worthily spoken, Maecenas.

  ANTONY.
 Thou art a soldier only.

  ANTONY.
 Go to, then- your considerate stone!
  CAESAR.
 Yet if I knew
    What hoop should hold us stanch, from edge to edge
    O' th' world, I would pursue it.

  AGRIPPA.
 Give me leave, Caesar.

  CAESAR.
 Speak, Agrippa.

  AGRIPPA.
 Thou hast a sister by the mother's side,
    Admir'd Octavia.
 Great Mark Antony
    Is now a widower.
 Say not so, Agrippa.

  ANTONY.

  AGRIPPA.
 Truths would be tales,
    Where now half tales be truths.
 Her love to both
    Would each to other, and all loves to both,
    Draw after her.
 Pardon what I have spoke;
    For 'tis a studied, not a present thought,
    By duty ruminated.

  ANTONY.
 Will Caesar speak?
  CAESAR.
 Not till he hears how Antony is touch'd
    With what is spoke already.

  ANTONY.
 What power is in Agrippa,
    If I would say 'Agrippa, be it so,'
    To make this good?  
  CAESAR.
 The power of Caesar, and
    His power unto Octavia.

  ANTONY.
 May I never
    To this good purpose, that so fairly shows,
    Dream of impediment! Let me have thy hand.

    Further this act of grace; and from this hour
    The heart of brothers govern in our loves
    And sway our great designs!
  CAESAR.
 There is my hand.
 Let her live
    To join our kingdoms and our hearts; and never
    Fly off our loves again!
  LEPIDUS.
  
    Of us must Pompey presently be sought,
    Or else he seeks out us.

  ANTONY.
 Where lies he?
  CAESAR.
 About the Mount Misenum.

  ANTONY.
 What is his strength by land?
  CAESAR.
 Great and increasing; but by sea
    He is an absolute master.

  ANTONY.
 So is the fame.

    Yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we
    The business we have talk'd of.

  CAESAR.
 With most gladness;
    And do invite you to my sister's view,
    Whither straight I'll lead you.

  ANTONY.
 Let us, Lepidus,
    Not lack your company.

  LEPIDUS.
 Noble Antony,
    Not sickness should detain me.
                    [Flourish]
                     Exeunt all but ENOBARBUS, AGRIPPA, MAECENAS
  MAECENAS.
 Welcome from Egypt, sir.
 Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Maecenas! My honourable
    friend, Agrippa!
  AGRIPPA.
 We have cause to be glad that matters are so well
    digested.
 You stay'd well by't in Egypt.

  ENOBARBUS.

  MAECENAS.
 We had much more
    monstrous matter of feast, which worthily deserved noting.
 When she first met Mark Antony she purs'd up his heart,
    upon the river of Cydnus.

  AGRIPPA.
 There she appear'd indeed! Or my reporter devis'd well for
    her.

  ENOBARBUS.
 I will tell you.
 The poop was beaten gold;
    Purple the sails, and so perfumed that  
    The winds were love-sick with them; the oars were silver,
    Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
    The water which they beat to follow faster,
    As amorous of their strokes.
 For her own person,
    It beggar'd all description.
 She did lie
    In her pavilion, cloth-of-gold, of tissue,
    O'erpicturing that Venus where we see
    The fancy out-work nature.
 Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
    So many mermaids, tended her i' th' eyes,
    And made their bends adornings.

  AGRIPPA.
 Rare Egyptian!
  ENOBARBUS.
 Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,
    Invited her to supper.
 She replied
    It should be better he became her guest;
    Which she entreated.

    He ploughed her, and she cropp'd.
 I saw her once
    Hop forty paces through the public street;  
    And, having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted,
    That she did make defect perfection,
    And, breathless, pow'r breathe forth.
 Now Antony must leave her utterly.
 Never! He will not.

  MAECENAS.

  AGRIPPA.
 Let us go.

    Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guest
    Whilst you abide here.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Humbly, sir, I thank you.

Rome.
 The world and my great office will sometimes
    Divide me from your bosom.

  OCTAVIA.

  ANTONY.

  CAESAR.
 Good night.
 Now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in Egypt?
  SOOTHSAYER.
 Would I had never come from thence, nor you thither!
  ANTONY.
  
  SOOTHSAYER.
 I see it in my motion, have it not in my tongue; but
    yet hie you to Egypt again.
 Caesar's.
 Therefore
    Make space enough between you.

  ANTONY.
 Thy lustre thickens
    When he shines by.
  
    Say to Ventidius I would speak with him.

                                                 Exit SOOTHSAYER
    He shall to Parthia.
- Be it art or hap,
    He hath spoken true.
 I will to Egypt;
    And though I make this marriage for my peace,
    I' th' East my pleasure lies.
                              Exeunt




SCENE IV.
 A street

Enter LEPIDUS, MAECENAS, and AGRIPPA

  LEPIDUS.
 Trouble yourselves no further.
 Sir, Mark Antony
    Will e'en but kiss Octavia, and we'll follow.
 Till I shall see you in your soldier's dress,
    Which will become you both, farewell.
 We shall,
    As I conceive the journey, be at th' Mount
    Before you, Lepidus.

  LEPIDUS.
 Your way is shorter;
    My purposes do draw me much about.

    You'll win two days upon me.

  BOTH.
 Farewell.
                                      Exeunt




SCENE V.

Alexandria.
 Give me some music- music, moody food
    Of us that trade in love.

  ALL.
 Let it alone! Let's to billiards.
 Come, Charmian.
 My arm is sore; best play with Mardian.

  CLEOPATRA.
 As well as I can, madam.

  CLEOPATRA.
 And when good will is show'd, though't come too short,
    The actor may plead pardon.

    Give me mine angle- we'll to th' river.
 There,
    My music playing far off, I will betray
    Tawny-finn'd fishes; my bended hook shall pierce
    Their slimy jaws; and as I draw them up
    I'll think them every one an Antony,
    And say 'Ah ha! Y'are caught.
 'Twas merry when
    You wager'd on your angling; when your diver
    Did hang a salt fish on his hook, which he
    With fervency drew up.
 That time? O times
    I laughed him out of patience; and that night
    I laugh'd him into patience; and next morn,
    Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed,
    Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst
    I wore his sword Philippan.


                    Enter a MESSENGER

    O! from Italy?
    Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
    That long time have been barren.

  MESSENGER.
 Madam, madam-
  CLEOPATRA.
 First, madam, he is well.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Good madam, hear me.

  CLEOPATRA.

  MESSENGER.
 Will't please you hear me?
  CLEOPATRA.
 I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st.

    Yet, if thou say Antony lives, is well,  
    Or friends with Caesar, or not captive to him,
    I'll set thee in a shower of gold, and hail
    Rich pearls upon thee.
 Madam, he's well.
 Well said.
 And friends with Caesar.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Th'art an honest man.
 Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.

  CLEOPATRA.

  MESSENGER.
 But yet, madam-
  CLEOPATRA.
 Prithee, friend,
    Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,
    The good and bad together.
 He's friends with Caesar;
    In state of health, thou say'st; and, thou say'st, free.
 Free, madam! No; I made no such report.

    He's bound unto Octavia.

  CLEOPATRA.

  CLEOPATRA.
 I am pale, Charmian.

  MESSENGER.

  CLEOPATRA.
 The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
                                              [Strikes him down]
  MESSENGER.
 Good madam, patience.
 What say you? Hence,                  [Strikes him]
    Horrible villain! or I'll spurn thine eyes
    Like balls before me; I'll unhair thy head;
                                     [She hales him up and down]
    Thou shalt be whipp'd with wire and stew'd in brine,
    Smarting in ling'ring pickle.

  MESSENGER.
 Gracious madam,
    I that do bring the news made not the match.

  CLEOPATRA.
 The blow thou hadst
    Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage;
    And I will boot thee with what gift beside
    Thy modesty can beg.
 He's married, madam.
  
  CLEOPATRA.
    [Draws a knife]
  MESSENGER.
 Nay, then I'll run.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Some innocents scape not the thunderbolt.

    Melt Egypt into Nile! and kindly creatures
    Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again.
 Call!
  CHARMIAN.
 He is afear'd to come.

  CLEOPATRA.
 I will not hurt him.

    These hands do lack nobility, that they strike
    A meaner than myself; since I myself
    Have given myself the cause.


                    Enter the MESSENGER again

    Come hither, sir.

    Though it be honest, it is never good
    To bring bad news.
 Give to a gracious message  
    An host of tongues; but let ill tidings tell
    Themselves when they be felt.

  MESSENGER.
 I have done my duty.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Should I lie, madam?
  CLEOPATRA.
 I crave your Highness' pardon.

  CLEOPATRA.

  CLEOPATRA.

    The merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome
    Are all too dear for me.
 Lie they upon thy hand,
    And be undone by 'em!                         Exit MESSENGER
  CHARMIAN.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Many times, madam.

  CLEOPATRA.
 I am paid for't now.
 Lead me from hence,
    I faint.

    Go to the fellow, good Alexas; bid him
    Report the feature of Octavia, her years,
    Her inclination; let him not leave out
    The colour of her hair.

                                                     Exit ALEXAS
    Let him for ever go- let him not, Charmian-
    Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
    The other way's a Mars.
                         [To MARDIAN]
    Bid you Alexas
    Bring me word how tall she is.
- Pity me, Charmian,
    But do not speak to me.
        Exeunt




SCENE VI.
 Enter POMPEY and MENAS at one door, with drum and trumpet;
at another, CAESAR, ANTONY, LEPIDUS, ENOBARBUS, MAECENAS, AGRIPPA,
with soldiers marching

  POMPEY.
 Your hostages I have, so have you mine;
    And we shall talk before we fight.

  CAESAR.

  POMPEY.
 To you all three,
    The senators alone of this great world,
    Chief factors for the gods: I do not know
    Wherefore my father should revengers want,
    Having a son and friends, since Julius Caesar,  
    Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted,
    There saw you labouring for him.
 What was't
    That mov'd pale Cassius to conspire? and what
    Made the all-honour'd honest Roman, Brutus,
    With the arm'd rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom,
    To drench the Capitol, but that they would
    Have one man but a man? And that is it
    Hath made me rig my navy, at whose burden
    The anger'd ocean foams; with which I meant
    To scourge th' ingratitude that despiteful Rome
    Cast on my noble father.

  CAESAR.
 Take your time.

  ANTONY.
 Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails;
    We'll speak with thee at sea; at land thou know'st
    How much we do o'er-count thee.

  POMPEY.
 At land, indeed,
    Thou dost o'er-count me of my father's house.

    But since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
    Remain in't as thou mayst.

  LEPIDUS.
 Be pleas'd to tell us-  
    For this is from the present- how you take
    The offers we have sent you.

  CAESAR.
 There's the point.
 Which do not be entreated to, but weigh
    What it is worth embrac'd.

  POMPEY.
 You have made me offer
    Of Sicily, Sardinia; and I must
    Rid all the sea of pirates; then to send
    Measures of wheat to Rome; this 'greed upon,
    To part with unhack'd edges and bear back
    Our targes undinted.

  ALL.

  POMPEY.
 Know, then,
    I came before you here a man prepar'd
    To take this offer; but Mark Antony
    Put me to some impatience.
 Though I lose
    The praise of it by telling, you must know,
    When Caesar and your brother were at blows,  
    Your mother came to Sicily and did find
    Her welcome friendly.

    I did not think, sir, to have met you here.

  ANTONY.

  CAESAR.
 Since I saw you last
    There is a change upon you.
 Well, I know not
    What counts harsh fortune casts upon my face;
    But in my bosom shall she never come
    To make my heart her vassal.
 Well met here.

    I crave our composition may be written,
    And seal'd between us.
  
  CAESAR.
 That's the next to do.

  POMPEY.
 That will I, Pompey.

  POMPEY.
 I have heard that Julius Caesar
    Grew fat with feasting there.

  ANTONY.
 You have heard much.

  POMPEY.
 I have fair meanings, sir.

  ANTONY.

  POMPEY.
 Then so much have I heard;
    And I have heard Apollodorus carried-
  ENOBARBUS.
 No more of that! He did so.
 What, I pray you?
  ENOBARBUS.
 A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.

  POMPEY.
 I know thee now.
 How far'st thou, soldier?
  ENOBARBUS.
  
  POMPEY.
 Let me shake thy hand.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Sir,
    I never lov'd you much; but I ha' prais'd ye
    When you have well deserv'd ten times as much
    As I have said you did.
 Enjoy thy plainness;
    It nothing ill becomes thee.

    Aboard my galley I invite you all.

    Will you lead, lords?
  ALL.
 Show's the way, sir.

  POMPEY.
 Come.
               Exeunt all but ENOBARBUS and MENAS
  MENAS.
 [Aside] Thy father, Pompey, would ne'er have made this
    treaty.

  ENOBARBUS.
 At sea, I think.

  MENAS.
 You have done well by water.

  MENAS.
 And you by land.

  ENOBARBUS.
 I Will praise any man that will praise me; though it  
    cannot be denied what I have done by land.

  MENAS.
 Yes, something you can deny for your own safety: you
    have been a great thief by sea.
 And you by land.

  ENOBARBUS.
 But give me your hand,
    Menas; if our eyes had authority, here they might take two
    thieves kissing.

  MENAS.
 All men's faces are true, whatsome'er their hands are.

  ENOBARBUS.

  MENAS.
 No slander: they steal hearts.

  ENOBARBUS.
 We came hither to fight with you.

  MENAS.

    Pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.

  ENOBARBUS.

  MENAS.
 We look'd not for Mark Antony here.
 Pray
    you, is he married to Cleopatra?
  ENOBARBUS.
 Caesar' sister is call'd Octavia.

  ENOBARBUS.
  
  MENAS.
 Pray ye, sir?
  ENOBARBUS.

  MENAS.
 Then is Caesar and he for ever knit together.

  ENOBARBUS.
 If I were bound to divine of this unity, I would not
    prophesy so.
 I think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage
    than the love of the parties.

  ENOBARBUS.
 I think so too.
 Who would not have his wife so?
  ENOBARBUS.

  MENAS.
 And thus it may be.
 Come, sir, will you aboard? I have a
    health for you.

  ENOBARBUS.
 We have us'd our throats in Egypt.
  
  MENAS.
                                Exeunt

ACT_2|SC_7
                           SCENE VII.

             On board POMPEY'S galley, off Misenum

     Music plays.
 Enter two or three SERVANTS with a banquet

  FIRST SERVANT.
 Some o' their plants are
    ill-rooted already; the least wind i' th' world will blow them
    down.

  SECOND SERVANT.
 Lepidus is high-colour'd.
 They have made him drink alms-drink.

  SECOND SERVANT.
 As they pinch one another by the disposition, he
    cries out 'No more!'; reconciles them to his entreaty and himself
    to th' drink.
 But it raises the greater war between him and his
    discretion.

  SECOND SERVANT.
 Why, this it is to have a name in great men's
    fellowship.
 I had as lief have a reed that will do me no service
    as a partizan I could not heave.

  FIRST SERVANT.
 To be call'd into a huge sphere, and not to be seen
    to move in't, are the holes where eyes should be, which pitifully
    disaster the cheeks.

  
           A sennet sounded.
 Enter CAESAR, ANTONY, LEPIDUS,
            POMPEY, AGRIPPA, MAECENAS, ENOBARBUS, MENAS,
                         with other CAPTAINS

  ANTONY.
 The higher Nilus swells
    The more it promises; as it ebbs, the seedsman
    Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain,
    And shortly comes to harvest.

  LEPIDUS.
 Y'have strange serpents there.

  ANTONY.
 Ay, Lepidus.

  LEPIDUS.
 They are so.
 I am not so well as I should be, but I'll ne'er out.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Not till you have slept.
 I fear me you'll be in till  
    then.

  LEPIDUS.
 Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies' pyramises are
    very goodly things.
 [Aside to POMPEY] Pompey, a word.

  POMPEY.
 [ Whispers in's ear ] Forbear me till anon-
    This wine for Lepidus!
  LEPIDUS.
 It is shap'd, sir, like itself, and it is as broad as it
    hath breadth; it is just so high as it is, and moves with it own
    organs.
 It lives by that which nourisheth it, and the elements
    once out of it, it transmigrates.
 What colour is it of?
  ANTONY.

  LEPIDUS.

  ANTONY.

  CAESAR.
 Will this description satisfy him?  
  ANTONY.
 With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a very
    epicure.

  POMPEY.
- Where's this cup I call'd for?
  MENAS.
 [Aside to POMPEY] If for the sake of merit thou wilt hear
      me,
    Rise from thy stool.

  POMPEY.
 [Rises and walks
    aside] The matter?
  MENAS.
 I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.

  POMPEY.
 Thou hast serv'd me with much faith.
 What's else to say?-
    Be jolly, lords.

  MENAS.
 What say'st thou?
  MENAS.
 Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That's twice.

  POMPEY.
 How should that be?
  MENAS.

  POMPEY.
 Hast thou drunk well?
  MENAS.

    Thou art, if thou dar'st be, the earthly Jove;
    Whate'er the ocean pales or sky inclips
    Is thine, if thou wilt ha't.

  POMPEY.
 Show me which way.
 These three world-sharers, these competitors,
    Are in thy vessel.

    All there is thine.

  POMPEY.
 Ah, this thou shouldst have done,
    And not have spoke on't.
 Desist, and drink.
  
  MENAS.
 [Aside] For this,
    I'll never follow thy pall'd fortunes more.

    Who seeks, and will not take when once 'tis offer'd,
    Shall never find it more.
 This health to Lepidus!
  ANTONY.
 I'll pledge it for him, Pompey.
 Here's to thee, Menas!
  MENAS.
 Enobarbus, welcome!
  POMPEY.
 Fill till the cup be hid.

  ENOBARBUS.

               [Pointing to the servant who carries off LEPIDUS]
  MENAS.
 Would it were all,
    That it might go on wheels!
  ENOBARBUS.
 Drink thou; increase the reels.
 Come.
 Strike the vessels, ho!
    Here's to Caesar!  
  CAESAR.
 I could well forbear't.

    It's monstrous labour when I wash my brain
    And it grows fouler.

  ANTONY.
 Be a child o' th' time.
 Possess it, I'll make answer.

    But I had rather fast from all four days
    Than drink so much in one.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Let's ha't, good soldier.
 Come, let's all take hands,
    Till that the conquering wine hath steep'd our sense
    In soft and delicate Lethe.

  ENOBARBUS.
 All take hands.

    Make battery to our ears with the loud music,
    The while I'll place you; then the boy shall sing;
    The holding every man shall bear as loud
    As his strong sides can volley.

            Cup us till the world go round,
            Cup us till the world go round!

  CAESAR.
 Gentle lords, let's part;
    You see we have burnt our cheeks.
 The wild disguise hath almost
    Antick'd us all.
 What needs more words? Good night.

    Good Antony, your hand.
 I'll try you on the shore.

  ANTONY.
 And shall, sir.
 Give's your hand.

  POMPEY.

    Come, down into the boat.

  ENOBARBUS.

  MENAS.

    These drums! these trumpets, flutes! what!
    Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell
    To these great fellows.
 Sound and be hang'd, sound out!
                                  [Sound a flourish, with drums]
  ENOBARBUS.

  MENAS.
 Hoo! Noble Captain, come.
                        Exeunt
ACT_3|SC_1
                     ACT III.
 SCENE I.

                     A plain in Syria

       Enter VENTIDIUS, as it were in triumph, with SILIUS
      and other Romans, OFFICERS and soldiers; the dead body
                of PACORUS borne before him

  VENTIDIUS.
 Bear the King's son's body
    Before our army.
 Thy Pacorus, Orodes,
    Pays this for Marcus Crassus.

  SILIUS.
 Noble Ventidius,
    Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm
    The fugitive Parthians follow; spur through Media,
    Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither
    The routed fly.
 O Silius, Silius,
    I have done enough.
 A lower place, note well,
    May make too great an act; for learn this, Silius:  
    Better to leave undone than by our deed
    Acquire too high a fame when him we serve's away.
 Sossius,
    One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant,
    For quick accumulation of renown,
    Which he achiev'd by th' minute, lost his favour.

    I could do more to do Antonius good,
    But 'twould offend him; and in his offence
    Should my performance perish.

  SILIUS.
 Thou hast, Ventidius, that
    Without the which a soldier and his sword
    Grants scarce distinction.
 Thou wilt write to Antony?
  VENTIDIUS.

  SILIUS.
 Where is he now?
  VENTIDIUS.

                                                          Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_2
                            SCENE II.
 CAESAR'S house

        Enter AGRIPPA at one door, ENOBARBUS at another

  AGRIPPA.
 What, are the brothers parted?
  ENOBARBUS.
 'Tis a noble Lepidus.
 A very fine one.

  AGRIPPA.
 What's Antony? The god of Jupiter.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Spake you of Caesar? How! the nonpareil!
  AGRIPPA.
 Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Yet he loves Antony.
 But as for Caesar,
    Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.

  AGRIPPA.
 Both he loves.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Adieu, noble Agrippa.
 Good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.


           Enter CAESAR, ANTONY, LEPIDUS, and OCTAVIA

  ANTONY.
 No further, sir.

  CAESAR.
 Most noble Antony,
    Let not the piece of virtue which is set
    Betwixt us as the cement of our love
    To keep it builded be the ram to batter
    The fortress of it; for better might we  
    Have lov'd without this mean, if on both parts
    This be not cherish'd.

  ANTONY.
 I have said.

  ANTONY.
 So the gods keep you,
    And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends!
    We will here part.

  CAESAR.

  OCTAVIA.
 What, Octavia?
  OCTAVIA.
 I'll tell you in your ear.

  ANTONY.
 Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can  
    Her heart inform her tongue- the swan's down feather,
    That stands upon the swell at the full of tide,
    And neither way inclines.

  AGRIPPA.

  ENOBARBUS.
 [Aside to AGRIPPA] That year, indeed, he was troubled
      with a rheum;
    What willingly he did confound he wail'd,
    Believe't- till I weep too.

  CAESAR.
 No, sweet Octavia,
    You shall hear from me still; the time shall not
    Out-go my thinking on you.

  ANTONY.

    Look, here I have you; thus I let you go,
    And give you to the gods.

  CAESAR.
 Adieu; be happy!
  LEPIDUS.
 Let all the number of the stars give light
    To thy fair way!
  CAESAR.
 Farewell!                       Trumpets sound.
 Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_3
                          SCENE III.
 CLEOPATRA'S palace

         Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS

  CLEOPATRA.
 Where is the fellow?
  ALEXAS.
 Half afeard to come.
 Go to, go to.
 Good Majesty,
    Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you
    But when you are well pleas'd.

  CLEOPATRA.
 That Herod's head
    I'll have.
 But how, when Antony is gone,
    Through whom I might command it? Come thou near.

  MESSENGER.
 Most gracious Majesty!
  CLEOPATRA.
 Didst thou behold Octavia?
  MESSENGER.
 Ay, dread Queen.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Where?  
  MESSENGER.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Is she as tall as me?
  MESSENGER.
 She is not, madam.
 That's not so good.

  CHARMIAN.
 Like her? O Isis! 'tis impossible.
 I think so, Charmian.
 Dull of tongue and dwarfish!
    What majesty is in her gait? Remember,
    If e'er thou look'dst on majesty.

  MESSENGER.

    Her motion and her station are as one;
    She shows a body rather than a life,
    A statue than a breather.

  CHARMIAN.
  
  CLEOPATRA.
 There's nothing in her yet.

  CHARMIAN.
 Excellent.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Guess at her years, I prithee.

  MESSENGER.
 Madam,
    She was a widow.
 Widow? Charmian, hark!
  MESSENGER.
 And I do think she's thirty.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Bear'st thou her face in mind? Is't long or round?
  MESSENGER.

  CLEOPATRA.
 For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.
 Brown, madam; and her forehead
    As low as she would wish it.

    Thou must not take my former sharpness ill.
                   Exeunt MESSENGER  
  CHARMIAN.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Indeed, he is so.
 I repent me much
    That so I harried him.

  CHARMIAN.
 Nothing, madam.
 I have one thing more to ask him yet, good Charmian.

    But 'tis no matter; thou shalt bring him to me
    Where I will write.
 All may be well enough.
 I warrant you, madam.

                  Athens.
 ANTONY'S house

                 Enter ANTONY and OCTAVIA

  ANTONY.

    The good gods will mock me presently
    When I shall pray 'O, bless my lord and husband!'  
    Undo that prayer by crying out as loud
    'O, bless my brother!' Husband win, win brother,
    Prays, and destroys the prayer; no mid-way
    'Twixt these extremes at all.

  ANTONY.
 If I lose mine honour,
    I lose myself; better I were not yours
    Than yours so branchless.
 But, as you requested,
    Yourself shall go between's.
 The meantime, lady,
    I'll raise the preparation of a war
    Shall stain your brother.

  OCTAVIA.
 Thanks to my lord.

    The Jove of power make me, most weak, most weak,
    Your reconciler! Wars 'twixt you twain would be
    As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
    Should solder up the rift.

  ANTONY.
 When it appears to you where this begins,
    Turn your displeasure that way, for our faults  
    Can never be so equal that your love
    Can equally move with them.
                               Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_5
                           SCENE V.

                   Athens.
 ANTONY'S house

             Enter ENOBARBUS and EROS, meeting

  ENOBARBUS.
 There's strange news come, sir.

  ENOBARBUS.
 What, man?
  EROS.
 This is old.
 What is the success?
  EROS.
 Caesar, having made use of him in the wars 'gainst Pompey,
    presently denied him rivality, would not let him partake in the
    glory of the action; and not resting here, accuses him of letters
    he had formerly wrote to Pompey; upon his own appeal, seizes him.

    So the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Where's Antony?
  EROS.
 He's walking in the garden- thus, and spurns
    The rush that lies before him; cries 'Fool Lepidus!'
    And threats the throat of that his officer
    That murd'red Pompey.
  
  ENOBARBUS.

  EROS.
 More, Domitius:
    My lord desires you presently; my news
    I might have told hereafter.

  ENOBARBUS.
 'Twill be naught;
    But let it be.
 Bring me to Antony.
 Come, sir.

                   Rome.
 Here's the manner of't:
    I' th' market-place, on a tribunal silver'd,
    Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold
    Were publicly enthron'd; at the feet sat
    Caesarion, whom they call my father's son,
    And all the unlawful issue that their lust
    Since then hath made between them.
 This in the public eye?
  CAESAR.

    His sons he there proclaim'd the kings of kings:
    Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia,
    He gave to Alexander; to Ptolemy he assign'd
    Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia.
 She  
    In th' habiliments of the goddess Isis
    That day appear'd; and oft before gave audience,
    As 'tis reported, so.

  AGRIPPA.
 Who, queasy with his insolence
    Already, will their good thoughts call from him.

  CAESAR.
 The people knows it, and have now receiv'd
    His accusations.

  AGRIPPA.
 Who does he accuse?
  CAESAR.
 Then does he say he lent me
    Some shipping, unrestor'd.
 Lastly, he frets
    That Lepidus of the triumvirate
    Should be depos'd; and, being, that we detain
    All his revenue.

  AGRIPPA.
 Sir, this should be answer'd.
 'Tis done already, and messenger gone.

    I have told him Lepidus was grown too cruel,  
    That he his high authority abus'd,
    And did deserve his change.

  MAECENAS.
 He'll never yield to that.

  CAESAR.


                Enter OCTAVIA, with her train

  OCTAVIA.
 That ever I should call thee cast-away!
  OCTAVIA.
 You have not call'd me so, nor have you cause.
 The wife of Antony
    Should have an army for an usher, and
    The neighs of horse to tell of her approach
    Long ere she did appear.
 The trees by th' way
    Should have borne men, and expectation fainted,
    Longing for what it had not.
 But you are come
    A market-maid to Rome, and have prevented
    The ostentation of our love, which left unshown
    Is often left unlov'd.

  OCTAVIA.

  CAESAR.

  OCTAVIA.

  CAESAR.
 I have eyes upon him,
    And his affairs come to me on the wind.
 No, my most wronged sister: Cleopatra
    Hath nodded him to her.
 He hath given his empire
    Up to a whore, who now are levying
    The kings o' th' earth for war.
 Ay me most wretched,
    That have my heart parted betwixt two friends,
    That does afflict each other!
  CAESAR.
 Welcome hither.

    Your letters did withhold our breaking forth,
    Till we perceiv'd both how you were wrong led
    And we in negligent danger.
 Cheer your heart;
    Be you not troubled with the time, which drives  
    O'er your content these strong necessities,
    But let determin'd things to destiny
    Hold unbewail'd their way.
 Welcome to Rome;
    Nothing more dear to me.

  AGRIPPA.
 Welcome, lady.
 Welcome, dear madam.

    Each heart in Rome does love and pity you;
    Only th' adulterous Antony, most large
    In his abominations, turns you off,
    And gives his potent regiment to a trull
    That noises it against us.

  OCTAVIA.
 Is it so, sir?
  CAESAR.
 Sister, welcome.
 My dear'st sister!         Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_7
                          SCENE VII.

                  ANTONY'S camp near Actium

                Enter CLEOPATRA and ENOBARBUS

  CLEOPATRA.
 I will be even with thee, doubt it not.

  ENOBARBUS.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Is't not denounc'd against us? Why should not we
    Be there in person?
  ENOBARBUS.
 [Aside] Well, I could reply:
    If we should serve with horse and mares together
    The horse were merely lost; the mares would bear
    A soldier and his horse.

  CLEOPATRA.

  CLEOPATRA.

  ANTONY.
 Is it not strange, Canidius,
    That from Tarentum and Brundusium
    He could so quickly cut the Ionian sea,
    And take in Toryne?- You have heard on't, sweet?
  CLEOPATRA.
 Celerity is never more admir'd
    Than by the negligent.

  ANTONY.
 A good rebuke,
    Which might have well becom'd the best of men
    To taunt at slackness.
 Canidius, we  
    Will fight with him by sea.
 By sea! What else?
  CANIDIUS.
 Why will my lord do so?
  ANTONY.
 Ay, and to wage this battle at Pharsalia,
    Where Caesar fought with Pompey.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Your ships are not well mann'd;
    Your mariners are muleteers, reapers, people
    Ingross'd by swift impress.
 In Caesar's fleet
    Are those that often have 'gainst Pompey fought;
    Their ships are yare; yours heavy.

  ANTONY.
 By sea, by sea.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Most worthy sir, you therein throw away
    The absolute soldiership you have by land;
    Distract your army, which doth most consist  
    Of war-mark'd footmen; leave unexecuted
    Your own renowned knowledge; quite forgo
    The way which promises assurance; and
    Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard
    From firm security.

  CLEOPATRA.
 I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.

  ANTONY.
 The news is true, my lord: he is descried;
    Caesar has taken Toryne.
 Can he be there in person? 'Tis impossible-
    Strange that his power should be.
 Canidius,
    Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land,  
    And our twelve thousand horse.
 We'll to our ship.

    Away, my Thetis!

                       Enter a SOLDIER

    How now, worthy soldier?
  SOLDIER.
 Do you misdoubt
    This sword and these my wounds? Let th' Egyptians
    And the Phoenicians go a-ducking; we
    Have us'd to conquer standing on the earth
    And fighting foot to foot.

  ANTONY.

                         Exeunt ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, and ENOBARBUS
  SOLDIER.
 By Hercules, I think I am i' th' right.
 Soldier, thou art; but his whole action grows
    Not in the power on't.
 So our leader's led,
    And we are women's men.
 Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius,
    Publicola, and Caelius are for sea;
    But we keep whole by land.
 This speed of Caesar's
    Carries beyond belief.

  CANIDIUS.
 Who's his lieutenant, hear you?
  SOLDIER.
 They say one Taurus.

  CANIDIUS.


                        Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER.
 The Emperor calls Canidius.

  CANIDIUS.
 With news the time's with labour and throes forth
    Each minute some.
                                     Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_8
                          SCENE VIII.

                      A plain near Actium

             Enter CAESAR, with his army, marching

  CAESAR.
 Strike not by land; keep whole; provoke not battle
    Till we have done at sea.
 Do not exceed
    The prescript of this scroll.
 Our fortune lies
    Upon this jump.
                                       Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_9
                           SCENE IX.
 Set we our squadrons on yon side o' th' hill,
    In eye of Caesar's battle; from which place
    We may the number of the ships behold,
    And so proceed accordingly.
                           Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_10
                           SCENE X.
 After their going in is heard
                   the noise of a sea-fight

                    Alarum.
 Enter ENOBARBUS

  ENOBARBUS.
 Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer.

    Th' Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,
    With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder.

    To see't mine eyes are blasted.


                        Enter SCARUS

  SCARUS.
 Gods and goddesses,
    All the whole synod of them!
  ENOBARBUS.

  ENOBARBUS.
 On our side like the token'd pestilence,
    Where death is sure.
 Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt-
    Whom leprosy o'ertake!- i' th' midst o' th' fight,
    When vantage like a pair of twins appear'd,
    Both as the same, or rather ours the elder-
    The breese upon her, like a cow in June-
    Hoists sails and flies.

  ENOBARBUS.

  SCARUS.

    I never saw an action of such shame;
    Experience, manhood, honour, ne'er before
    Did violate so itself.
 Our fortune on the sea is out of breath,
    And sinks most lamentably.

    O, he has given example for our flight
    Most grossly by his own!
  ENOBARBUS.
 Ay, are you thereabouts?
    Why then, good night indeed.
 Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.
 'Tis easy to't; and there I will attend
    What further comes.

  CANIDIUS.
 To Caesar will I render
    My legions and my horse; six kings already
    Show me the way of yielding.

  ENOBARBUS.
 CLEOPATRA'S palace

               Enter ANTONY With attendants

  ANTONY.
 Hark! the land bids me tread no more upon't;
    It is asham'd to bear me.
 Friends, come hither.
 I have a ship
    Laden with gold; take that; divide it.

  ALL.
 Fly? Not we!
  ANTONY.
 I have fled myself, and have instructed cowards
    To run and show their shoulders.
 Friends, be gone;
    I have myself resolv'd upon a course
    Which has no need of you; be gone.

    My treasure's in the harbour, take it.
 O,
    I follow'd that I blush to look upon.
 Friends, be gone; you shall
    Have letters from me to some friends that will  
    Sweep your way for you.
 Let that be left
    Which leaves itself.

    I will possess you of that ship and treasure.

    Leave me, I pray, a little; pray you now;
    Nay, do so, for indeed I have lost command;
    Therefore I pray you.
 I'll see you by and by.
    [Sits down]

            Enter CLEOPATRA, led by CHARMIAN and IRAS,
                         EROS following

  EROS.
 Nay, gentle madam, to him! Comfort him.

  IRAS.
 Do, most dear Queen.

  CHARMIAN.
 Do? Why, what else?
  CLEOPATRA.
 Let me sit down.
 See you here, sir?
  ANTONY.
 O, fie, fie, fie!
  CHARMIAN.
 Madam!  
  IRAS.
 Madam, O good Empress!
  EROS.
 Sir, sir!
  ANTONY.
 Yes, my lord, yes.
 He at Philippi kept
    His sword e'en like a dancer, while I struck
    The lean and wrinkled Cassius; and 'twas I
    That the mad Brutus ended; he alone
    Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had
    In the brave squares of war.
 Yet now- no matter.
 Ah, stand by!
  EROS.
 The Queen, my lord, the Queen!
  IRAS.
 Most noble sir, arise; the Queen approaches.

  ANTONY.

  EROS.
 O, whither hast thou led me, Egypt? See
    How I convey my shame out of thine eyes  
    By looking back what I have left behind
    'Stroy'd in dishonour.

  CLEOPATRA.

  ANTONY.
 Egypt, thou knew'st too well
    My heart was to thy rudder tied by th' strings,
    And thou shouldst tow me after.
 You did know
    How much you were my conqueror, and that
    My sword, made weak by my affection, would
    Obey it on all cause.
  
  CLEOPATRA.
 Pardon, pardon!
  ANTONY.
 Give me a kiss;
    Even this repays me.

    We sent our schoolmaster; is 'a come back?
    Love, I am full of lead.
 Some wine,
    Within there, and our viands! Fortune knows
    We scorn her most when most she offers blows.

                   CAESAR'S camp in Egypt

   Enter CAESAR, AGRIPPA, DOLABELLA, THYREUS, with others

  CAESAR.

    Know you him?
  DOLABELLA.
 Caesar, 'tis his schoolmaster:
    An argument that he is pluck'd, when hither
    He sends so poor a pinion of his wing,
    Which had superfluous kings for messengers
    Not many moons gone by.


            Enter EUPHRONIUS, Ambassador from ANTONY

  CAESAR.
 Approach, and speak.
 Such as I am, I come from Antony.

    I was of late as petty to his ends
    As is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf
    To his grand sea.
 Be't so.
 Declare thine office.

  EUPHRONIUS.
 Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and  
    Requires to live in Egypt; which not granted,
    He lessens his requests and to thee sues
    To let him breathe between the heavens and earth,
    A private man in Athens.

  CAESAR.
 For Antony,
    I have no ears to his request.
 The Queen
    Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she
    From Egypt drive her all-disgraced friend,
    Or take his life there.
 This if she perform,
    She shall not sue unheard.
 Promise,
    And in our name, what she requires; add more,
    From thine invention, offers.
 Women are not  
    In their best fortunes strong; but want will perjure
    The ne'er-touch'd vestal.
 Try thy cunning, Thyreus;
    Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we
    Will answer as a law.
 Caesar, I go.

  CAESAR.
 Observe how Antony becomes his flaw,
    And what thou think'st his very action speaks
    In every power that moves.

  THYREUS.

               Alexandria.
 CLEOPATRA'S palace

        Enter CLEOPATRA, ENOBARBUS, CHARMIAN, and IRAS

  CLEOPATRA.
 Think, and die.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Is Antony or we in fault for this?
  ENOBARBUS.


          Enter EUPHRONIUS, the Ambassador; with ANTONY
  
  ANTONY.
 Is that his answer?
  EUPHRONIUS.
 Ay, my lord.
 The Queen shall then have courtesy, so she
    Will yield us up.

  EUPHRONIUS.

  ANTONY.
 Let her know't.

    To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head,
    And he will fill thy wishes to the brim
    With principalities.

  CLEOPATRA.
 That head, my lord?
  ANTONY.
 To him again.
 Tell him he wears the rose
    Of youth upon him; from which the world should note
    Something particular.
 His coin, ships, legions,
    May be a coward's whose ministers would prevail
    Under the service of a child as soon
    As i' th' command of Caesar.
 I dare him therefore
    To lay his gay comparisons apart,
    And answer me declin'd, sword against sword,
    Ourselves alone.
 I'll write it.
 That he should dream,
    Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will
    Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdu'd
    His judgment too.
 A messenger from Caesar.

  CLEOPATRA.
     Exit SERVANT
  ENOBARBUS.
 Yet he that can endure
    To follow with allegiance a fall'n lord  
    Does conquer him that did his master conquer,
    And earns a place i' th' story.


                       Enter THYREUS

  CLEOPATRA.

  CLEOPATRA.
 If Caesar please, our master
    Will leap to be his friend.
 For us, you know
    Whose he is we are, and that is Caesar's.

  THYREUS.
 So.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Right royal!
  THYREUS.
 He knows that you embrace not Antony
    As you did love, but as you fear'd him.
  
  CLEOPATRA.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Mine honour was not yielded,
    But conquer'd merely.
 [Aside] To be sure of that,
    I will ask Antony.
 Sir, sir, thou art so leaky
    That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
    Thy dearest quit thee.
 What's your name?  
  THYREUS.
 My name is Thyreus.
 Most kind messenger,
    Say to great Caesar this: in deputation
    I kiss his conquring hand.

    Tell him from his all-obeying breath I hear
    The doom of Egypt.

    Wisdom and fortune combating together,
    If that the former dare but what it can,
    No chance may shake it.

  ENOBARBUS.
 [Aside] You will be whipt.

  ANTONY.
- Ah, you kite!- Now, gods and devils!
    Authority melts from me.
 Of late, when I cried 'Ho!'
    Like boys unto a muss, kings would start forth
    And cry 'Your will?' Have you no ears? I am
    Antony yet.

  ENOBARBUS.
 'Tis better playing with a lion's whelp
    Than with an old one dying.

  ANTONY.
 Were't twenty of the greatest tributaries
    That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
    So saucy with the hand of she here- what's her name  
    Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him, fellows,
    Till like a boy you see him cringe his face,
    And whine aloud for mercy.
       Exeunt servants with THYREUS
    You were half blasted ere I knew you.
 You have been a boggler ever.
 I found you as a morsel cold upon
    Dead Caesar's trencher.
 Nay, you were a fragment
    Of Cneius Pompey's, besides what hotter hours,
    Unregist'red in vulgar fame, you have
    Luxuriously pick'd out; for I am sure,
    Though you can guess what temperance should be,
    You know not what it is.

  CLEOPATRA.


              Re-enter a SERVANT with THYREUS
  
    Is he whipt?
  SERVANT.
 Cried he? and begg'd 'a pardon?
  SERVANT.
 Henceforth
    The white hand of a lady fever thee!
    Shake thou to look on't.
                Exit THYREUS
  CLEOPATRA.
 Have you done yet?
  ANTONY.

  CLEOPATRA.
 I must stay his time.

  ANTONY.
 Ah, dear, if I be so,
    From my cold heart let heaven engender hail,
    And poison it in the source, and the first stone
    Drop in my neck; as it determines, so
    Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite!
    Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
    Together with my brave Egyptians all,
    By the discandying of this pelleted storm,  
    Lie graveless, till the flies and gnats of Nile
    Have buried them for prey.

    Caesar sits down in Alexandria, where
    I will oppose his fate.
 Our force by land
    Hath nobly held; our sever'd navy to
    Have knit again, and fleet, threat'ning most sea-like.

    There's hope in't yet.
 For when mine hours
    Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives
    Of me for jests; but now I'll set my teeth,
    And send to darkness all that stop me.
 Come,
    Let's have one other gaudy night.
 Call to me
    All my sad captains; fill our bowls once more;  
    Let's mock the midnight bell.
 It is my birthday.

  ANTONY.
 We will yet do well.

  CLEOPATRA.

  ANTONY.
 Do so, we'll speak to them; and to-night I'll force
    The wine peep through their scars.
 The next time I do fight
    I'll make death love me; for I will contend
    Even with his pestilent scythe.
 Now he'll outstare the lightning.
 To be furious
    Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood
    The dove will peck the estridge; and I see still
    A diminution in our captain's brain
    Restores his heart.
 When valour preys on reason,
    It eats the sword it fights with.
 SCENE I.

              CAESAR'S camp before Alexandria

      Enter CAESAR, AGRIPPA, and MAECENAS, with his army;
                 CAESAR reading a letter

  CAESAR.
 He calls me boy, and chides as he had power
    To beat me out of Egypt.
 My messenger
    He hath whipt with rods; dares me to personal combat,
    Caesar to Antony.
 Let the old ruffian know
    I have many other ways to die, meantime
    Laugh at his challenge.

  MAECENAS.

  CAESAR.
 Let our best heads
    Know that to-morrow the last of many battles
    We mean to fight.
 Within our files there are
    Of those that serv'd Mark Antony but late
    Enough to fetch him in.
 See it done;  
    And feast the army; we have store to do't,
    And they have earn'd the waste.

               Alexandria.
 CLEOPATRA's palace

      Enter ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, ENOBARBUS, CHARMIAN, IRAS,
                     ALEXAS, with others

  ANTONY.
 He will not fight with me, Domitius?
  ENOBARBUS.
 No.
 He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
    He is twenty men to one.

  ANTONY.
 To-morrow, soldier,
    By sea and land I'll fight.
 Woo't thou fight well?
  ENOBARBUS.
 I'll strike, and cry 'Take all.
'
  ANTONY.
 Well said; come on.

    Call forth my household servants; let's to-night
    Be bounteous at our meal.
 So hast thou;
    Thou, and thou, and thou.
 You have serv'd me well,
    And kings have been your fellows.

  CLEOPATRA.
 [Aside to ENOBARBUS] What means this?
  ENOBARBUS.

    I wish I could be made so many men,
    And all of you clapp'd up together in
    An Antony, that I might do you service
    So good as you have done.
 The gods forbid!
  ANTONY.

    Scant not my cups, and make as much of me
    As when mine empire was your fellow too,
    And suffer'd my command.

  CLEOPATRA.
 [Aside to ENOBARBUS] What does he mean?
    ENOBARBUS.
  
  ANTONY.
 Tend me to-night;
    May be it is the period of your duty.

    Haply you shall not see me more; or if,
    A mangled shadow.
 Perchance to-morrow
    You'll serve another master.
 Mine honest friends,
    I turn you not away; but, like a master
    Married to your good service, stay till death.

  ANTONY.
 Know, my hearts,  
    I hope well of to-morrow, and will lead you
    Where rather I'll expect victorious life
    Than death and honour.
                              Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_3
                          SCENE III.

             Alexandria.
 Before CLEOPATRA's palace

                 Enter a company of soldiers

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Brother, good night.
 Fare you well.
 Good night to you.

  FIRST SOLDIER.

                                      [They meet other soldiers]
  SECOND SOLDIER.
 And you.
 Here we.
 And if to-morrow
    Our navy thrive, I have an absolute hope
    Our landmen will stand up.
 'Tis a brave army,
    And full of purpose.

                      [Music of the hautboys is under the stage]  
  SECOND SOLDIER.
 Peace, what noise?
  THIRD SOLDIER.
 Hark!
  THIRD SOLDIER.
 Music i' th' air.

  FOURTH SOLDIER.
 It signs well, does it not?
  FOURTH SOLDIER.
 No.
 Peace, I say!
    What should this mean?
  SECOND SOLDIER.
 'Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony lov'd,
    Now leaves him.

  THIRD SOLDIER.
 Walk; let's see if other watchmen
    Do hear what we do.
 How now, masters!
  SOLDIERS.
 [Speaking together] How now!
    How now! Do you hear this?
  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Ay; is't not strange?
  THIRD SOLDIER.
 Do you hear, masters? Do you hear?
  FIRST SOLDIER.
 'Tis strange.
                        Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_4
                           SCENE IV.

  ANTONY.

    If fortune be not ours to-day, it is
    Because we brave her.
 Come.
 Nay, I'll help too.

    What's this for?
  ANTONY.
 Ah, let be, let be! Thou art
    The armourer of my heart.
 False, false; this, this.
 Thus it must be.

  ANTONY.
 Well, well;
    We shall thrive now.
 Seest thou, my good fellow?  
    Go put on thy defences.

  EROS.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Is not this buckled well?
  ANTONY.

    Thou fumblest, Eros, and my queen's a squire
    More tight at this than thou.
 Dispatch.
 Welcome.

  SOLDIER.
 A thousand, sir,
    Early though't be, have on their riveted trim,  
    And at the port expect you.
 The morn is fair.

  ALL.
 Good morrow, General.
 Come, give me that.
 This way.

    This is a soldier's kiss.
 Rebukeable,
    And worthy shameful check it were, to stand
    On more mechanic compliment; I'll leave thee
    Now like a man of steel.
 Adieu.

                      Exeunt ANTONY, EROS, CAPTAINS and soldiers
  CHARMIAN.
 Please you retire to your chamber?
  CLEOPATRA.
 Lead me.

    He goes forth gallantly.
 That he and Caesar might
    Determine this great war in single fight!
    Then, Antony- but now.

                  Alexandria.
 Enter ANTONY and EROS, a SOLDIER
                       meeting them

  SOLDIER.
 The gods make this a happy day to Antony!
  ANTONY.
 Hadst thou done so,
    The kings that have revolted, and the soldier
    That has this morning left thee, would have still
    Followed thy heels.
 Who's gone this morning?
  SOLDIER.
 Who?
    One ever near thee.
'
  ANTONY.
 What say'st thou?
  SOLDIER.
 Sir, his chests and treasure  
    He has not with him.

  ANTONY.
 Is he gone?
  SOLDIER.

  ANTONY.
 Go, Eros, send his treasure after; do it;
    Detain no jot, I charge thee.
 O, my fortunes have
    Corrupted honest men! Dispatch.
 Enobarbus!            Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_6
                         SCENE VI.

                 Alexandria.
 Enter AGRIPPA, CAESAR, With DOLABELLA
                       and ENOBARBUS

  CAESAR.

    Our will is Antony be took alive;
    Make it so known.
 The time of universal peace is near.


                     Enter A MESSENGER

  MESSENGER.
                       Exeunt all but ENOBARBUS  
  ENOBARBUS.


                  Enter a SOLDIER of CAESAR'S

  SOLDIER.
 Enobarbus, Antony
    Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with
    His bounty overplus.

  ENOBARBUS.
 I give it you.

  SOLDIER.
 Mock not, Enobarbus.

    I tell you true.
 Best you saf'd the bringer  
    Out of the host.
 I must attend mine office,
    Or would have done't myself.
 O Antony,
    Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid
    My better service, when my turpitude
    Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my heart.

    I fight against thee? No! I will go seek
    Some ditch wherein to die; the foul'st best fits
    My latter part of life.
                                 Exit

ACT_4|SC_7
                          SCENE VII.
 Drums and trumpets.
 Enter AGRIPPA
                        and others

  AGRIPPA.
 Retire.
 We have engag'd ourselves too far.

    Caesar himself has work, and our oppression
    Exceeds what we expected.
 Enter ANTONY, and SCARUS wounded

  SCARUS.
 O my brave Emperor, this is fought indeed!
    Had we done so at first, we had droven them home
    With clouts about their heads.

  ANTONY.
 Thou bleed'st apace.

  SCARUS.

  ANTONY.
 They do retire.

  SCARUS.
 I have yet
    Room for six scotches more.

  
                        Enter EROS

  EROS.
 I will reward thee
    Once for thy sprightly comfort, and tenfold
    For thy good valour.
 Come thee on.
 I'll halt after.
 To-morrow,
    Before the sun shall see's, we'll spill the blood
    That has to-day escap'd.
 I thank you all;
    For doughty-handed are you, and have fought
    Not as you serv'd the cause, but as't had been
    Each man's like mine; you have shown all Hectors.

    Enter the city, clip your wives, your friends,
    Tell them your feats; whilst they with joyful tears
    Wash the congealment from your wounds and kiss
    The honour'd gashes whole.


                 Enter CLEOPATRA, attended

    [To SCARUS] Give me thy hand-
    To this great fairy I'll commend thy acts,  
    Make her thanks bless thee.
 O thou day o' th' world,
    Chain mine arm'd neck.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Lord of lords!
    O infinite virtue, com'st thou smiling from
    The world's great snare uncaught?
  ANTONY.
 What, girl! though grey
    Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet ha' we
    A brain that nourishes our nerves, and can
    Get goal for goal of youth.
 Behold this man;
    Commend unto his lips thy favouring hand-
    Kiss it, my warrior- he hath fought to-day
    As if a god in hate of mankind had
    Destroyed in such a shape.
 He has deserv'd it, were it carbuncled
    Like holy Phoebus' car.
 Give me thy hand.
  
    Through Alexandria make a jolly march;
    Bear our hack'd targets like the men that owe them.

    Had our great palace the capacity
    To camp this host, we all would sup together,
    And drink carouses to the next day's fate,
    Which promises royal peril.
 Trumpeters,
    With brazen din blast you the city's ear;
    Make mingle with our rattling tabourines,
    That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together
    Applauding our approach.
                              Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_9
                         SCENE IX.

                      CAESAR'S camp

      Enter a CENTURION and his company; ENOBARBUS follows

  CENTURION.
 If we be not reliev'd within this hour,
    We must return to th' court of guard.
 The night
    Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle
    By th' second hour i' th' morn.

  FIRST WATCH.
 This last day was
    A shrewd one to's.

  ENOBARBUS.
 O, bear me witness, night-
  SECOND WATCH.
 What man is this?
  FIRST WATCH.
 Stand close and list him.

  ENOBARBUS.
 Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon,
    When men revolted shall upon record
    Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did
    Before thy face repent!
  CENTURION.
 Enobarbus?
  SECOND WATCH.
 Peace!
    Hark further.
 O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,  
    The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me,
    That life, a very rebel to my will,
    May hang no longer on me.
 O Antony,
    Nobler than my revolt is infamous,
    Forgive me in thine own particular,
    But let the world rank me in register
    A master-leaver and a fugitive!
    O Antony! O Antony!                                   [Dies]
  FIRST WATCH.
 Let's do so.
 Swoons rather; for so bad a prayer as his
    Was never yet for sleep.
 Awake, sir, awake; speak to us.

  FIRST WATCH.
 Hear you, sir?  
  CENTURION.

    [Drums afar off ] Hark! the drums
    Demurely wake the sleepers.
 Our hour
    Is fully out.

  SECOND WATCH.
 Come on, then;
    He may recover yet.

                    Between the two camps

            Enter ANTONY and SCARUS, with their army

  ANTONY.
 Their preparation is to-day by sea;
    We please them not by land.

  SCARUS.
 I would they'd fight i' th' fire or i' th' air;
    We'd fight there too.
                          Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_11
                         SCENE XI.
 To the vales,
    And hold our best advantage.

                  A hill near Alexandria

                  Enter ANTONY and SCARUS

  ANTONY.
 Yet they are not join'd.
 Where yond pine does stand
    I shall discover all.
 The augurers
    Say they know not, they cannot tell; look grimly,
    And dare not speak their knowledge.
 Antony
    Is valiant and dejected; and by starts
    His fretted fortunes give him hope and fear
    Of what he has and has not.

                            [Alarum afar off, as at a sea-fight]

                      Re-enter ANTONY

  ANTONY.
 Bid them all fly; begone.
       Exit SCARUS
    O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more!
    Fortune and Antony part here; even here
    Do we shake hands.
 All come to this? The hearts
    That spaniel'd me at heels, to whom I gave
    Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets
    On blossoming Caesar; and this pine is bark'd
    That overtopp'd them all.
 Why is my lord enrag'd against his love?
  ANTONY.
 Let him take thee
    And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians;
    Follow his chariot, like the greatest spot
    Of all thy sex; most monster-like, be shown
    For poor'st diminutives, for doits, and let
    Patient Octavia plough thy visage up
    With her prepared nails.
                      Exit CLEOPATRA
    'Tis well th'art gone,
    If it be well to live; but better 'twere
    Thou fell'st into my fury, for one death
    Might have prevented many.
 The witch shall die.

    To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I fall
    Under this plot.
 She dies for't.
 Eros, ho!              Exit

ACT_4|SC_13
                          SCENE XIII.
 CLEOPATRA's palace

      Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and MARDIAN

  CLEOPATRA.
 Help me, my women.
 O, he is more mad
    Than Telamon for his shield; the boar of Thessaly
    Was never so emboss'd.
 To th'monument!
    There lock yourself, and send him word you are dead.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Hence, Mardian,
    And bring me how he takes my death.
 To th' monument!
                                                          Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_14
                          SCENE XIV.
 Eros, thou yet behold'st me?
  EROS.
 Ay, noble lord.

  ANTONY.
 Sometime we see a cloud that's dragonish;
    A vapour sometime like a bear or lion,
    A tower'd citadel, a pendent rock,
    A forked mountain, or blue promontory
    With trees upon't that nod unto the world
    And mock our eyes with air.

  EROS.

  ANTONY.

  EROS.
 It does, my lord.
 My good knave Eros, now thy captain is
    Even such a body.
 Here I am Antony;
    Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave.
  
    I made these wars for Egypt; and the Queen-
    Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine,
    Which, whilst it was mine, had annex'd unto't
    A million moe, now lost- she, Eros, has
    Pack'd cards with Caesar, and false-play'd my glory
    Unto an enemy's triumph.

    Nay, weep not, gentle Eros; there is left us
    Ourselves to end ourselves.

  ANTONY.
 Hence, saucy eunuch; peace!
    She hath betray'd me, and shall die the death.

  MARDIAN.
 Dead then?
  MARDIAN.
 Dead.
 Unarm, Eros; the long day's task is done,
    And we must sleep.
 Go.
                 Exit MARDIAN
    Off, pluck off!
    The sevenfold shield of Ajax cannot keep
    The battery from my heart.
 O, cleave, my sides!
    Heart, once be stronger than thy continent,
    Crack thy frail case.
 Apace, Eros, apace.
-
    No more a soldier.
 Bruised pieces, go;
    You have been nobly borne.
- From me awhile.
        Exit EROS
    I will o'ertake thee, Cleopatra, and
    Weep for my pardon.
 Seal then, and all is done.
- Eros!- Stay for me;
    Where souls do couch on flowers, we'll hand in hand,
    And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze.
 What would my lord?
  ANTONY.
 Since Cleopatra died,
    I have liv'd in such dishonour that the gods
    Detest my baseness.
 I, that with my sword
    Quarter'd the world, and o'er green Neptune's back
    With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack
    The courage of a woman; less noble mind
    Than she which by her death our Caesar tells  
    'I am conqueror of myself.
' Thou art sworn, Eros,
    That, when the exigent should come- which now
    Is come indeed- when I should see behind me
    Th' inevitable prosecution of
    Disgrace and horror, that, on my command,
    Thou then wouldst kill me.
 Do't; the time is come.

    Put colour in thy cheek.

  EROS.
 I would not see't.

  ANTONY.

  EROS.
 When I did make thee free, swor'st thou not then
    To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once,
    Or thy precedent services are all
    But accidents unpurpos'd.
 Draw, and come.

  EROS.
 Lo thee!                            [Turning from him]
  EROS.

  EROS.
 'Tis said, man; and farewell.

  EROS.
 Farewell, great chief.
 Shall I strike now?
  ANTONY.
 Why, there then! Thus do I escape the sorrow  
    Of Antony's death.
 Thrice nobler than myself!
    Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what
    I should, and thou couldst not.
 But I will be
    A bridegroom in my death, and run into't
    As to a lover's bed.
 To do thus
                                          [Falling on his sword]
    I learn'd of thee.
 How? not dead? not dead?-
    The guard, ho! O, dispatch me!

                  Enter DERCETAS and a guard

  FIRST GUARD.
 What's the noise?
  ANTONY.
 I have done my work ill, friends.
 O, make an end
    Of what I have begun.

  SECOND GUARD.

  FIRST GUARD.
 And time is at his period.
  
  ALL.
 Alas, and woe!
  ANTONY.
 Not I.

  SECOND GUARD.

  THIRD GUARD.
 Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.
 Where's Antony?
  DERCETAS.

  DIOMEDES.
 Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword and give me
    Sufficing strokes for death.

  DIOMEDES.
 Most absolute lord,
    My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.
 When did she send thee?  
  DIOMEDES.
 Now, my lord.
 Lock'd in her monument.
 She had a prophesying fear
    Of what hath come to pass; for when she saw-
    Which never shall be found- you did suspect
    She had dispos'd with Caesar, and that your rage
    Would not be purg'd, she sent you word she was dead;
    But fearing since how it might work, hath sent
    Me to proclaim the truth; and I am come,
    I dread, too late.

  ANTONY.
 Call my guard, I prithee.

  DIOMEDES.
 What, ho! the Emperor's guard! The guard, what ho!
    Come, your lord calls!

             Enter four or five of the guard of ANTONY

  ANTONY.
 Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides;
    'Tis the last service that I shall command you.

  FIRST GUARD.
 Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear
    All your true followers out.
  
  ALL.
 Bid that welcome
    Which comes to punish us, and we punish it,
    Seeming to bear it lightly.
 Take me up.

    I have led you oft; carry me now, good friends,
    And have my thanks for all.
 A monument

      Enter CLEOPATRA and her maids aloft, with CHARMIAN
                         and IRAS

  CLEOPATRA.
 O Charmian, I will never go from hence!
  CHARMIAN.
 Be comforted, dear madam.

  CLEOPATRA.
 No, I will not.

    All strange and terrible events are welcome,
    But comforts we despise; our size of sorrow,
    Proportion'd to our cause, must be as great
    As that which makes it.

    Look out o' th' other side your monument;
    His guard have brought him thither.


            Enter, below, ANTONY, borne by the guard  

  CLEOPATRA.
 O Antony,
    Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian; help, Iras, help;
    Help, friends below! Let's draw him hither.

  ANTONY.
 Peace!
    Not Caesar's valour hath o'erthrown Antony,
    But Antony's hath triumph'd on itself.
 I am dying, Egypt, dying; only
    I here importune death awhile, until
    Of many thousand kisses the poor last
    I lay upon thy lips.

  CLEOPATRA.
 I dare not, dear.

    Dear my lord, pardon! I dare not,
    Lest I be taken.
 If knife, drugs, serpents, have  
    Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Here's sport indeed! How heavy weighs my lord!
    Our strength is all gone into heaviness;
    That makes the weight.
 Had I great Juno's power,
    The strong-wing'd Mercury should fetch thee up,
    And set thee by Jove's side.

    Wishers were ever fools.
 O come, come,
                          [They heave ANTONY aloft to CLEOPATRA]
    And welcome, welcome! Die where thou hast liv'd.

  ALL.
 A heavy sight!
  ANTONY.
 I am dying, Egypt, dying.

    Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.
  
  CLEOPATRA.
 No, let me speak; and let me rail so high
    That the false huswife Fortune break her wheel,
    Provok'd by my offence.

  ANTONY.
 One word, sweet queen:
    Of Caesar seek your honour, with your safety.
 O!
  CLEOPATRA.
 They do not go together.
 Gentle, hear me:
    None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.
 My resolution and my hands I'll trust;
    None about Caesar
  ANTONY.
 Now my spirit is going
    I can no more.
 The odds is gone,
    And there is nothing left remarkable
    Beneath the visiting moon.
                          [Swoons]
  CHARMIAN.
 O, quietness, lady!
  IRAS.
 She's dead too, our sovereign.

  CHARMIAN.
 Madam!
  CHARMIAN.
 O madam, madam, madam!
  IRAS.
 Royal Egypt, Empress!
  CHARMIAN.
 Peace, peace, Iras!
  CLEOPATRA.
 All's but nought;
    Patience is sottish, and impatience does
    Become a dog that's mad.
 Then is it sin
    To rush into the secret house of death
    Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women?
    What, what! good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian!
    My noble girls! Ah, women, women, look,
    Our lamp is spent, it's out! Good sirs, take heart.

    Ah, women, women! Come; we have no friend
    But resolution and the briefest end.

                   Exeunt; those above hearing off ANTONY'S body

ACT_5|SC_1
                       ACT V.

                  Alexandria.
 CAESAR'S camp

      Enter CAESAR, AGRIPPA, DOLABELLA, MAECENAS, GALLUS,
          PROCULEIUS, and others, his Council of War

  CAESAR.
 Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield;
    Being so frustrate, tell him he mocks
    The pauses that he makes.

  DOLABELLA.
                               Exit

             Enter DERCETAS With the sword of ANTONY

  CAESAR.
 What is't thou say'st?
  DERCETAS.
 The breaking of so great a thing should make
    A greater crack.
 This is his sword;
    I robb'd his wound of it; behold it stain'd
    With his most noble blood.
 Look you sad, friends?
    The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings
    To wash the eyes of kings.
 And strange it is
    That nature must compel us to lament
    Our most persisted deeds.

  MAECENAS.
 His taints and honours
    Wag'd equal with him.

  AGRIPPA.
 But you gods will give us
    Some faults to make us men.
 Caesar is touch'd.

  MAECENAS.

  CAESAR.
 O Antony,
    I have follow'd thee to this! But we do lance
    Diseases in our bodies.
 But yet let me lament,
    With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts,
    That thou, my brother, my competitor
    In top of all design, my mate in empire,
    Friend and companion in the front of war,  
    The arm of mine own body, and the heart
    Where mine his thoughts did kindle- that our stars,
    Unreconciliable, should divide
    Our equalness to this.
 Hear me, good friends-

                    Enter an EGYPTIAN

    But I will tell you at some meeter season.

    The business of this man looks out of him;
    We'll hear him what he says.
 A poor Egyptian, yet the Queen, my mistress,
    Confin'd in all she has, her monument,
    Of thy intents desires instruction,
    That she preparedly may frame herself
    To th' way she's forc'd to.

    She soon shall know of us, by some of ours,
    How honourable and how kindly we
    Determine for her; for Caesar cannot learn
    To be ungentle.
  
  EGYPTIAN.
 Give her what comforts
    The quality of her passion shall require,
    Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke
    She do defeat us; for her life in Rome
    Would be eternal in our triumph.

  PROCULEIUS.
 Caesar, I shall.
                              Exit
  CAESAR.
 Go with me, and see
    What I can show in this.
                              Exeunt

ACT_5|SC_2
                         SCENE II.
 My desolation does begin to make
    A better life.
 Caesar sends greetings to the Queen of Egypt,
    And bids thee study on what fair demands
    Thou mean'st to have him grant thee.

  CLEOPATRA.
 My name is Proculeius.
 If he please
    To give me conquer'd Egypt for my son,
    He gives me so much of mine own as I
    Will kneel to him with thanks.

  PROCULEIUS.
 Be of good cheer;
    Y'are fall'n into a princely hand; fear nothing.

    Make your full reference freely to my lord,
    Who is so full of grace that it flows over
    On all that need.
 Let me report to him
    Your sweet dependency, and you shall find
    A conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness
    Where he for grace is kneel'd to.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Pray you tell him
    I am his fortune's vassal and I send him  
    The greatness he has got.
 I hourly learn
    A doctrine of obedience, and would gladly
    Look him i' th' face.

  PROCULEIUS.
 This I'll report, dear lady.

    Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied
    Of him that caus'd it.

  GALLUS.
 You see how easily she may be surpris'd.


      Here PROCULEIUS and two of the guard ascend the
       monument by a ladder placed against a window,
       and come behind CLEOPATRA.
 Some of the guard
                unbar and open the gates

    Guard her till Caesar come.
 Royal Queen!
  CHARMIAN.
 O Cleopatra! thou art taken, Queen!
  CLEOPATRA.
 Quick, quick, good hands.
        [Drawing a dagger]
  PROCULEIUS.
 What, of death too,
    That rids our dogs of languish?
  PROCULEIUS.
 Cleopatra,
    Do not abuse my master's bounty by
    Th' undoing of yourself.
 Where art thou, death?
    Come hither, come! Come, come, and take a queen
    Worth many babes and beggars!
  PROCULEIUS.
 This mortal house I'll ruin,
    Do Caesar what he can.
 Shall they hoist me up,
    And show me to the shouting varletry
    Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt  
    Be gentle grave unto me! Rather on Nilus' mud
    Lay me stark-nak'd, and let the water-flies
    Blow me into abhorring! Rather make
    My country's high pyramides my gibbet,
    And hang me up in chains!
  PROCULEIUS.
 You do extend
    These thoughts of horror further than you shall
    Find cause in Caesar.


                      Enter DOLABELLA

  DOLABELLA.
 Proculeius,
    What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows,
    And he hath sent for thee.

  PROCULEIUS.
 Be gentle to her.

    [To CLEOPATRA] To Caesar I will speak what you shall please,
    If you'll employ me to him.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Say I would die.
  
                                  Exeunt PROCULEIUS and soldiers
  DOLABELLA.
 Most noble Empress, you have heard of me?
  CLEOPATRA.

  DOLABELLA.
 No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.

  CLEOPATRA.
 I dreamt there was an Emperor Antony-
    O, such another sleep, that I might see
    But such another man!
  DOLABELLA.
 If it might please ye-
  CLEOPATRA.
 His legs bestrid the ocean; his rear'd arm
    Crested the world.
 His voice was propertied
    As all the tuned spheres, and that to friends;
    But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,  
    He was as rattling thunder.
 His delights
    Were dolphin-like: they show'd his back above
    The element they liv'd in.
 Think you there was or might be such a man
    As this I dreamt of?
  DOLABELLA.

    But if there be nor ever were one such,
    It's past the size of drearning.

  DOLABELLA.
 Hear me, good madam.

    Your loss is, as yourself, great; and you bear it
    As answering to the weight.
 Would I might never  
    O'ertake pursu'd success, but I do feel,
    By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites
    My very heart at root.

  CLEOPATRA.
 I thank you, sir.

    Know you what Caesar means to do with me?
  DOLABELLA.
 I am loath to tell you what I would you knew.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Nay, pray you, sir.
 Though he be honourable-
  CLEOPATRA.
 Madam, he will.
                [Flourish]
                              [Within: 'Make way there-Caesar!']

       Enter CAESAR; GALLUS, PROCULEIUS, MAECENAS, SELEUCUS,
                     and others of his train

  CAESAR.
        [CLEOPATPA kneels]
  CAESAR.
 Arise, you shall not kneel.

    I pray you, rise; rise, Egypt.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Sir, the gods  
    Will have it thus; my master and my lord
    I must obey.
 Take to you no hard thoughts.

    The record of what injuries you did us,
    Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
    As things but done by chance.

  CLEOPATRA.

  CAESAR.
 I'll take my leave.
 And may, through all the world.
 'Tis yours, and we,
    Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall
    Hang in what place you please.
 You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.

  CLEOPATRA.
 This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels,
    I am possess'd of.
 'Tis exactly valued,
    Not petty things admitted.
 This is my treasurer; let him speak, my lord,
    Upon his peril, that I have reserv'd
    To myself nothing.
 Madam,
    I had rather seal my lips than to my peril
    Speak that which is not.

  CLEOPATRA.
 What have I kept back?
  SELEUCUS.
 Enough to purchase what you have made known.

  CAESAR.
 Nay, blush not, Cleopatra; I approve
    Your wisdom in the deed.
 See, Caesar! O, behold,  
    How pomp is followed! Mine will now be yours;
    And, should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
 Slave, soulless villain, dog!
    O rarely base!
  CAESAR.
 Good Queen, let us entreat you.
 O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
    That thou vouchsafing here to visit me,
    Doing the honour of thy lordliness
    To one so meek, that mine own servant should
    Parcel the sum of my disgraces by
    Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar,
    That I some lady trifles have reserv'd,
    Immoment toys, things of such dignity
    As we greet modern friends withal; and say
    Some nobler token I have kept apart
    For Livia and Octavia, to induce  
    Their mediation- must I be unfolded
    With one that I have bred? The gods! It smites me
    Beneath the fall I have.
 Wert thou a man,
    Thou wouldst have mercy on me.
 Forbear, Seleucus.
                       Exit SELEUCUS
  CLEOPATRA.
 Be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought
    For things that others do; and when we fall
    We answer others' merits in our name,
    Are therefore to be pitied.

  CAESAR.
 Cleopatra,
    Not what you have reserv'd, nor what acknowledg'd,
    Put we i' th' roll of conquest.
 No, dear Queen;
    For we intend so to dispose you as
    Yourself shall give us counsel.
 Feed and sleep.

  CLEOPATRA.
 My master and my lord!
  CAESAR.
 Adieu.

                           Flourish.
 He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not
    Be noble to myself.
 But hark thee, Charmian!
                                             [Whispers CHARMIAN]
  IRAS.
 Hie thee again.
 Where's the Queen?
  CHARMIAN.
                                    Exit
  CLEOPATRA.
 Dolabella!  
  DOLABELLA.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Dolabella,
    I shall remain your debtor.

  DOLABELLA.
 I your servant.

    Adieu, good Queen; I must attend on Caesar.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Farewell, and thanks.

  IRAS.
 Saucy lictors
    Will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhymers
    Ballad us out o' tune; the quick comedians
    Extemporally will stage us, and present
    Our Alexandrian revels; Antony
    Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
    Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness
    I' th' posture of a whore.

  IRAS.
 Nay, that's certain.
 I'll never see't, for I am sure mine nails
    Are stronger than mine eyes.
 Why, that's the way
    To fool their preparation and to conquer
    Their most absurd intents.


                      Enter CHARMIAN

    Now, Charmian!
    Show me, my women, like a queen.
 I am again for Cydnus,
    To meet Mark Antony.
 Sirrah, Iras, go.

    Now, noble Charmian, we'll dispatch indeed;
    And when thou hast done this chare, I'll give thee leave
    To play till doomsday.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Let him come in.
 Now from head to foot
    I am marble-constant; now the fleeting moon
    No planet is of mine.
  

          Re-enter GUARDSMAN and CLOWN, with a basket

  GUARDSMAN.
 This is the man.

  CLEOPATRA.
                Exit GUARDSMAN
    Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there
    That kills and pains not?
  CLOWN.
 Truly, I have him.
 But I would not be the party that should
    desire you to touch him, for his biting is immortal; those that
    do die of it do seldom or never recover.
 Very many, men and women too.
 I heard of one of them no
    longer than yesterday: a very honest woman, but something given
    to lie, as a woman should not do but in the way of honesty; how
    she died of the biting of it, what pain she felt- truly she makes
    a very good report o' th' worm.
 But he that will believe all that
    they say shall never be saved by half that they do.
 But this is
    most falliable, the worm's an odd worm.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Get thee hence; farewell.

  CLOWN.
 I wish you all joy of the worm.
  
                                          [Sets down the basket]
  CLEOPATRA.
 You must think this, look you, that the worm will do his
    kind.

  CLEOPATRA.
 Look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the keeping
    of wise people; for indeed there is no goodness in the worm.

  CLEOPATRA.

  CLOWN.
 Will it eat me?
  CLOWN.
 You must not think I am so simple but I know the devil
    himself will not eat a woman.
 Well, get thee gone; farewell.
 Yes, forsooth.
 I wish you joy o' th' worm.
  

  CLEOPATRA.
 Give me my robe, put on my crown; I have
    Immortal longings in me.
 Now no more
    The juice of Egypt's grape shall moist this lip.
 Methinks I hear
    Antony call.
 I see him rouse himself
    To praise my noble act.
 I hear him mock
    The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men
    To excuse their after wrath.
 So, have you done?
    Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.
 Iras, long farewell.

                              [Kisses them.
 Dissolve, thick cloud, and rain, that I may say
    The gods themselves do weep.

  CLEOPATRA.
 This proves me base.

    If she first meet the curled Antony,
    He'll make demand of her, and spend that kiss
    Which is my heaven to have.
 O couldst thou speak,
    That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass
    Unpolicied!
  CHARMIAN.
 O Eastern star!
  CLEOPATRA.
 Peace, peace!
    Dost thou not see my baby at my breast
    That sucks the nurse asleep?
  CHARMIAN.
 In this vile world? So, fare thee well.

    Now boast thee, death, in thy possession lies
    A lass unparallel'd.
 Downy windows, close;
    And golden Phoebus never be beheld
    Of eyes again so royal! Your crown's awry;
    I'll mend it and then play-

                  Enter the guard, rushing in

  FIRST GUARD.
 Where's the Queen?
  CHARMIAN.
 Speak softly, wake her not.
 Caesar hath sent-
  CHARMIAN.
               [Applies an asp]
    O, come apace, dispatch.

  FIRST GUARD.

  SECOND GUARD.
 There's Dolabella sent from Caesar; call him.

  FIRST GUARD.
 It is well done, and fitting for a princes  
    Descended of so many royal kings.

    Ah, soldier!                                 [CHARMIAN dies]

                      Re-enter DOLABELLA

  DOLABELLA.
 How goes it here?
  SECOND GUARD.

  DOLABELLA.
 Caesar, thy thoughts
    Touch their effects in this.

                      [Within: 'A way there, a way for Caesar!']

              Re-enter CAESAR and all his train

  DOLABELLA.
 O sir, you are too sure an augurer:
    That you did fear is done.

  CAESAR.
 The manner of their deaths?  
    I do not see them bleed.

  DOLABELLA.
 A simple countryman that brought her figs.
 O Caesar,
    This Charmian liv'd but now; she stood and spake.

    I found her trimming up the diadem
    On her dead mistress.
 Tremblingly she stood,
    And on the sudden dropp'd.

  CAESAR.
 Here on her breast
    There is a vent of blood, and something blown;
    The like is on her arm.

  FIRST GUARD.
 This is an aspic's trail; and these fig-leaves
    Have slime upon them, such as th' aspic leaves  
    Upon the caves of Nile.

  CAESAR.
 Most probable
    That so she died; for her physician tells me
    She hath pursu'd conclusions infinite
    Of easy ways to die.
 Come, Dolabella, see
    High order in this great solemnity.
                   Exeunt


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>





1601

AS YOU LIKE IT

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE.


  DUKE, living in exile
  FREDERICK, his brother, and usurper of his dominions
  AMIENS, lord attending on the banished Duke
  JAQUES,   "      "       "  "     "      "
  LE BEAU, a courtier attending upon Frederick
  CHARLES, wrestler to Frederick
  OLIVER, son of Sir Rowland de Boys
  JAQUES,   "   "  "    "     "  "
  ORLANDO,  "   "  "    "     "  "
  ADAM,   servant to Oliver
  DENNIS,     "     "   "
  TOUCHSTONE, the court jester
  SIR OLIVER MARTEXT, a vicar
  CORIN,    shepherd
  SILVIUS,     "
  WILLIAM, a country fellow, in love with Audrey
  A person representing HYMEN

  ROSALIND, daughter to the banished Duke
  CELIA, daughter to Frederick
  PHEBE, a shepherdes  
  AUDREY, a country wench

  Lords, Pages, Foresters, and Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



SCENE:
OLIVER'S house; FREDERICK'S court; and the Forest of Arden

ACT I.
 SCENE I.

Orchard of OLIVER'S house

Enter ORLANDO and ADAM

  ORLANDO.
 As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed
    me by will but poor a thousand crowns, and, as thou say'st,
    charged my brother, on his blessing, to breed me well; and there
    begins my sadness.
 My brother Jaques he keeps at school, and
    report speaks goldenly of his profit.
 For my part, he keeps me
    rustically at home, or, to speak more properly, stays me here at
    home unkept; for call you that keeping for a gentleman of my
    birth that differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses are
    bred better; for, besides that they are fair with their feeding,
    they are taught their manage, and to that end riders dearly
    hir'd; but I, his brother, gain nothing under him but growth; for
    the which his animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him
    as I.
 Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me, the
    something that nature gave me his countenance seems to take from
    me.
 He lets me feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a
    brother, and as much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my
    education.
 I will no longer endure it, though yet I know no
    wise remedy how to avoid it.
 Yonder comes my master, your brother.
 Nothing; I am not taught to make any thing.

  OLIVER.
 What mar you then, sir?
  ORLANDO.

  OLIVER.
 Marry, sir, be better employed, and be nought awhile.

  ORLANDO.
 Know you before whom, sir?  
  ORLANDO.

  OLIVER.
 Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?
  ORLANDO.
 I am no villain; I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de
    Boys.
 Wert thou not my brother, I would not
    take this hand from thy throat till this other had pull'd out thy
    tongue for saying so.
 Thou has rail'd on thyself.

  OLIVER.
 I will not, till I please; you shall hear me.
 The spirit of my father grows strong in
    me, and I will no longer endure it; therefore allow me such
    exercises as may become a gentleman, or give me the poor
    allottery my father left me by testament; with that I will go buy
    my fortunes.

  OLIVER.
 I will not long be troubled with you; you shall have
    some part of your will.
 I pray you leave me.

  ORLANDO.

  OLIVER.

  ADAM.
 Is 'old dog' my reward? Most true, I have lost my teeth in
    your service.
 God be with my old master! He would not have spoke
    such a word.
 Holla,
    Dennis!

                          Enter DENNIS  

  DENNIS.
 Calls your worship?
  OLIVER.
 So please you, he is here at the door and importunes access
    to you.
 Call him in.
 Good morrow to your worship.
 Good Monsieur Charles! What's the new news at the new
    court?
  CHARLES.
 There's no news at the court, sir, but the old news; that
    is, the old Duke is banished by his younger brother the new Duke;
    and three or four loving lords have put themselves into voluntary
    exile with him, whose lands and revenues enrich the new Duke;
    therefore he gives them good leave to wander.

  OLIVER.
 Can you tell if Rosalind, the Duke's daughter, be banished
    with her father?  
  CHARLES.
 O, no; for the Duke's daughter, her cousin, so loves her,
    being ever from their cradles bred together, that she would have
    followed her exile, or have died to stay behind her.
 Where will the old Duke live?
  CHARLES.
 They say he is already in the Forest of Arden, and a many
    merry men with him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood
    of England.
 They say many young gentlemen flock to him every day,
    and fleet the time carelessly, as they did in the golden world.

  OLIVER.
 Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt
    find I will most kindly requite.
 I had myself notice of my
    brother's purpose herein, and have by underhand means laboured to
    dissuade him from it; but he is resolute.
 I'll tell thee,
    Charles, it is the stubbornest young fellow of France; full of
    ambition, an envious emulator of every man's good parts, a secret
    and villainous contriver against me his natural brother.
 And thou wert best look to't; for if thou
    dost him any slight disgrace, or if he do not mightily grace
    himself on thee, he will practise against thee by poison, entrap
    thee by some treacherous device, and never leave thee till he
    hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other; for, I
    assure thee, and almost with tears I speak it, there is not one
    so young and so villainous this day living.
 I speak but brotherly
    of him; but should I anatomize him to thee as he is, I must blush
    and weep, and thou must look pale and wonder.

  CHARLES.
 I am heartily glad I came hither to you.
 If he come  
    to-morrow I'll give him his payment.
 If ever he go alone again,
    I'll never wrestle for prize more.
 Now will I stir this gamester.
 I
    hope I shall see an end of him; for my soul, yet I know not why,
    hates nothing more than he.
 Yet he's gentle; never school'd and
    yet learned; full of noble device; of all sorts enchantingly
    beloved; and, indeed, so much in the heart of the world, and
    especially of my own people, who best know him, that I am
    altogether misprised.
 Nothing remains but that I kindle the boy
    thither, which now I'll go about.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>




SCENE II.

A lawn before the DUKE'S palace

Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

  CELIA.

  ROSALIND.

  CELIA.
 You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is like to
    have; and, truly, when he dies thou shalt be his heir; for what
    he hath taken away from thy father perforce, I will render thee
    again in affection.
 By mine honour, I will; and when I break that  
    oath, let me turn monster; therefore, my sweet Rose, my dear
    Rose, be merry.
 From henceforth I will, coz, and devise sports.
 What shall be our sport, then?
  CELIA.
 Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from her
    wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.

  ROSALIND.
 I would we could do so; for her benefits are mightily
    misplaced; and the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her
    gifts to women.
 Nay; now thou goest from Fortune's office to Nature's:
    Fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments of
    Nature.

  
                         Enter TOUCHSTONE

  CELIA.
 No; when Nature hath made a fair creature, may she not by
    Fortune fall into the fire? Though Nature hath given us wit to
    flout at Fortune, hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off
    the argument?
  ROSALIND.

  CELIA.
 How
    now, wit! Whither wander you?
  TOUCHSTONE.
 No, by mine honour; but I was bid to come for you.
 Of a certain knight that swore by his honour they were
    good pancakes, and swore by his honour the mustard was naught.

    Now I'll stand to it, the pancakes were naught and the mustard  
    was good, and yet was not the knight forsworn.

  CELIA.
 How prove you that, in the great heap of your knowledge?
  ROSALIND.
 Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and swear
    by your beards that I am a knave.

  CELIA.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 By my knavery, if I had it, then I were.

  CELIA.
 Prithee, who is't that thou mean'st?
  TOUCHSTONE.
 My father's love is enough to honour him.
 Enough, speak no
    more of him; you'll be whipt for taxation one of these days.

  CELIA.
  

                           Enter LE BEAU

  ROSALIND.
 Which he will put on us as pigeons feed their young.

  ROSALIND.
 All the better; we shall be the more marketable.
 Fair Princess, you have lost much good sport.

  CELIA.
 Sport! of what colour?
  LE BEAU.
 What colour, madam? How shall I answer you?
  ROSALIND.
 As wit and fortune will.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 Or as the Destinies decrees.

  CELIA.
 Well said; that was laid on with a trowel.
 Nay, if I keep not my rank-
  ROSALIND.

  LE BEAU.
 You amaze me, ladies.

  ROSALIND.
 Yet tell us the manner of the wrestling.
 I will tell you the beginning, and, if it please your  
    ladyships, you may see the end; for the best is yet to do; and
    here, where you are, they are coming to perform it.

  CELIA.

  LE BEAU.
 Three proper young men, of excellent growth and presence.
 With bills on their necks: 'Be it known unto all men by
    these presents'-
  LE BEAU.
 So he serv'd
    the second, and so the third.
 Yonder they lie; the poor old man,
    their father, making such pitiful dole over them that all the
    beholders take his part with weeping.

  ROSALIND.
 Why, this that I speak of.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 Thus men may grow wiser every day.
  
  CELIA.
 Or I, I promise thee.

  ROSALIND.

  CELIA.
 Yonder, sure, they are coming.
 Let us now stay and see it.


           Flourish.
 Enter DUKE FREDERICK, LORDS, ORLANDO,
                     CHARLES, and ATTENDANTS

  FREDERICK.
 Come on; since the youth will not be entreated, his own
    peril on his forwardness.

  ROSALIND.
 Is yonder the man?
  LE BEAU.
 Even he, madam.
 Alas, he is too young; yet he looks successfully.
 How now, daughter and cousin! Are you crept hither to
    see the wrestling?
  ROSALIND.
 Ay, my liege; so please you give us leave.

  FREDERICK.
 You will take little delight in it, I can tell you,  
    there is such odds in the man.
 In pity of the challenger's youth
    I would fain dissuade him, but he will not be entreated.

  CELIA.
 Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.

  FREDERICK.
 Do so; I'll not be by.

                                     [DUKE FREDERICK goes apart]
  LE BEAU.
 No, fair Princess; he is the general challenger.
 I come
    but in, as others do, to try with him the strength of my youth.

  CELIA.
 Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years.

    You have seen cruel proof of this man's strength; if you saw
    yourself with your eyes, or knew yourself with your judgment, the
    fear of your adventure would counsel you to a more equal
    enterprise.
 We pray you, for your own sake, to embrace your own
    safety and give over this attempt.
 Do, young sir; your reputation shall not therefore be
    misprised: we will make it our suit to the Duke that the
    wrestling might not go forward.
 I beseech you, punish me not with your hard thoughts,
    wherein I confess me much guilty to deny so fair and excellent
    ladies any thing.
 I shall do my friends no wrong, for I have none
    to lament me; the world no injury, for in it I have nothing; only
    in the world I fill up a place, which may be better supplied when
    I have made it empty.

  ROSALIND.
 The little strength that I have, I would it were with
    you.
 And mine to eke out hers.

  ROSALIND.
 Pray heaven I be deceiv'd in you!
  CELIA.
 Your heart's desires be with you!
  CHARLES.
 Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more modest working.

  FREDERICK.
 You shall try but one fall.

  CHARLES.
 No, I warrant your Grace, you shall not entreat him to a
    second, that have so mightily persuaded him from a first.
  
  ORLANDO.
 You mean to mock me after; you should not have mock'd me
    before; but come your ways.

  ROSALIND.
 Now, Hercules be thy speed, young man!
  CELIA.
                                          [They wrestle]
  ROSALIND.
 If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who should
    down.

                                      [CHARLES is thrown.

  ORLANDO.
 How dost thou, Charles?
  LE BEAU.
 He cannot speak, my lord.
 Bear him away.

  FREDERICK.
 I would thou hadst been son to some man else.

    The world esteem'd thy father honourable,
    But I did find him still mine enemy.

    But fare thee well; thou art a gallant youth;
    I would thou hadst told me of another father.
 Were I my father, coz, would I do this?
  ORLANDO.
 My father lov'd Sir Rowland as his soul,
    And all the world was of my father's mind;
    Had I before known this young man his son,
    I should have given him tears unto entreaties
    Ere he should thus have ventur'd.
 Gentle cousin,
    Let us go thank him, and encourage him;
    My father's rough and envious disposition
    Sticks me at heart.

    Shall we go, coz?
  CELIA.
 Ay.
 Fare you well, fair gentleman.

  ORLANDO.
 Can I not say 'I thank you'? My better parts
    Are all thrown down; and that which here stands up
    Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.
 He calls us back.
 My pride fell with my fortunes;
    I'll ask him what he would.
 Did you call, sir?
    Sir, you have wrestled well, and overthrown
    More than your enemies.
 Fare you well.

    O poor Orlando, thou art overthrown!
    Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.

  
                      Re-enter LE BEAU

  LE BEAU.
 Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
    To leave this place.

    The Duke is humorous; what he is, indeed,
    More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.
 I thank you, sir; and pray you tell me this:
    Which of the two was daughter of the Duke
    That here was at the wrestling?
  LE BEAU.
 Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners;
    But yet, indeed, the smaller is his daughter;
    The other is daughter to the banish'd Duke,
    And here detain'd by her usurping uncle,
    To keep his daughter company; whose loves
    Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.

    Hereafter, in a better world than this,
    I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.

  ORLANDO.
 I rest much bounden to you; fare you well.

    But heavenly Rosalind!                                  Exit




SCENE III.
 Why, cousin! why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy!
    Not a word?
  ROSALIND.
 Not one to throw at a dog.
 No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs;
    throw some of them at me; come, lame me with reasons.

  ROSALIND.
 Then there were two cousins laid up, when the one should
    be lam'd with reasons and the other mad without any.

  CELIA.
 But is all this for your father?
  ROSALIND.
 No, some of it is for my child's father.
 O, how full of
    briers is this working-day world!
  CELIA.

  ROSALIND.
 Hem them away.

  ROSALIND.
 I would try, if I could cry 'hem' and have him.
 Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.

  ROSALIND.
 O, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself.

  CELIA.
 O, a good wish upon you! You will try in time, in despite of
    a fall.
 The Duke my father lov'd his father dearly.

  CELIA.

  ROSALIND.
 Why should I not? Doth he not deserve well?

                    Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with LORDS

  ROSALIND.
 Look, here comes the Duke.
 With his eyes full of anger.
  
  ROSALIND.
 Me, uncle?
  FREDERICK.

  ROSALIND.
 I do beseech your Grace,
    Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me.

    If with myself I hold intelligence,
    Or have acquaintance with mine own desires;
    If that I do not dream, or be not frantic-
    As I do trust I am not- then, dear uncle,
    Never so much as in a thought unborn
    Did I offend your Highness.

  FREDERICK.

  ROSALIND.
 Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor.

    Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.

  FREDERICK.
 Thou art thy father's daughter; there's enough.
 SO was I when your Highness took his dukedom;
    So was I when your Highness banish'd him.

    Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
    To think my poverty is treacherous.

  CELIA.
 Dear sovereign, hear me speak.

  FREDERICK.
 Ay, Celia; we stay'd her for your sake,
    Else had she with her father rang'd along.

  CELIA.
 I did not then entreat to have her stay;
    It was your pleasure, and your own remorse;
    I was too young that time to value her,
    But now I know her.
 If she be a traitor,
    Why so am I: we still have slept together,
    Rose at an instant, learn'd, play'd, eat together;
    And wheresoe'er we went, like Juno's swans,
    Still we went coupled and inseparable.

  FREDERICK.

    Thou art a fool.

    Firm and irrevocable is my doom
    Which I have pass'd upon her; she is banish'd.

  CELIA.
 Pronounce that sentence, then, on me, my liege;
    I cannot live out of her company.

  FREDERICK.
 You are a fool.

                                           Exeunt DUKE and LORDS
  CELIA.
 O my poor Rosalind! Whither wilt thou go?
    Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.

    I charge thee be not thou more griev'd than I am.

  ROSALIND.
 I have more cause.
 That he hath not.
  
  CELIA.
 No, hath not? Rosalind lacks, then, the love
    Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one.

    Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
    Whither to go, and what to bear with us;
    And do not seek to take your charge upon you,
    To bear your griefs yourself, and leave me out;
    For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
    Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.

  ROSALIND.
 Why, whither shall we go?
  CELIA.
 To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden.

  ROSALIND.

  CELIA.
 I'll put myself in poor and mean attire,
    And with a kind of umber smirch my face;
    The like do you; so shall we pass along,
    And never stir assailants.

  ROSALIND.
 What shall I call thee when thou art a man?
  ROSALIND.
 I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page,
    And therefore look you call me Ganymede.

    But what will you be call'd?
  CELIA.
 Something that hath a reference to my state:
    No longer Celia, but Aliena.

  ROSALIND.
 He'll go along o'er the wide world with me;
    Leave me alone to woo him.
 Let's away,
    And get our jewels and our wealth together;  
    Devise the fittest time and safest way
    To hide us from pursuit that will be made
    After my flight.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.

The Forest of Arden

Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and two or three LORDS, like foresters

  DUKE SENIOR.

  AMIENS.
 Happy is your Grace,
    That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
    Into so quiet and so sweet a style.
 Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
    And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
    Being native burghers of this desert city,
    Should, in their own confines, with forked heads
    Have their round haunches gor'd.

  FIRST LORD.

    To-day my Lord of Amiens and myself
    Did steal behind him as he lay along
    Under an oak whose antique root peeps out
    Upon the brook that brawls along this wood!
    To the which place a poor sequest'red stag,
    That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,  
    Did come to languish; and, indeed, my lord,
    The wretched animal heav'd forth such groans
    That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
    Almost to bursting; and the big round tears
    Cours'd one another down his innocent nose
    In piteous chase; and thus the hairy fool,
    Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
    Stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook,
    Augmenting it with tears.
 But what said Jaques?
    Did he not moralize this spectacle?
  FIRST LORD.

    First, for his weeping into the needless stream:
    'Poor deer,' quoth he 'thou mak'st a testament
    As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
    To that which had too much.
' Then, being there alone,
    Left and abandoned of his velvet friends:
    ''Tis right'; quoth he 'thus misery doth part
    The flux of company.
' Anon, a careless herd,
    Full of the pasture, jumps along by him  
    And never stays to greet him.

  DUKE SENIOR.

  FIRST LORD.
             Exeunt




SCENE II.

The DUKE'S palace

Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with LORDS

  FREDERICK.
 Can it be possible that no man saw them?
    It cannot be; some villains of my court
    Are of consent and sufferance in this.

  FIRST LORD.
 Send to his brother; fetch that gallant hither.
  
    If he be absent, bring his brother to me;
    I'll make him find him.
                Exeunt




SCENE III.
 Who's there?
  ADAM.
 What, my young master? O my gentle master!
    O my sweet master! O you memory
    Of old Sir Rowland! Why, what make you here?
    Why are you virtuous? Why do people love you?
    And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant?
    Why would you be so fond to overcome
    The bonny prizer of the humorous Duke?
    Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.

    O, what a world is this, when what is comely
    Envenoms him that bears it!
  ORLANDO.
 Why, what's the matter?
  ADAM.
 O unhappy youth!  
    Come not within these doors; within this roof
    The enemy of all your graces lives.

  ORLANDO.
 No matter whither, so you come not here.

  ORLANDO.

    I rather will subject me to the malice  
    Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
 But do not so.

    Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
    Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
    Be comfort to my age! Here is the gold;
    All this I give you.
 Let me be your servant;
    Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty;
    For in my youth I never did apply
    Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
    Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
    The means of weakness and debility;
    Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
    Frosty, but kindly.

  ORLANDO.
 O good old man, how well in thee appears  
    The constant service of the antique world,
    When service sweat for duty, not for meed!
    Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
    Where none will sweat but for promotion,
    And having that do choke their service up
    Even with the having; it is not so with thee.

    But, poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree
    That cannot so much as a blossom yield
    In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry.

    But come thy ways, we'll go along together,
    And ere we have thy youthful wages spent
    We'll light upon some settled low content.

  ADAM.
 Master, go on; and I will follow the
    To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty.

    From seventeen years till now almost four-score
    Here lived I, but now live here no more.
          Exeunt




SCENE IV.
 I Care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.

  ROSALIND.
 I could find in my heart to disgrace my man's apparel,
    and to cry like a woman; but I must comfort the weaker vessel, as
    doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous to petticoat;
    therefore, courage, good Aliena.

  CELIA.
 For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear you;
    yet I should bear no cross if I did bear you; for I think you
    have no money in your purse.
 this is the Forest of Arden.
 Ay, now am I in Arden; the more fool I; when I was at
    home I was in a better place; but travellers must be content.


                        Enter CORIN and SILVIUS
  
  ROSALIND.
 Ay, be so, good Touchstone.
 Look you, who comes here, a
    young man and an old in solemn talk.

  CORIN.
 That is the way to make her scorn you still.
 O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her!
  CORIN.
 I partly guess; for I have lov'd ere now.

  SILVIUS.
 No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
    Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
    As ever sigh'd upon a midnight pillow.
 Into a thousand that I have forgotten.
 O, thou didst then never love so heartily!
    If thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly
    That ever love did make thee run into,
    Thou hast not lov'd;
    Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
    Wearing thy hearer in thy mistress' praise,
    Thou hast not lov'd;  
    Or if thou hast not broke from company
    Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,
    Thou hast not lov'd.
' We that are true lovers run into strange capers;
    but as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal
    in folly.

  ROSALIND.
 Thou speak'st wiser than thou art ware of.

  TOUCHSTONE.

  ROSALIND.
 And mine; but it grows something stale with me.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 Holla, you clown!
  ROSALIND.
 Peace, fool; he's not thy Ensman.
 Your betters, sir.

  ROSALIND.
 Peace, I say.
 Good even to you, friend.
 I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold
    Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
    Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed.
 Fair sir, I pity her,
    And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,
    My fortunes were more able to relieve her;
    But I am shepherd to another man,  
    And do not shear the fleeces that I graze.

    My master is of churlish disposition,
    And little recks to find the way to heaven
    By doing deeds of hospitality.

    Besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed,
    Are now on sale; and at our sheepcote now,
    By reason of his absence, there is nothing
    That you will feed on; but what is, come see,
    And in my voice most welcome shall you be.

  ROSALIND.
 What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?
  CORIN.

  ROSALIND.
 I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
    Buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock,
    And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.

  CELIA.
 And we will mend thy wages.

  CORIN.
 Assuredly the thing is to be sold.
             Exeunt




SCENE V.

Another part of the forest

Enter AMIENS, JAQUES, and OTHERS

                       SONG
  AMIENS.
    Under the greenwood tree
               Who loves to lie with me,
               And turn his merry note
               Unto the sweet bird's throat,
             Come hither, come hither, come hither.

               Here shall he see
               No enemy
             But winter and rough weather.
 More, more, I prithee, more.
 It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.
 More, I prithee, more.
 I can suck melancholy
    out of a song, as a weasel sucks eggs.
 More, I prithee, more.

  JAQUES.
 I do not desire you to please me; I do desire you to sing.

    Come, more; another stanzo.
 What you will, Monsieur Jaques.

  JAQUES.
 Nay, I care not for their names; they owe me nothing.
 Will
    you sing?
  AMIENS.
 Well then, if ever I thank any man, I'll thank you; but
    that they call compliment is like th' encounter of two dog-apes;
    and when a man thanks me heartily, methinks have given him a
    penny, and he renders me the beggarly thanks.

  AMIENS.
 Sirs, cover the while; the Duke
    will drink under this tree.
 He hath been all this day to look
    you.

  JAQUES.
 And I have been all this day to avoid him.
 I think of as many matters as he; but
    I give heaven thanks, and make no boast of them.


                       SONG
              [All together here]
  
           Who doth ambition shun,
           And loves to live i' th' sun,
           Seeking the food he eats,
           And pleas'd with what he gets,
         Come hither, come hither, come hither.

  AMIENS.
 And I'll sing it.

  JAQUES.


  AMIENS.
 'Tis a Greek invocation, to call fools into a circle.
 I'll
    go sleep, if I can; if I cannot, I'll rail against all the
    first-born of Egypt.

  AMIENS.
 Dear master, I can go no further.
 O, I die for food! Here lie
    I down, and measure out my grave.

  ORLANDO.
 Why, how now, Adam! No greater heart in thee? Live a
    little; comfort a little; cheer thyself a little.
 I will here be with the presently; and if I bring thee
    not something to eat, I will give thee leave to die; but if thou
    diest before I come, thou art a mocker of my labour.
 Well said!
    thou look'st cheerly; and I'll be with thee quickly.
 Come, I will bear thee to some shelter;
    and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner, if there live
    anything in this desert.
 Cheerly, good Adam!          Exeunt




SCENE VII.
 I think he be transform'd into a beast;
    For I can nowhere find him like a man.

  FIRST LORD.
 If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
    We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.

    Go seek him; tell him I would speak with him.
 Why, how now, monsieur! what a life is this,
    That your poor friends must woo your company?
    What, you look merrily!
  JAQUES.
 A miserable world!  
    As I do live by food, I met a fool,
    Who laid him down and bask'd him in the sun,
    And rail'd on Lady Fortune in good terms,
    In good set terms- and yet a motley fool.

    'Good morrow, fool,' quoth I; 'No, sir,' quoth he,
    'Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune.
'
    And then he drew a dial from his poke,
    And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,
    Says very wisely, 'It is ten o'clock;
    Thus we may see,' quoth he, 'how the world wags;
    'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine;
    And after one hour more 'twill be eleven;
    And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe,
    And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot;
    And thereby hangs a tale.
' When I did hear
    The motley fool thus moral on the time,
    My lungs began to crow like chanticleer
    That fools should be so deep contemplative;
    And I did laugh sans intermission
    An hour by his dial.
 O noble fool!  
    A worthy fool! Motley's the only wear.
 What fool is this?
  JAQUES.
 O worthy fool! One that hath been a courtier,
    And says, if ladies be but young and fair,
    They have the gift to know it; and in his brain,
    Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
    After a voyage, he hath strange places cramm'd
    With observation, the which he vents
    In mangled forms.

  DUKE SENIOR.
 Thou shalt have one.

  JAQUES.
 I must have liberty
    Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
    To blow on whom I please, for so fools have;
    And they that are most galled with my folly,
    They most must laugh.
 And why, sir, must they so?
    The why is plain as way to parish church:  
    He that a fool doth very wisely hit
    Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
    Not to seem senseless of the bob; if not,
    The wise man's folly is anatomiz'd
    Even by the squand'ring glances of the fool.

    Invest me in my motley; give me leave
    To speak my mind, and I will through and through
    Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world,
    If they will patiently receive my medicine.

  JAQUES.
 What, for a counter, would I do but good?
  DUKE SENIOR.
 Most Mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin;
    For thou thyself hast been a libertine,
    As sensual as the brutish sting itself;
    And all th' embossed sores and headed evils
    That thou with license of free foot hast caught
    Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.

  JAQUES.
 Why, who cries out on pride
    That can therein tax any private party?
    Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea,  
    Till that the wearer's very means do ebb?
    What woman in the city do I name
    When that I say the city-woman bears
    The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
    Who can come in and say that I mean her,
    When such a one as she such is her neighbour?
    Or what is he of basest function
    That says his bravery is not on my cost,
    Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
    His folly to the mettle of my speech?
    There then! how then? what then? Let me see wherein
    My tongue hath wrong'd him: if it do him right,
    Then he hath wrong'd himself; if he be free,
    Why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies,
    Unclaim'd of any man.
 But who comes here?

             Enter ORLANDO with his sword drawn

  ORLANDO.
 Forbear, and eat no more.

  JAQUES.
 Why, I have eat none yet.
  
  ORLANDO.

  JAQUES.
 You touch'd my vein at first: the thorny point
    Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show
    Of smooth civility; yet arn I inland bred,
    And know some nurture.
 But forbear, I say;
    He dies that touches any of this fruit
    Till I and my affairs are answered.

  JAQUES.
 An you will not be answer'd with reason, I must die.

  DUKE SENIOR.
 What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
    More than your force move us to gentleness.

  ORLANDO.
 I almost die for food, and let me have it.

  ORLANDO.
 But whate'er you are  
    That in this desert inaccessible,
    Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
    Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time;
    If ever you have look'd on better days,
    If ever been where bells have knoll'd to church,
    If ever sat at any good man's feast,
    If ever from your eyelids wip'd a tear,
    And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied,
    Let gentleness my strong enforcement be;
    In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.
 True is it that we have seen better days,
    And have with holy bell been knoll'd to church,
    And sat at good men's feasts, and wip'd our eyes
    Of drops that sacred pity hath engend'red;
    And therefore sit you down in gentleness,
    And take upon command what help we have
    That to your wanting may be minist'red.
 There is an old poor man  
    Who after me hath many a weary step
    Limp'd in pure love; till he be first suffic'd,
    Oppress'd with two weak evils, age and hunger,
    I will not touch a bit.

    And we will nothing waste till you return.

  ORLANDO.
 I thank ye; and be blest for your good comfort!
 Exit
  DUKE SENIOR.

  JAQUES.
 All the world's a stage,
    And all the men and women merely players;
    They have their exits and their entrances;
    And one man in his time plays many parts,
    His acts being seven ages.
 And then the lover,
    Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
    Made to his mistress' eyebrow.
 Then a soldier,
    Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard,
    Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
    Seeking the bubble reputation
    Even in the cannon's mouth.
 And then the justice,
    In fair round belly with good capon lin'd,
    With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
    Full of wise saws and modern instances;
    And so he plays his part.
 The sixth age shifts
    Into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon,
    With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
    His youthful hose, well sav'd, a world too wide
    For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,
    Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
    And whistles in his sound.
 Last scene of all,
    That ends this strange eventful history,
    Is second childishness and mere oblivion;
    Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing.
  

                  Re-enter ORLANDO with ADAM

  DUKE SENIOR.
 Welcome.
 Set down your venerable burden.

    And let him feed.

  ORLANDO.
 Welcome; fall to.
 I will not trouble you
    As yet to question you about your fortunes.

    Give us some music; and, good cousin, sing.


                         SONG
            Blow, blow, thou winter wind,
            Thou art not so unkind
              As man's ingratitude;
            Thy tooth is not so keen,
            Because thou art not seen,
              Although thy breath be rude.

    Heigh-ho! sing heigh-ho! unto the green holly.
  
    Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly.


  DUKE SENIOR.
 If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son,
    As you have whisper'd faithfully you were,
    And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
    Most truly limn'd and living in your face,
    Be truly welcome hither.
 The residue of your fortune,
    Go to my cave and tell me.
  
    Support him by the arm.
              Exeunt




ACT III.

The palace

Enter DUKE FREDERICK, OLIVER, and LORDS

  FREDERICK.
 Not see him since! Sir, sir, that cannot be.

    But were I not the better part made mercy,
    I should not seek an absent argument
    Of my revenge, thou present.

    Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine
    Worth seizure do we seize into our hands,
    Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth
    Of what we think against thee.

  OLIVER.
 More villain thou.
  
    Do this expediently, and turn him going.
              Exeunt




SCENE II.

The forest

Enter ORLANDO, with a paper

  ORLANDO.
 Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love;
    And thou, thrice-crowned Queen of Night, survey
    With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
    Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway.

    Run, run, Orlando; carve on every tree,
    The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.
             Exit

                     Enter CORIN and TOUCHSTONE

  CORIN.
 And how like you this shepherd's life, Master Touchstone?
  TOUCHSTONE.
 Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good
    life; but in respect that it is a shepherd's life, it is nought.

    In respect that it is solitary, I like it very well; but in  
    respect that it is private, it is a very vile life.
 Now in
    respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me well; but in respect
    it is not in the court, it is tedious.
 Hast any philosophy in
    thee, shepherd?
  CORIN.
 Such a one is a natural philosopher.
 Wast ever in
    court, shepherd?
  CORIN.

  TOUCHSTONE.

  CORIN.
 Nay, I hope.
  
  CORIN.
 Why, if thou never wast at court thou never saw'st good
    manners; if thou never saw'st good manners, then thy manners must
    be wicked; and wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation.
 Thou art
    in a parlous state, shepherd.
 Not a whit, Touchstone.
 You told me you salute not
    at the court, but you kiss your hands; that courtesy would be
    uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 Instance, briefly; come, instance.

  CORIN.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 A better instance, I say; come.
 Besides, our hands are hard.
 Your lips will feel them the sooner.
 A
    more sounder instance; come.

  CORIN.
 Most shallow man! thou worm's meat in respect of a good
    piece of flesh indeed! Learn of the wise, and perpend: civet is
    of a baser birth than tar- the very uncleanly flux of a cat.
 Mend
    the instance, shepherd.
 You have too courtly a wit for me; I'll rest.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 Sir, I am a true labourer: I earn that I eat, get that I
    wear; owe no man hate, envy no man's happiness; glad of other
    men's good, content with my harm; and the greatest of my pride is
    to see my ewes graze and my lambs suck.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 That is another simple sin in you: to bring the ewes
    and the rams together, and to offer to get your living by the
    copulation of cattle; to be bawd to a bell-wether, and to betray
    a she-lamb of a twelvemonth to crooked-pated, old, cuckoldly ram,
    out of all reasonable match.
  
  CORIN.
 Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistress's brother.


                  Enter ROSALIND, reading a paper

  ROSALIND.
   'From the east to western Inde,
              No jewel is like Rosalinde.

              Her worth, being mounted on the wind,
              Through all the world bears Rosalinde.

              Let no face be kept in mind
              But the fair of Rosalinde.
'
  TOUCHSTONE.
 I'll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners, and
    suppers, and sleeping hours, excepted.
 Out, fool!
  TOUCHSTONE.
   For a taste:
                If a hart do lack a hind,
                Let him seek out Rosalinde.

                Winter garments must be lin'd,
                So must slender Rosalinde.

                They that reap must sheaf and bind,
                Then to cart with Rosalinde.

                Sweetest nut hath sourest rind,
                Such a nut is Rosalinde.

                He that sweetest rose will find
                Must find love's prick and Rosalinde.

    This is the very false gallop of verses; why do you infect
    yourself with them?
  ROSALIND.
 Peace, you dull fool! I found them on a tree.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 I'll graff it with you, and then I shall graff it with a
    medlar.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 You have said; but whether wisely or no, let the forest
    judge.

  
                      Enter CELIA, with a writing

  ROSALIND.
 Peace!
    Here comes my sister, reading; stand aside.

  CELIA.
   'Why should this a desert be?
             For it is unpeopled? No;
           Tongues I'll hang on every tree
             That shall civil sayings show.
  
           Therefore heaven Nature charg'd
             That one body should be fill'd
           With all graces wide-enlarg'd.

           Thus Rosalinde of many parts
             By heavenly synod was devis'd,
           Of many faces, eyes, and hearts,
             To have the touches dearest priz'd.

           Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
           And I to live and die her slave.
 O most gentle pulpiter! What tedious homily of love have
    you wearied your parishioners withal, and never cried 'Have
    patience, good people.
 How now! Back, friends; shepherd, go off a little; go with
    him, sirrah.

                                     Exeunt CORIN and TOUCHSTONE
  CELIA.
 Didst thou hear these verses?
  ROSALIND.
 O, yes, I heard them all, and more too; for some of them
    had in them more feet than the verses would bear.

  CELIA.
 That's no matter; the feet might bear the verses.

  ROSALIND.
 Ay, but the feet were lame, and could not bear themselves
    without the verse, and therefore stood lamely in the verse.

  CELIA.
 I was never so
    berhym'd since Pythagoras' time that I was an Irish rat, which I
    can hardly remember.

  CELIA.
 Is it a man?
  CELIA.
 And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.
 I prithee, who?
  CELIA.
 O Lord, Lord! it is a hard matter for friends to meet; but  
    mountains may be remov'd with earthquakes, and so encounter.

  ROSALIND.
 Nay, but who is it?
  CELIA.
 Is it possible?
  ROSALIND.
 O wonderful, wonderful, most wonderful wonderful, and yet
    again wonderful, and after that, out of all whooping!
  ROSALIND.
 Good my complexion! dost thou think, though I am
    caparison'd like a man, I have a doublet and hose in my
    disposition? One inch of delay more is a South Sea of discovery.

    I prithee tell me who is it quickly, and speak apace.
 I would
    thou could'st stammer, that thou mightst pour this conceal'd man
    out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of narrow-mouth'd bottle-
    either too much at once or none at all.
 I prithee take the cork
    out of thy mouth that I may drink thy tidings.
 So you may put a man in your belly.
 Is he of God's making? What manner of man?
    Is his head worth a hat or his chin worth a beard?
  CELIA.

  ROSALIND.
 Why, God will send more if the man will be thankful.
 Let  
    me stay the growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the
    knowledge of his chin.

  ROSALIND.
 Nay, but the devil take mocking! Speak sad brow and true
    maid.

  CELIA.
 I' faith, coz, 'tis he.

  ROSALIND.
 Orlando?
  CELIA.

  ROSALIND.
 You must borrow me Gargantua's mouth first; 'tis a word too
    great for any mouth of this age's size.
 To say ay and no to these
    particulars is more than to answer in a catechism.
 But doth he know that I am in this forest, and in man's
    apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled?
  CELIA.
 I found him under a tree, like a
    dropp'd acorn.

  CELIA.
 Give me audience, good madam.
 Proceed.
 Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomes
    the ground.
 He was furnish'd like a hunter.

  ROSALIND.
 O, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.

  CELIA.
 I would sing my song without a burden; thou bring'st me out
    of tune.

  ROSALIND.
 Do you not know I am a woman? When I think, I must speak.

    Sweet, say on.

  CELIA.
 You bring me out.
 'Tis he; slink by, and note him.

  JAQUES.
 I thank you for your company; but, good faith, I had as
    lief have been myself alone.

  ORLANDO.
 I pray you mar no more trees with writing love songs in
    their barks.

  ORLANDO.
 Yes, just.
 I do not like her name.
 There was no thought of pleasing you when she was
    christen'd.

  JAQUES.
 Have you not been  
    acquainted with goldsmiths' wives, and conn'd them out of rings?
  ORLANDO.
 Not so; but I answer you right painted cloth, from whence
    you have studied your questions.
 You have a nimble wit; I think 'twas made of Atalanta's
    heels.

  ORLANDO.

  JAQUES.

  ORLANDO.
 'Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue.
 I am
    weary of you.

  JAQUES.
 By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found you.
 He is drown'd in the brook; look but in, and you shall see
    him.
 There I shall see mine own figure.

  ORLANDO.
 Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.

                                                     Exit JAQUES  
  ROSALIND.
 [Aside to CELIA] I will speak to him like a saucy lackey,
    and under that habit play the knave with him.
 You should ask me what time o' day; there's no clock in
    the forest.
 Then there is no true lover in the forest, else sighing
    every minute and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot
    of Time as well as a clock.
 Time travels in divers paces with
    divers persons.

  ORLANDO.
 I prithee, who doth he trot withal?
  ROSALIND.
 Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the
    contract of her marriage and the day it is solemniz'd; if the
    interim be but a se'nnight, Time's pace is so hard that it seems  
    the length of seven year.

  ORLANDO.
 Who ambles Time withal?
  ROSALIND.
 With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that hath
    not the gout; for the one sleeps easily because he cannot study,
    and the other lives merrily because he feels no pain; the one
    lacking the burden of lean and wasteful learning, the other
    knowing no burden of heavy tedious penury.
 These Time ambles
    withal.
 Who doth he gallop withal?
  ROSALIND.
 Who stays it still withal?
  ROSALIND.
 With lawyers in the vacation; for they sleep between term
    and term, and then they perceive not how Time moves.

  ORLANDO.
 Where dwell you, pretty youth?
  ROSALIND.

  ORLANDO.
 Are you native of this place?
  ROSALIND.
 As the coney that you see dwell where she is kindled.

  ROSALIND.
 I have been told so of many; but indeed an old religious
    uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was in his youth an inland
    man; one that knew courtship too well, for there he fell in love.

    I have heard him read many lectures against it; and I thank God I
    am not a woman, to be touch'd with so many giddy offences as he
    hath generally tax'd their whole sex withal.

  ORLANDO.
 Can you remember any of the principal evils that he laid
    to the charge of women?
  ROSALIND.
 There were none principal; they were all like one another
    as halfpence are; every one fault seeming monstrous till his
    fellow-fault came to match it.

  ORLANDO.
 I prithee recount some of them.
 No; I will not cast away my physic but on those that are
    sick.
 There is a man haunts the forest that abuses our young
    plants with carving 'Rosalind' on their barks; hangs odes upon
    hawthorns and elegies on brambles; all, forsooth, deifying the
    name of Rosalind.
 If I could meet that fancy-monger, I would give
    him some good counsel, for he seems to have the quotidian of love
    upon him.
 I am he that is so love-shak'd; I pray you tell me your
    remedy.
 There is none of my uncle's marks upon you; he taught me
    how to know a man in love; in which cage of rushes I am sure you
    are not prisoner.

  ORLANDO.
 What were his marks?
  ROSALIND.

    Then your hose should be ungarter'd, your bonnet unbanded, your
    sleeve unbutton'd, your shoe untied, and every thing about you
    demonstrating a careless desolation.
 Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.

  ROSALIND.
 I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of Rosalind, I
    am that he, that unfortunate he.

  ROSALIND.
 But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?
  ORLANDO.
 Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.

  ROSALIND.

  ORLANDO.
 Did you ever cure any so?
  ROSALIND.
 He was to imagine me his
    love, his mistress; and I set him every day to woo me; at which
    time would I, being but a moonish youth, grieve, be effeminate,
    changeable, longing and liking, proud, fantastical, apish,
    shallow, inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles; for every
    passion something and for no passion truly anything, as boys and
    women are for the most part cattle of this colour; would now like
    him, now loathe him; then entertain him, then forswear him; now
    weep for him, then spit at him; that I drave my suitor from his  
    mad humour of love to a living humour of madness; which was, to
    forswear the full stream of the world and to live in a nook
    merely monastic.
 And thus I cur'd him; and this way will I take
    upon me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep's heart,
    that there shall not be one spot of love in 't.
 I would not be cured, youth.

  ROSALIND.
 I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind, and
    come every day to my cote and woo me.

  ORLANDO.
 Now, by the faith of my love, I will.
 Go with me to it, and I'll show it you; and, by the way,
    you shall tell me where in the forest you live.
 With all my heart, good youth.

  ROSALIND.
 Nay, you must call me Rosalind.
 Come apace, good Audrey; I will fetch up your goats,
    Audrey.
 And how, Audrey, am I the man yet? Doth my simple feature
    content you?
  AUDREY.
 Your features! Lord warrant us! What features?
  TOUCHSTONE.

  JAQUES.
 I do not know what 'poetical' is.
 Is it honest in deed and
    word? Is it a true thing?
  TOUCHSTONE.
  
  AUDREY.
 I do, truly, for thou swear'st to me thou art honest;
    now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some hope thou didst
    feign.
 Would you not have me honest?
  TOUCHSTONE.
 No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favour'd; for honesty
    coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.
 [Aside] A material fool!
  AUDREY.
 Well, I am not fair; and therefore I pray the gods make me
    honest.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut were
    to put good meat into an unclean dish.
 But be it as it may be, I will
    marry thee; and to that end I have been with Sir Oliver Martext,
    the vicar of the next village, who hath promis'd to meet me in
    this place of the forest, and to couple us.

  JAQUES.

  AUDREY.
 Well, the gods give us joy!  
  TOUCHSTONE.
 Amen.
 A man may, if he were of a fearful heart, stagger
    in this attempt; for here we have no temple but the wood, no
    assembly but horn-beasts.
 But what though? Courage! As horns are
    odious, they are necessary.
 It is said: 'Many a man knows no end
    of his goods.
' Right! Many a man has good horns and knows no end
    of them.
 Is the single man therefore
    blessed? No; as a wall'd town is more worthier than a village, so
    is the forehead of a married man more honourable than the bare
    brow of a bachelor; and by how much defence is better than no
    skill, by so much is horn more precious than to want.
 Here comes
    Sir Oliver.
 I will not take her on gift of any man.
  
  MARTEXT.
 Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.
 [Discovering himself] Proceed, proceed; I'll give her.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 Good even, good Master What-ye-call't; how do you, sir?
    You are very well met.
 Goddild you for your last company.
 Even a toy in hand here, sir.
 Nay; pray be
    cover'd.

  JAQUES.
 And will you, being a man of your breeding, be married
    under a bush, like a beggar? Get you to church and have a good
    priest that can tell you what marriage is; this fellow will but
    join you together as they join wainscot; then one of you will
    prove a shrunk panel, and like green timber warp, warp.

  TOUCHSTONE.
  
  TOUCHSTONE.

    But-
                 Wind away,
               Begone, I say,
           I will not to wedding with thee.

                           Exeunt JAQUES, TOUCHSTONE, and AUDREY
  MARTEXT.
 'Tis no matter; ne'er a fantastical knave of them all
    shall flout me out of my calling.
                       Exit




SCENE IV.

  CELIA.

  ROSALIND.

  ROSALIND.
 His very hair is of the dissembling colour.

  CELIA.
 Something browner than Judas's.

  ROSALIND.

  ROSALIND.
 And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of
    holy bread.
 A nun of
    winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously; the very ice of
    chastity is in them.

  ROSALIND.
 But why did he swear he would come this morning, and
    comes not?
  CELIA.
  
  ROSALIND.
 Do you think so?
  CELIA.

  ROSALIND.
 You have heard him swear downright he was.
 'Was' is not 'is'; besides, the oath of a lover is no
    stronger than the word of a tapster; they are both the confirmer
    of false reckonings.
 He attends here in the forest on the Duke,
    your father.

  ROSALIND.

    He asked me of what parentage I was; I told him, of as good as
    he; so he laugh'd and let me go.
 But what talk we of fathers when
    there is such a man as Orlando?
  CELIA.
 Who  
    comes here?

                         Enter CORIN

  CORIN.
 Mistress and master, you have oft enquired
    After the shepherd that complain'd of love,
    Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
    Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
    That was his mistress.

  CELIA.
 Well, and what of him?
  CORIN.

    Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
    I'll prove a busy actor in their play.
                Exeunt




SCENE V.
 Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me; do not, Phebe.

    Say that you love me not; but say not so
    In bitterness.
 The common executioner,
    Whose heart th' accustom'd sight of death makes hard,
    Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
    But first begs pardon.
 Will you sterner be
    Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?

          Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and CORIN, at a distance

  PHEBE.

    Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye.

    Now counterfeit to swoon; why, now fall down;
    Or, if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
    Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers.

    Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee.

    Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
    Some scar of it; lean upon a rush,
    The cicatrice and capable impressure
    Thy palm some moment keeps; but now mine eyes,
    Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not;
    Nor, I am sure, there is not force in eyes
    That can do hurt.

  SILVIUS.
 O dear Phebe,
    If ever- as that ever may be near-
    You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
    Then shall you know the wounds invisible
    That love's keen arrows make.

  ROSALIND.
 'Od's my little life,
    I think she means to tangle my eyes too!
    No faith, proud mistress, hope not after it;
    'Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
    Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,
    That can entame my spirits to your worship.

    You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
    Like foggy south, puffing with wind and rain?
    You are a thousand times a properer man  
    Than she a woman.
 'Tis such fools as you
    That makes the world full of ill-favour'd children.

    'Tis not her glass, but you, that flatters her;
    And out of you she sees herself more proper
    Than any of her lineaments can show her.
 Down on your knees,
    And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love;
    For I must tell you friendly in your ear:
    Sell when you can; you are not for all markets.

    So take her to thee, shepherd.
 Fare you well.

  ROSALIND.
 If it be so, as fast as she answers thee
    with frowning looks, I'll sauce her with bitter words.
 Why look
    you so upon me?
  PHEBE.
 For no ill will I bear you.
 I pray you do not fall in love with me,  
    For I am falser than vows made in wine;
    Besides, I like you not.

    Come, sister.

    Come, to our flock.
        Exeunt ROSALIND, CELIA, and CORIN
  PHEBE.
 Dead shepherd, now I find thy saw of might:
    'Who ever lov'd that lov'd not at first sight?'
  SILVIUS.
 Sweet Phebe, pity me.
 Why, that were covetousness.

    Silvius, the time was that I hated thee;
    And yet it is not that I bear thee love;
    But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
    Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
    I will endure; and I'll employ thee too.

  SILVIUS.
 Know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile?
  SILVIUS.

  PHEBE.
  
    But what care I for words? Yet words do well
    When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.

    He'll make a proper man.
 The best thing in him
    Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue
    Did make offence, his eye did heal it up.

    He is not very tall; yet for his years he's tall;
    His leg is but so-so; and yet 'tis well.

    There was a pretty redness in his lip,
    A little riper and more lusty red
    Than that mix'd in his cheek; 'twas just the difference
    Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask.

    I marvel why I answer'd not again;
    But that's all one: omittance is no quittance.

  PHEBE.
 I'll write it straight;
    The matter's in my head and in my heart;
    I will be bitter with him and passing short.

    Go with me, Silvius.
                                  Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE I.

  ROSALIND.
 They say you are a melancholy fellow.
 I am so; I do love it better than laughing.
 Why, 'tis good to be sad and say nothing.

  ROSALIND.
 Why then, 'tis good to be a post.

  ROSALIND.
 A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to be
    sad.
 I fear you have sold your own lands to see other men's; then
    to have seen much and to have nothing is to have rich eyes and
    poor hands.

  JAQUES.


                        Enter ORLANDO

  ROSALIND.
 I had rather have a
    fool to make me merry than experience to make me sad- and to
    travel for it too.

  ORLANDO.
 Good day, and happiness, dear Rosalind!
  JAQUES.

  ROSALIND.
 Farewell, Monsieur Traveller; look you lisp and wear
    strange suits, disable all the benefits of your own country, be
    out of love with your nativity, and almost chide God for making
    you that countenance you are; or I will scarce think you have
    swam in a gondola.
 [Exit JAQUES] Why, how now, Orlando! where
    have you been all this while? You a lover! An you serve me such  
    another trick, never come in my sight more.

  ROSALIND.
 Break an hour's promise in love! He that will divide a
    minute into a thousand parts, and break but a part of the
    thousand part of a minute in the affairs of love, it may be said
    of him that Cupid hath clapp'd him o' th' shoulder, but I'll
    warrant him heart-whole.

  ORLANDO.
 Pardon me, dear Rosalind.
 Of a snail!
  ROSALIND.

  ORLANDO.
 What's that?
  ROSALIND.
 Why, horns; which such as you are fain to be beholding to
    your wives for; but he comes armed in his fortune, and prevents
    the slander of his wife.

  ORLANDO.
 Virtue is no horn-maker; and my Rosalind is virtuous.

  ROSALIND.
 And I am your Rosalind.
 It pleases him to call you so; but he hath a Rosalind of a
    better leer than you.

  ROSALIND.
 Come, woo me, woo me; for now I am in a holiday humour,
    and like enough to consent.
 What would you say to me now, an I
    were your very very Rosalind?
  ORLANDO.
 I would kiss before I spoke.

  ROSALIND.

    Very good orators, when they are out, they will spit; and for
    lovers lacking- God warn us!- matter, the cleanliest shift is to
    kiss.
 How if the kiss be denied?
  ROSALIND.

  ORLANDO.
 Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress; or I
    should think my honesty ranker than my wit.

  ORLANDO.
 Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit.
 I take some joy to say you are, because I would be talking
    of her.

  ROSALIND.
 Well, in her person, I say I will not have you.

  ORLANDO.
 Then, in mine own person, I die.

  ROSALIND.
 No, faith, die by attorney.

    Leander, he would have liv'd many a fair year, though Hero had
    turn'd nun, if it had not been for a hot midsummer night; for,
    good youth, he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont, and,
    being taken with the cramp, was drown'd; and the foolish
    chroniclers of that age found it was- Hero of Sestos.

  ORLANDO.
 By this hand, it will not kill a fly.
 But come, now I
    will be your Rosalind in a more coming-on disposition; and ask me  
    what you will, I will grant it.

  ORLANDO.
 Then love me, Rosalind.

  ORLANDO.
 Are you not good?
  ORLANDO.

  CELIA.
 You must begin 'Will you, Orlando'-
  CELIA.
 I will.

  ROSALIND.
 Ay, but when?
  ORLANDO.

  ROSALIND.
 Then you must say 'I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.
  
  ROSALIND.
 I might ask you for your commission; but- I do take thee,
    Orlando, for my husband.
 There's a girl goes before the priest;
    and, certainly, a woman's thought runs before her actions.

  ORLANDO.
 So do all thoughts; they are wing'd.

  ROSALIND.
 Now tell me how long you would have her, after you have
    possess'd her.
 For ever and a day.
' No, no, Orlando; men are
    April when they woo, December when they wed: maids are May when
    they are maids, but the sky changes when they are wives.

  ORLANDO.
 O, but she is wise.
 Or else she could not have the wit to do this.
 The wiser,  
    the waywarder.

  ORLANDO.
 Nay, you might keep that check for it, till you met your
    wife's wit going to your neighbour's bed.
 O, that woman that cannot make her fault her husband's
    occasion, let her never nurse her child herself, for she will
    breed it like a fool!
  ORLANDO.
 For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.
 Alas, dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours!
  ORLANDO.

  ROSALIND.
 Ay, go your ways, go your ways.
 I knew what you would
    prove; my friends told me as much, and I thought no less.
 That
    flattering tongue of yours won me.
 Ay, sweet Rosalind.
 Therefore
    beware my censure, and keep your promise.

  ORLANDO.
 With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my
    Rosalind; so, adieu.
             Exit ORLANDO
  CELIA.

  ROSALIND.
 O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou didst
    know how many fathom deep I am in love! But it cannot be sounded;
    my affection hath an unknown bottom, like the Bay of Portugal.

  CELIA.
 Or rather, bottomless; that as fast as you pour affection  
    in, it runs out.
 No; that same wicked bastard of Venus, that was begot of
    thought, conceiv'd of spleen, and born of madness; that blind
    rascally boy, that abuses every one's eyes, because his own are
    out- let him be judge how deep I am in love.
 And I'll sleep.

The forest

        Enter JAQUES and LORDS, in the habit of foresters

  JAQUES.
 Sir, it was I.
 Let's present him to the Duke, like a Roman conqueror; and
    it would do well to set the deer's horns upon his head for a
    branch of victory.
 Sing it; 'tis no matter how it be in tune, so it make noise
    enough.

           Thy father's father wore it;
           And thy father bore it.

      The horn, the horn, the lusty horn,
      Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.
                   Exeunt




SCENE III.
 How say you now? Is it not past two o'clock?
    And here much Orlando!
  CELIA.
 Look, who
    comes here.
 My errand is to you, fair youth;
    My gentle Phebe did bid me give you this.

    I know not the contents; but, as I guess
    By the stern brow and waspish action
    Which she did use as she was writing of it,
    It bears an angry tenour.
 Pardon me,
    I am but as a guiltless messenger.
 Patience herself would startle at this letter,
    And play the swaggerer.
 Bear this, bear all.
 No, I protest, I know not the contents;
    Phebe did write it.

    I saw her hand; she has a leathern hand,
    A freestone-colour'd hand; I verily did think
    That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands;
    She has a huswife's hand- but that's no matter.

  SILVIUS.
 Sure, it is hers.
 Women's gentle brain
    Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention,  
    Such Ethiope words, blacker in their effect
    Than in their countenance.
 So please you, for I never heard it yet;
    Yet heard too much of Phebe's cruelty.
 'Why, thy godhead laid apart,
             Warr'st thou with a woman's heart?'

    Did you ever hear such railing?

            'Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
            That could do no vengeance to me.
 Do you pity him? No, he deserves no pity.
 If you be a
    true lover, hence, and not a word; for here comes more company.

                                                    Exit SILVIUS

                         Enter OLIVER

  OLIVER.
 If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
    Then should I know you by description-
    Such garments, and such years: 'The boy is fair,  
    Of female favour, and bestows himself
    Like a ripe sister; the woman low,
    And browner than her brother.
' Are not you
    The owner of the house I did inquire for?
  CELIA.
 Are you he?
  ROSALIND.
 I am.
 What must we understand by this?
  OLIVER.
 I pray you, tell it.
 When last the young Orlando parted from you,
    He left a promise to return again
    Within an hour; and, pacing through the forest,
    Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
    Lo, what befell! He threw his eye aside,
    And mark what object did present itself.

    Under an oak, whose boughs were moss'd with age,  
    And high top bald with dry antiquity,
    A wretched ragged man, o'ergrown with hair,
    Lay sleeping on his back.

  CELIA.
 O, I have heard him speak of that same brother;
    And he did render him the most unnatural
    That liv'd amongst men.

  ROSALIND.
 Are you his brother?
  ROSALIND.
 Was't you he rescu'd?
  CELIA.
 But for the bloody napkin?
  OLIVER.
 By and by.

    When from the first to last, betwixt us two,
    Tears our recountments had most kindly bath'd,
    As how I came into that desert place-  
    In brief, he led me to the gentle Duke,
    Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
    Committing me unto my brother's love;
    Who led me instantly unto his cave,
    There stripp'd himself, and here upon his arm
    The lioness had torn some flesh away,
    Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted,
    And cried, in fainting, upon Rosalind.
 Why, how now, Ganymede! sweet Ganymede!
  OLIVER.

  CELIA.
 There is more in it.
 Cousin Ganymede!
  OLIVER.
  
  ROSALIND.

  CELIA.

    I pray you, will you take him by the arm?
  OLIVER.
 You a man!
    You lack a man's heart.

  ROSALIND.
 Ah, sirrah, a body would think
    this was well counterfeited.
 I pray you tell your brother how
    well I counterfeited.

  ROSALIND.
 Counterfeit, I assure you.

  OLIVER.

  ROSALIND.
 That will I, for I must bear answer back
    How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.

The forest

Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

  TOUCHSTONE.
 We shall find a time, Audrey; patience, gentle Audrey.
 Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old
    gentleman's saying.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 Ay, I know who 'tis; he hath no interest in me in the
    world; here comes the man you mean.
 It is meat and drink to me to see a clown.

  WILLIAM.
 Good ev'n, Audrey.

  AUDREY.
 God ye good ev'n, William.

  WILLIAM.
 And good ev'n to you, sir.
 Good ev'n, gentle friend.
 How old are you, friend?
  WILLIAM.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 Is thy name William?
  WILLIAM.
 William, sir.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 A fair name.
 Ay, sir, I thank God.
 'Thank God.

    Art rich?
  WILLIAM.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 'So so' is good, very good, very excellent good; and
    yet it is not; it is but so so.
 Art thou wise?
  WILLIAM.
 Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 Why, thou say'st well.
' The heathen philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a
    grape, would open his lips when he put it into his mouth; meaning
    thereby that grapes were made to eat and lips to open.
 You do
    love this maid?
  WILLIAM.
 No, sir.

  WILLIAM.
 Which he, sir?
  TOUCHSTONE.
 He, sir, that must marry this woman.

  AUDREY.
 Do, good William.

  WILLIAM.
                         Exit  

                          Enter CORIN

  CORIN.
 Our master and mistress seeks you; come away, away.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 I attend, I attend.

The forest

Enter ORLANDO and OLIVER

  ORLANDO.
 Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the poverty
    of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden wooing, nor her sudden
    consenting; but say with me, I love Aliena; say with her that she
    loves me; consent with both that we may enjoy each other.

  ORLANDO.
 Go
    you and prepare Aliena; for, look you, here comes my Rosalind.


                        Enter ROSALIND
  
  ROSALIND.

  OLIVER.
 And you, fair sister.
                             Exit
  ROSALIND.
 O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear
    thy heart in a scarf!
  ORLANDO.

  ROSALIND.
 I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a
    lion.

  ORLANDO.
 Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to swoon
    when he show'd me your handkercher?
  ORLANDO.
 Ay, and greater wonders than that.
 O, I know where you are.
 There was never
    any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams and Caesar's
    thrasonical brag of 'I came, saw, and overcame.
 They are in the very wrath of  
    love, and they will together.
 They shall be married to-morrow; and I will bid the Duke
    to the nuptial.
 But, O, how bitter a thing it is to look into
    happiness through another man's eyes! By so much the more shall I
    to-morrow be at the height of heart-heaviness, by how much I
    shall think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.

  ROSALIND.
 Why, then, to-morrow I cannot serve your turn for
    Rosalind?
  ORLANDO.
 I can live no longer by thinking.
 I speak not this that you should
    bear a good opinion of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you
    are; neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in some
    little measure draw a belief from you, to do yourself good, and
    not to grace me.
 Believe then, if you please, that I can do
    strange things.
 I have, since I was three year old, convers'd
    with a magician, most profound in his art and yet not damnable.

    If you do love Rosalind so near the heart as your gesture cries
    it out, when your brother marries Aliena shall you marry her.
 I  
    know into what straits of fortune she is driven; and it is not
    impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient to you, to set
    her before your eyes to-morrow, human as she is, and without any
    danger.
 Speak'st thou in sober meanings?
  ROSALIND.
 By my life, I do; which I tender dearly, though I say I
    am a magician.
 Therefore put you in your best array, bid your
    friends; for if you will be married to-morrow, you shall; and to
    Rosalind, if you will.


                     Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE

    Look, here comes a lover of mine, and a lover of hers.

  PHEBE.
 Youth, you have done me much ungentleness
    To show the letter that I writ to you.
 I care not if I have.
 It is my study
    To seem despiteful and ungentle to you.
 It is to be all made of sighs and tears;
    And so am I for Phebe.

  ORLANDO.

  ROSALIND.
 And I for no woman.

  SILVIUS.

  ORLANDO.

  ROSALIND.
 And I for no woman.

  SILVIUS.

  PHEBE.
 And so am I for Ganymede.
 If this be so, why blame you me to love you?  
  SILVIUS.
 If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
  ORLANDO.
 Pray you, no more of this; 'tis like the howling of Irish
    wolves against the moon.

    [To PHEBE] I would love you if I could.
- To-morrow meet me all
    together.
 [ To PHEBE ] I will marry you if ever I marry woman,
    and I'll be married to-morrow.
 [To ORLANDO] I will satisfy you if
    ever I satisfied man, and you shall be married to-morrow.
 [To ORLANDO] As you love
    Rosalind, meet.
 [To SILVIUS] As you love Phebe, meet;- and as I
    love no woman, I'll meet.

  SILVIUS.
 I'll not fail, if I live.

  PHEBE.
 Nor I.
 Nor I.
                                         Exeunt




SCENE III.

  AUDREY.
 Well met, honest gentleman.
 Come sit, sit, and a song.

  SECOND PAGE.

  FIRST PAGE.
 Shall we clap into't roundly, without hawking, or
    spitting, or saying we are hoarse, which are the only prologues
    to a bad voice?
  SECOND PAGE.
 I'faith, i'faith; and both in a tune, like two gipsies
    on a horse.

  
                      SONG.

        Sweet lovers love the spring.


        This carol they began that hour,
          With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
        How that a life was but a flower,
          In the spring time, &c.


        And therefore take the present time,
          With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,  
        For love is crowned with the prime,
          In the spring time, &c.
 Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great
    matter in the ditty, yet the note was very untuneable.

  FIRST PAGE.
 By my troth, yes; I count it but time lost to hear such
    a foolish song.
                                               Exeunt




SCENE IV.

The forest

Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, JAQUES, ORLANDO, OLIVER, and CELIA

  DUKE SENIOR.
 Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
    Can do all this that he hath promised?
  ORLANDO.
 I sometimes do believe and sometimes do not:
    As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
 Patience once more, whiles our compact is urg'd:
    You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
    You will bestow her on Orlando here?
  DUKE SENIOR.

  ROSALIND.
 And you say you will have her when I bring her?
  ORLANDO.
 That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
 You say you'll marry me, if I be willing?
  PHEBE.

  ROSALIND.
 But if you do refuse to marry me,  
    You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?
  PHEBE.
 You say that you'll have Phebe, if she will?
  SILVIUS.
 Though to have her and death were both one thing.

  ROSALIND.
 I have promis'd to make all this matter even.

    Keep you your word, O Duke, to give your daughter;
    You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter;
    Keep your word, Phebe, that you'll marry me,
    Or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd;
    Keep your word, Silvius, that you'll marry her
    If she refuse me; and from hence I go,
    To make these doubts all even.
 My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
    Methought he was a brother to your daughter.


                    Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

  JAQUES.
 Here comes a pair of very strange beasts which
    in all tongues are call'd fools.

  TOUCHSTONE.
 Salutation and greeting to you all!
  JAQUES.
 Good my lord, bid him welcome.
 This is the motley-minded
    gentleman that I have so often met in the forest.
 If any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation.

  JAQUES.
 And how was that ta'en up?
  TOUCHSTONE.
  
  JAQUES.
 I like him very well.
 God 'ild you, sir; I desire you of the like.
 I press in
    here, sir, amongst the rest of the country copulatives, to swear
    and to forswear, according as marriage binds and blood breaks.
 A
    poor virgin, sir, an ill-favour'd thing, sir, but mine own; a
    poor humour of mine, sir, to take that that man else will.
 Rich
    honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a poor house; as your pearl
    in your foul oyster.
 By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.

  JAQUES.
 Upon a lie seven times removed- bear your body more
    seeming, Audrey- as thus, sir.
 If I sent him word again it was not well cut, he would
    send me word he cut it to please himself.
 This is call'd the Quip  
    Modest.
 If again it was not well cut, he disabled my judgment.

    This is call'd the Reply Churlish.
 If again it was not well cut,
    he would answer I spake not true.
 This is call'd the Reproof
    Valiant.
 If again it was not well cut, he would say I lie.

  JAQUES.
 And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?
  TOUCHSTONE.
' And they shook hands, and swore
    brothers.
 Your If is the only peace-maker; much virtue in If.
 Is not this a rare fellow, my lord?
    He's as good at any thing, and yet a fool.

  DUKE SENIOR.
 He uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under the
    presentation of that he shoots his wit:

          Enter HYMEN, ROSALIND, and CELIA.
 Still MUSIC

    HYMEN.
    Then is there mirth in heaven,
              When earthly things made even
                Atone together.

              Good Duke, receive thy daughter;
              Hymen from heaven brought her,
                Yea, brought her hither,
              That thou mightst join her hand with his,
              Whose heart within his bosom is.

  ROSALIND.
 [To DUKE] To you I give myself, for I am yours.

  DUKE SENIOR.
 If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.

  PHEBE.
 If sight and shape be true,
    Why then, my love adieu!
  ROSALIND.
    Peace, ho! I bar confusion;
            'Tis I must make conclusion
              Of these most strange events.


                       SONG
            Wedding is great Juno's crown;
              O blessed bond of board and bed!
            'Tis Hymen peoples every town;
              High wedlock then be honoured.

            Honour, high honour, and renown,
            To Hymen, god of every town!

  DUKE SENIOR.
 O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
    Even daughter, welcome in no less degree.

  PHEBE.
 I will not eat my word, now thou art mine;
    Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

    Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
    Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
    Address'd a mighty power; which were on foot,
    In his own conduct, purposely to take
    His brother here, and put him to the sword;
    And to the skirts of this wild wood he came,
    Where, meeting with an old religious man,
    After some question with him, was converted
    Both from his enterprise and from the world;
    His crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother,
    And all their lands restor'd to them again
    That were with him exil'd.
 This to be true
    I do engage my life.

  DUKE SENIOR.

    Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding:
    To one, his lands withheld; and to the other,
    A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.

    First, in this forest let us do those ends
    That here were well begun and well begot;  
    And after, every of this happy number,
    That have endur'd shrewd days and nights with us,
    Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
    According to the measure of their states.

    Play, music; and you brides and bridegrooms all,
    With measure heap'd in joy, to th' measures fall.

  JAQUES.
 Sir, by your patience.
 If I heard you rightly,
    The Duke hath put on a religious life,
    And thrown into neglect the pompous court.
 To him will I.

    [To DUKE] You to your former honour I bequeath;
    Your patience and your virtue well deserves it.

    [To ORLANDO] You to a love that your true faith doth merit;
    [To OLIVER] You to your land, and love, and great allies
    [To SILVIUS] You to a long and well-deserved bed;
    [To TOUCHSTONE] And you to wrangling; for thy loving voyage  
    Is but for two months victuall'd.
- So to your pleasures;
    I am for other than for dancing measures.

  DUKE SENIOR.
 Stay, Jaques, stay.
 What you would have
    I'll stay to know at your abandon'd cave.
 Proceed, proceed.

  ROSALIND.
 It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue; but
    it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue.
 If it
    be true that good wine needs no bush, 'tis true that a good play
    needs no epilogue.
 Yet to good wine they do use good bushes; and
    good plays prove the better by the help of good epilogues.
 My
    way is to conjure you; and I'll begin with the women.
 I charge
    you, O women, for the love you bear to men, to like as much of
    this play as please you; and I charge you, O men, for the love
    you bear to women- as I perceive by your simp'ring none of you
    hates them- that between you and the women the play may please.

    If I were a woman, I would kiss as many of you as had beards that
    pleas'd me, complexions that lik'd me, and breaths that I defied
    not; and, I am sure, as many as have good beards, or good faces,
    or sweet breaths, will, for my kind offer, when I make curtsy,
    bid me farewell.


THE END





1593

THE COMEDY OF ERRORS

by William Shakespeare



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

SOLINUS, Duke of Ephesus
AEGEON, a merchant of Syracuse

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS twin brothers and sons to
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE Aegion and Aemelia

DROMIO OF EPHESUS twin brothers, and attendants on
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE the two Antipholuses

BALTHAZAR, a merchant
ANGELO, a goldsmith
FIRST MERCHANT, friend to Antipholus of Syracuse
SECOND MERCHANT, to whom Angelo is a debtor
PINCH, a schoolmaster

AEMILIA, wife to AEgeon; an abbess at Ephesus
ADRIANA, wife to Antipholus of Ephesus
LUCIANA, her sister
LUCE, servant to Adriana

A COURTEZAN

Gaoler, Officers, Attendants





SCENE:
Ephesus


<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>




THE COMEDY OF ERRORS

ACT I.
 SCENE 1

A hall in the DUKE'S palace

Enter the DUKE OF EPHESUS, AEGEON, the Merchant
of Syracuse, GAOLER, OFFICERS, and other ATTENDANTS

AEGEON.
 Merchant of Syracuse, plead no more;
  I am not partial to infringe our laws.

  The enmity and discord which of late
  Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke
  To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen,
  Who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives,
  Have seal'd his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
  Excludes all pity from our threat'ning looks.

  For, since the mortal and intestine jars
  'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us,
  It hath in solemn synods been decreed,
  Both by the Syracusians and ourselves,
  To admit no traffic to our adverse towns;
  Nay, more: if any born at Ephesus
  Be seen at any Syracusian marts and fairs;
  Again, if any Syracusian born
  Come to the bay of Ephesus-he dies,
  His goods confiscate to the Duke's dispose,
  Unless a thousand marks be levied,
  To quit the penalty and to ransom him.

  Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
  Cannot amount unto a hundred marks;
  Therefore by law thou art condemn'd to die.

AEGEON.
 Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause
  Why thou departed'st from thy native home,
  And for what cause thou cam'st to Ephesus.

AEGEON.
 A heavier task could not have been impos'd
  Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable;
  Yet, that the world may witness that my end
  Was wrought by nature, not by vile offence,
  I'll utter what my sorrow gives me leave.

  In Syracuse was I born, and wed
  Unto a woman, happy but for me,
  And by me, had not our hap been bad.

  With her I liv'd in joy; our wealth increas'd
  By prosperous voyages I often made
  To Epidamnum; till my factor's death,
  And the great care of goods at random left,
  Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse:
  From whom my absence was not six months old,
  Before herself, almost at fainting under
  The pleasing punishment that women bear,
  Had made provision for her following me,
  And soon and safe arrived where I was.

  There had she not been long but she became
  A joyful mother of two goodly sons;
  And, which was strange, the one so like the other
  As could not be disdnguish'd but by names.

  That very hour, and in the self-same inn,
  A mean woman was delivered
  Of such a burden, male twins, both alike.

  Those, for their parents were exceeding poor,
  I bought, and brought up to attend my sons.

  My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys,
  Made daily motions for our home return;
  Unwilling, I agreed.

  A league from Epidamnum had we sail'd
  Before the always-wind-obeying deep
  Gave any tragic instance of our harm:
  But longer did we not retain much hope,
  For what obscured light the heavens did grant
  Did but convey unto our fearful minds
  A doubtful warrant of immediate death;
  Which though myself would gladly have embrac'd,
  Yet the incessant weepings of my wife,
  Weeping before for what she saw must come,
  And piteous plainings of the pretty babes,
  That mourn'd for fashion, ignorant what to fear,
  Forc'd me to seek delays for them and me.

  But ere they came-O, let me say no more!
  Gather the sequel by that went before.

DUKE.
 Nay, forward, old man, do not break off so;
  For we may pity, though not pardon thee.

AEGEON.

  Her part, poor soul, seeming as burdened
  With lesser weight, but not with lesser woe,
  Was carried with more speed before the wind;
  And in our sight they three were taken up
  By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.

  At length another ship had seiz'd on us;
  And, knowing whom it was their hap to save,
  Gave healthful welcome to their ship-wreck'd guests,
  And would have reft the fishers of their prey,
  Had not their bark been very slow of sail;
  And therefore homeward did they bend their course.

DUKE.

AEGEON.

  Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece,
  Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,
  And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus;
  Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought
  Or that or any place that harbours men.

  But here must end the story of my life;
  And happy were I in my timely death,
  Could all my travels warrant me they live.

DUKE.
 Hapless, Aegeon, whom the fates have mark'd
  To bear the extremity of dire mishap!
  Now, trust me, were it not against our laws,
  Against my crown, my oath, my dignity,
  Which princes, would they, may not disannul,
  My soul should sue as advocate for thee.

  But though thou art adjudged to the death,
  And passed sentence may not be recall'd
  But to our honour's great disparagement,
  Yet will I favour thee in what I can.

  Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus;
  Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
  And live; if no, then thou art doom'd to die.

GAOLER.

AEGEON.
 Hopeless and helpless doth Aegeon wend,
  But to procrastinate his lifeless end.

<Exeunt


SCENE 2

The mart

Enter ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE, DROMIO OF SYRACUSE, and FIRST MERCHANT

FIRST MERCHANT.
 Therefore, give out you are of Epidamnum,
  Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host.

  And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee.

  Within this hour it will be dinner-time;
  Till that, I'll view the manners of the town,
  Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
  And then return and sleep within mine inn;
  For with long travel I am stiff and weary.
 Many a man would take you at your word,
  And go indeed, having so good a mean.
 A trusty villain, sir, that very oft,
  When I am dull with care and melancholy,
  Lightens my humour with his merry jests.

  What, will you walk with me about the town,
  And then go to my inn and dine with me?
FIRST MERCHANT.
 I am invited, sir, to certain merchants,
  Of whom I hope to make much benefit;
  I crave your pardon.
 Soon at five o'clock,
  Please you, I'll meet with you upon the mart,
  And afterward consort you till bed time.

  My present business calls me from you now.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 I will go lose myself,
  And wander up and down to view the city.
 Sir, I commend you to your own content.
 He that commends me to mine own content
  Commends me to the thing I cannot get.

  What now? How chance thou art return'd so soon?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Return'd so soon! rather approach'd too late.

  The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit;
  The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell-
  My mistress made it one upon my cheek;
  She is so hot because the meat is cold,
  The meat is cold because you come not home,
  You come not home because you have no stomach,
  You have no stomach, having broke your fast;
  But we, that know what 'tis to fast and pray,
  Are penitent for your default to-day.
 Stop in your wind, sir; tell me this, I pray:
  Where have you left the money that I gave you?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

  I from my mistress come to you in post;
  If I return, I shall be post indeed,
  For she will score your fault upon my pate.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

  Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 To me, sir? Why, you gave no gold to me.

  ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

  My mistress and her sister stays for you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Your worship's wife, my mistress at the Phoenix;
  She that doth fast till you come home to dinner,
  And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.
 What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face,
  Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave.

[Beats him]
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Upon my life, by some device or other
  The villain is o'erraught of all my money.

  I'll to the Centaur to go seek this slave.

  I greatly fear my money is not safe.

<Exit


<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE 1

The house of ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS

Enter ADRIANA, wife to ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS, with LUCIANA, her sister

ADRIANA.

LUCIANA.
 Perhaps some merchant hath invited him,
  And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner;
  Good sister, let us dine, and never fret.

  A man is master of his liberty;
  Time is their master, and when they see time,
  They'll go or come.
 If so, be patient, sister.

ADRIANA.
 Why should their liberty than ours be more?
LUCIANA.

ADRIANA.
 Look when I serve him so, he takes it ill.

LUCIANA.
 O, know he is the bridle of your will.

ADRIANA.
 There's none but asses will be bridled so.

LUCIANA.
 Why, headstrong liberty is lash'd with woe.

  The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls,
  Are their males' subjects, and at their controls.

  Man, more divine, the master of all these,
  Lord of the wide world and wild wat'ry seas,
  Indu'd with intellectual sense and souls,
  Of more pre-eminence than fish and fowls,
  Are masters to their females, and their lords;
  Then let your will attend on their accords.

ADRIANA.
 This servitude makes you to keep unwed.

LUCIANA.
 Not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed.

ADRIANA.
 Ere I learn love, I'll practise to obey.

ADRIANA.
 Till he come home again, I would forbear.

ADRIANA.
 Patience unmov'd! no marvel though she pause:
  They can be meek that have no other cause.

  A wretched soul, bruis'd with adversity,
  We bid be quiet when we hear it cry;
  But were we burd'ned with like weight of pain,
  As much, or more, we should ourselves complain.
 Well, I will marry one day, but to try.

  Here comes your man, now is your husband nigh.

ADRIANA.
 Say, didst thou speak with him? Know'st thou his mind?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

LUCIANA.
 Nay, he struck so plainly I could to
  well feel his blows; and withal so doubtfully that I could
  scarce understand them.

ADRIANA.
 But say, I prithee, is he coming home?
  It seems he hath great care to please his wife.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

ADRIANA.
 Horn-mad, thou villain!
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

  When I desir'd him to come home to dinner,
  He ask'd me for a thousand marks in gold.

  "Tis dinner time' quoth I; 'My gold!' quoth he.

  'Will you come home?' quoth I; 'My gold!' quoth he.

  'My mistress, sir,' quoth I; 'Hang up thy mistress;
  I know not thy mistress; out on thy mistress.
'
LUCIANA.
 Quoth who?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Quoth my master.
 Go back again, and be new beaten home?
  For God's sake, send some other messenger.

ADRIANA.
 Back, slave, or I will break thy pate across.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 And he will bless that cross with other beating;
  Between you I shall have a holy head.

ADRIANA.
 Hence, prating peasant! Fetch thy master home.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Am I so round with you, as you with me,
  That like a football you do spurn me thus?
  You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither;
  If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.
 Fie, how impatience loureth in your face!
ADRIANA.

  Hath homely age th' alluring beauty took
  From my poor cheek? Then he hath wasted it.

  Are my discourses dull? Barren my wit?
  If voluble and sharp discourse be marr'd,
  Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard.
 My decayed fair
  A sunny look of his would soon repair.

LUCIANA.
 Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence.

ADRIANA.
 Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense.

  I know his eye doth homage otherwhere;
  Or else what lets it but he would be here?
  Sister, you know he promis'd me a chain;
  Would that alone a love he would detain,
  So he would keep fair quarter with his bed!
  I see the jewel best enamelled
  Will lose his beauty; yet the gold bides still
  That others touch and, often touching, will
  Where gold; and no man that hath a name
  By falsehood and corruption doth it shame.

  Since that my beauty cannot please his eye,
  I'll weep what's left away, and weeping die.
 How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!
<Exeunt


SCENE 2

The mart

Enter ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up
  Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave
  Is wand'red forth in care to seek me out.

  By computation and mine host's report
  I could not speak with Dromio since at first
  I sent him from the mart.
 See, here he comes.


Enter DROMIO OF SYRACUSE

  How now, sir, is your merry humour alter'd?
  As you love strokes, so jest with me again.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Villain, thou didst deny the gold's receipt,
  And told'st me of a mistress and a dinner;
  For which, I hope, thou felt'st I was displeas'd.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 I am glad to see you in this merry vein.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth?
  Think'st thou I jest? Hold, take thou that, and that.
 Hold, sir, for God's sake! Now your jest is earnest.
 Sconce, call you it? So you would
  leave battering, I had rather have it a head.
 An you use
  these blows long, I must get a sconce for my head, and
  insconce it too; or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders.

  But I pray, sir, why am I beaten?
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Dost thou not know?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,
  When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme nor reason?
  Well, sir, I thank you.
 Marry, sir, for this something that you gave
  me for nothing.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 I'll make you amends next, to
  give you nothing for something.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Well, sir, then 'twill be dry.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 If it be, sir, I pray you eat none of it.
 Your reason?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 I durst have denied that, before you
  were so choleric.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the
  plain bald pate of Father Time himself.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig, and
  recover the lost hair of another man.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Why is Time such a niggard of
  hair, being, as it is, so plentiful an excrement?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Because it is a blessing that he bestows
  on beasts, and what he hath scanted men in hair he hath
  given them in wit.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Not a man of those but he hath the
  wit to lose his hair.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Why, thou didst conclude hairy
  men plain dealers without wit.
 The plainer dealer, the sooner lost;
  yet he loseth it in a kind of jollity.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 For what reason?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 For two; and sound ones too.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Nay, not sound I pray you.
 Sure ones, then.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 The one, to save the money that he spends in
  tiring; the other, that at dinner they should not drop in his
  porridge.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 You would all this time have prov'd there
  is no time for all things.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 But your reason was not substantial, why
  there is no time to recover.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 I knew 't'would be a bald conclusion.
 Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown.

  Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects;
  I am not Adriana, nor thy wife.

  The time was once when thou unurg'd wouldst vow
  That never words were music to thine ear,
  That never object pleasing in thine eye,
  That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
  That never meat sweet-savour'd in thy taste,
  Unless I spake, or look'd, or touch'd, or carv'd to thee.

  Ah, do not tear away thyself from me;
  For know, my love, as easy mayst thou fall
  A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
  And take unmingled thence that drop again
  Without addition or diminishing,
  As take from me thyself, and not me too.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Plead you to me, fair dame? I know you not:
  In Ephesus I am but two hours old,
  As strange unto your town as to your talk,
  Who, every word by all my wit being scann'd,
  Wants wit in all one word to understand.

LUCIANA.
 Fie, brother, how the world is chang'd with you!
  When were you wont to use my sister thus?
  She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 By Dromio?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 By thee; and this thou didst return from him-
  That he did buffet thee, and in his blows
  Denied my house for his, me for his wife.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 I, Sir? I never saw her till this time.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 How can she thus, then, call us by our names,
  Unless it be by inspiration?
ADRIANA.
 How ill agrees it with your gravity
  To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,
  Abetting him to thwart me in my mood!
  Be it my wrong you are from me exempt,
  But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 To me she speaks; she moves me for her theme.

LUCIANA.
 Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

  If we obey them not, this will ensue:
  They'll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.

LUCIANA.
 Why prat'st thou to thyself, and answer'st not?
  Dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot!
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 I am transformed, master, am not I?
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 I think thou art in mind, and so am I.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Thou hast thine own form.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

LUCIANA.
 Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,
  To put the finger in the eye and weep,
  Whilst man and master laughs my woes to scorn.
 Dromio, keep the gate.

  Husband, I'll dine above with you to-day,
  And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks.

  Sirrah, if any ask you for your master,
  Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.

  Come, sister.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell?
  Sleeping or waking, mad or well-advis'd?
  Known unto these, and to myself disguis'd!
  I'll say as they say, and persever so,
  And in this mist at all adventures go.

LUCIANA.

<Exeunt


<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





ACT III.
 Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all;
  My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours.

  Say that I linger'd with you at your shop
  To see the making of her carcanet,
  And that to-morrow you will bring it home.

  But here's a villain that would face me down
  He met me on the mart, and that I beat him,
  And charg'd him with a thousand marks in gold,
  And that I did deny my wife and house.

  That you beat me at the mart I have your hand to show;
  If the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave were ink,
  Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

  I should kick, being kick'd; and being at that pass,
  You would keep from my heels, and beware of an ass.
 Y'are sad, Signior Balthazar; pray God our cheer
  May answer my good will and your good welcome here.

BALTHAZAR.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 O, Signior Balthazar, either at flesh or fish,
  A table full of welcome makes scarce one dainty dish.

BALTHAZAR.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

BALTHAZAR.
 Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Ay, to a niggardly host and more sparing guest.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Maud, Bridget, Marian, Cicely, Gillian, Ginn!
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 [Within] Mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb, idiot, patch!
  Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Who talks within there? Ho, open the door!
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Wherefore? For my dinner;
    I have not din'd to-day.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

  If thou hadst been Dromio to-day in my place,
  Thou wouldst have chang'd thy face for a name, or thy name for an ass.


Enter LUCE, within

LUCE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Do you hear, you minion? You'll let us in, I hope?
LUCE.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Thou baggage, let me in.
  [Within]  Can you tell for whose sake?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
  [Within]  Let him knock till it ache.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 You'll cry for this, minion, if beat the door down.

LUCE.
  [Within]  By my troth, your town is
    troubled with unruly boys.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

ADRIANA.
  [Within]  Your wife, sir knave! Go get you from the door.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 They stand at the door, master; bid them welcome hither.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.
 Go fetch me something; I'll break ope the gate.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
  [Within]  Break any breaking here,
    and I'll break your knave's pate.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 A man may break a word with you,
    sir; and words are but wind;
  Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.
  [Within]  It seems thou want'st breaking;
    out upon thee, hind!
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Well, I'll break in; go borrow me a crow.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

  If by strong hand you offer to break in
  Now in the stirring passage of the day,
  A vulgar comment will be made of it,
  And that supposed by the common rout
  Against your yet ungalled estimation
  That may with foul intrusion enter in
  And dwell upon your grave when you are dead;
  For slander lives upon succession,
  For ever hous'd where it gets possession.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 I will depart in quiet,
  And in despite of mirth mean to be merry.

  I know a wench of excellent discourse,
  Pretty and witty; wild, and yet, too, gentle;
  There will we dine.
 This woman that I mean,
  My wife-but, I protest, without desert-
  Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal;
  To her will we to dinner.
 That chain will I bestow-
  Be it for nothing but to spite my wife-
  Upon mine hostess there; good sir, make haste.

ANGELO.
 Do so; this jest shall cost me some expense.

<Exeunt


SCENE 2

Before the house of ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS

Enter LUCIANA with ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE

LUCIANA.
 What need she be acquainted?
  What simple thief brags of his own attaint?
  'Tis double wrong to truant with your bed
  And let her read it in thy looks at board;
  Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed;
  Ill deeds is doubled with an evil word.

  Alas, poor women! make us but believe,
  Being compact of credit, that you love us;
  Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve;
  We in your motion turn, and you may move us.

  Then, gentle brother, get you in again;
  Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

  But if that I am I, then well I know
  Your weeping sister is no wife of mine,
  Nor to her bed no homage do I owe;
  Far more, far more, to you do I decline.

  Sing, siren, for thyself, and I will dote;
  Spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs,
  And as a bed I'll take them, and there he;
  And in that glorious supposition think
  He gains by death that hath such means to die.
 What, are you mad, that you do reason so?
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Not mad, but mated; how, I do not know.

LUCIANA.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 For gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.

LUCIANA.
 Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 As good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.
 Why call you me love? Call my sister so.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Thy sister's sister.

LUCIANA.
 That's my sister.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 No;
  It is thyself, mine own self's better part;
  Mine eye's clear eye, my dear heart's dearer heart,
  My food, my fortune, and my sweet hope's aim,
  My sole earth's heaven, and my heaven's claim.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 O, soft, sir, hold you still;
  I'll fetch my sister to get her good will.

<Exit LUCIANA

Enter DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Why, how now, Dromio! Where run'st thou
  so fast?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Do you know me, sir? Am I Dromio?
  Am I your man? Am I myself?
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 I am an ass, I am a woman's man, and besides
  myself.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 What woman's man, and how besides thyself?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due
  to a woman-one that claims me, one that haunts me, one
  that will have me.
 What claim lays she to thee?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Marry, sir, such claim as you would
  lay to your horse; and she would have me as a beast: not
  that, I being a beast, she would have me; but that she,
  being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 What is she?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 A very reverent body; ay, such a one
  as a man may not speak of without he say 'Sir-reverence.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 How dost thou mean a fat marriage?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Marry, sir, she's the kitchen-wench,
  and all grease; and I know not what use to put her to but
  to make a lamp of her and run from her by her own light.
 If she lives till doomsday, she'll burn
  week longer than the whole world.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 What complexion is she of?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Swart, like my shoe; but her face
  nothing like so clean kept; for why, she sweats, a man may
  go over shoes in the grime of it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 What's her name?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Nell, sir; but her name and three
  quarters, that's an ell and three quarters, will not measure
  her from hip to hip.
 No longer from head to foot than
  from hip to hip: she is spherical, like a globe; I could find
  out countries in her.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 I found it by the barrenness, hard in
  the palm of the hand.
 Where France?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Where England?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Where Spain?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 To
  conclude: this drudge or diviner laid claim to me; call'd me
  Dromio; swore I was assur'd to her; told me what privy
  marks I had about me, as, the mark of my shoulder, the
  mole in my neck, the great wart on my left arm, that I,
  amaz'd, ran from her as a witch.

  And, I think, if my breast had not been made of faith,
    and my heart of steel,
  She had transform'd me to a curtal dog, and made me turn i' th' wheel.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

  If every one knows us, and we know none,
  'Tis time, I think, to trudge, pack and be gone.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 As from a bear a man would run for life,
  So fly I from her that would be my wife.

<Exit
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 There's none but witches do inhabit here,
  And therefore 'tis high time that I were hence.
 But her fair sister,
  Possess'd with such a gentle sovereign grace,
  Of such enchanting presence and discourse,
  Hath almost made me traitor to myself;
  But, lest myself be guilty to self-wrong,
  I'll stop mine ears against the mermaid's song.


Enter ANGELO with the chain

ANGELO.
 Master Antipholus!
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Ay, that's my name.

ANGELO.

  I thought to have ta'en you at the Porpentine;
  The chain unfinish'd made me stay thus long.
 What is your will that I shall do with this?
ANGELO.
 What please yourself, sir; I have made it for you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Made it for me, sir! I bespoke it not.

ANGELO.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

<Exit
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

  I see a man here needs not live by shifts,
  When in the streets he meets such golden gifts.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE 1

A public place

Enter SECOND MERCHANT, ANGELO, and an OFFICER

SECOND MERCHANT.
 You know since Pentecost the sum is due,
  And since I have not much importun'd you;
  Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
  To Persia, and want guilders for my voyage.

  Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house,
  I will discharge my bond, and thank you too.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 While I go to the goldsmith's house, go thou
  And buy a rope's end; that will I bestow
  Among my wife and her confederates,
  For locking me out of my doors by day.

  But, soft, I see the goldsmith.
 Get thee gone;
  Buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 I buy a thousand pound a year; I buy a rope.

  Belike you thought our love would last too long,
  If it were chain'd together, and therefore came not.

ANGELO.
 Saving your merry humour, here's the note
  How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
  The fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion,
  Which doth amount to three odd ducats more
  Than I stand debted to this gentleman.

  I pray you see him presently discharg'd,
  For he is bound to sea, and stays but for it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 I am not furnish'd with the present money;
  Besides, I have some business in the town.

  Perchance I will be there as soon as you.

ANGELO.
 Then you will bring the chain to her yourself?
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 No; bear it with you, lest I come not time enough.

ANGELO.
 Well, sir, I will.

ANGELO.
 Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain;
  Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,
  And I, to blame, have held him here too long.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Good Lord! you use this dalliance to excuse
  Your breach of promise to the Porpentine;
  I should have chid you for not bringing it,
  But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.
 The hour steals on; I pray you, sir, dispatch.

ANGELO.
 Why, give it to my wife, and fetch your money.
 Come, come, you know I gave it you even now.

  Either send the chain or send by me some token.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 My business cannot brook this dalliance.
 I answer you! What should I answer you?
ANGELO.

ANGELO.
 You know I gave it you half an hour since.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

ANGELO.
 You wrong me more, sir, in denying it.

  Consider how it stands upon my credit.
 I do; and charge you in the Duke's name to obey me.

ANGELO.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Consent to pay thee that I never had!
  Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou dar'st.

ANGELO.
 Here is thy fee; arrest him, officer.

  I would not spare my brother in this case,
  If he should scorn me so apparently.

OFFICER.
 I do obey thee till I give thee bail.

  But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear
  As all the metal in your shop will answer.

ANGELO.


Enter DROMIO OF SYRACUSE, from the bay

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Master, there's a bark of Epidamnum
  That stays but till her owner comes aboard,
  And then, sir, she bears away.
 Our fraughtage, sir,
  I have convey'd aboard; and I have bought
  The oil, the balsamum, and aqua-vitx.

  The ship is in her trim; the merry wind
  Blows fair from land; they stay for nought at an
  But for their owner, master, and yourself.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 How now! a madman? Why, thou peevish sheep,
  What ship of Epidamnum stays for me?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 YOU sent me for a rope's end as soon-
  You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

  Tell her I am arrested in the street,
  And that shall bail me; hie thee, slave, be gone.

  On, officer, to prison till it come.

<Exeunt all but DROMIO
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so?
  Might'st thou perceive austerely in his eye
  That he did plead in earnest? Yea or no?
  Look'd he or red or pale, or sad or merrily?
  What observation mad'st thou in this case
  Of his heart's meteors tilting in his face?
LUCIANA.
 He meant he did me none-the more my spite.

LUCIANA.

ADRIANA.
 And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.

LUCIANA.
 Then pleaded I for you.

ADRIANA.
 And what said he?
LUCIANA.
 With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?
LUCIANA.
 With words that in an honest suit might move.

ADRIANA.
 Have patience, I beseech.

ADRIANA.
 I cannot, nor I will not hold me still;
  My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.

  He is deformed, crooked, old, and sere,
  Ill-fac'd, worse bodied, shapeless everywhere;
  Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind;
  Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.

LUCIANA.
 Who would be jealous then of such a one?
  No evil lost is wail'd when it is gone.
 Ah, but I think him better than I say,
  And yet would herein others' eyes were worse.


Enter DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.


DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Here go-the desk, the purse.
 Sweet
  now, make haste.

LUCIANA.
 How hast thou lost thy breath?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 By running fast.

ADRIANA.
 Where is thy master, Dromio? Is he well?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ADRIANA.
 Why, man, what is the matter?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 I do not know the matter; he is rested on the case.

ADRIANA.
 I know not at whose suit he is arrested well;
  But he's in a suit of buff which 'rested him, that can I tell.
 Go fetch it, sister.
  [Exit LUCIANA]  This I wonder at:
  Thus he unknown to me should be in debt.

  Tell me, was he arrested on a band?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 on a band, but on a stronger thing,
  A chain, a chain.
 Do you not hear it ring?
ADRIANA.
 What, the chain?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 No, no, the bell; 'tis time that I were gone.

  It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 As if Time were in debt! How fondly dost thou reason!
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

  Nay, he's a thief too: have you not heard men say
  That Time comes stealing on by night and day?
  If 'a be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,
  Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?

Re-enter LUCIANA with a purse

ADRIANA.
 Go, Dromio, there's the money; bear it straight,
  And bring thy master home immediately.

<Exeunt


SCENE 3

The mart

Enter ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

  Some tender money to me, some invite me,
  Some other give me thanks for kindnesses,
  Some offer me commodities to buy;
  Even now a tailor call'd me in his shop,
  And show'd me silks that he had bought for me,
  And therewithal took measure of my body.

  Sure, these are but imaginary wiles,
  And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.


Enter DROMIO OF SYRACUSE

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Master, here's the gold you sent me
  for.
 What gold is this? What Adam dost thou mean?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 I understand thee not.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band;
  that brings any man to answer it that breaks his band; on
  that thinks a man always going to bed, and says 'God give
  you good rest!'
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Well, sir, there rest in your foolery.
 Is
  there any ship puts forth to-night? May we be gone?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Why, sir, I brought you word an
  hour since that the bark Expedition put forth to-night; and
  then were you hind'red by the sergeant, to tarry for the
  boy Delay.
 Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 The fellow is distract, and so am I;
  And here we wander in illusions.
 Well met, well met, Master Antipholus.

  I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now.
 It is the devil.
 Nay, she is worse, she is the devil's
  dam, and here she comes in the habit of a light wench; and
  thereof comes that the wenches say 'God damn me!' That's
  as much to say 'God make me a light wench!' It is written
  they appear to men like angels of light; light is an effect
  of fire, and fire will burn; ergo, light wenches will burn.

  Come not near her.

COURTEZAN.
 Your man and you are marvellous merry, sir.

  Will you go with me? We'll mend our dinner here.
 Master, if you do, expect spoon-meat,
  or bespeak a long spoon.
 Why, Dromio?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner,
  Or, for my diamond, the chain you promis'd,
  And I'll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

COURTEZAN.
 I pray you, sir, my ring, or else the chain;
  I hope you do not mean to cheat me so.
 Avaunt, thou witch! Come, Dromio, let us go.
 Now, out of doubt, Antipholus is mad,
  Else would he never so demean himself.

  A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats,
  And for the same he promis'd me a chain;
  Both one and other he denies me now.

  Belike his wife, acquainted with his fits,
  On purpose shut the doors against his way.
 This course I fittest choose,
  For forty ducats is too much to lose.

<Exit


SCENE 4

A street

Enter ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS with the OFFICER

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

  I'll give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money,
  To warrant thee, as I am 'rested for.

  My wife is in a wayward mood to-day,
  And will not lightly trust the messenger.

  That I should be attach'd in Ephesus,
  I tell you 'twill sound harshly in her cars.

  How now, sir! Have you that I sent you for?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Here's that, I warrant you, will pay them all.
 But where's the money?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Five hundred ducats, villain, for rope?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 I'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 And to that end, sir, I will welcome you.

[Beating him]
OFFICER.
 Good sir, be patient.
 Nay, 'tis for me to be patient; I am in
  adversity.

OFFICER.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Thou whoreson, senseless villain!
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 I am an ass indeed; you may prove it
  by my long 'ears.
 I have served him from the hour of my
  nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands for
  my service but blows.
 Come, go along; my wife is coming yonder.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Wilt thou still talk?
[Beating him]
COURTEZAN.

  Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer:
  Establish him in his true sense again,
  And I will please you what you will demand.

LUCIANA.
 Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!
COURTEZAN.
 Give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse.
 I charge thee, Satan, hous'd within this man,
  To yield possession to my holy prayers,
  And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Peace, doting wizard, peace! I am not mad.
 You minion, you, are these your customers?
  Did this companion with the saffron face
  Revel and feast it at my house to-day,
  Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut,
  And I denied to enter in my house?
ADRIANA.
 O husband, God doth know you din'd at home,
  Where would you had remain'd until this time,
  Free from these slanders and this open shame!
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Din'd at home! Thou villain, what sayest thou?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 And did not I in rage depart from thence?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 In verity, you did.
 My bones bear witness,
  That since have felt the vigour of his rage.

ADRIANA.
 It is no shame; the fellow finds his vein,
  And, yielding to him, humours well his frenzy.
 Alas, I sent you money to redeem you,
  By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Money by me! Heart and goodwill you might,
  But surely, master, not a rag of money.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Went'st not thou to her for purse of ducats?
ADRIANA.

LUCIANA.
 And I am witness with her that she did.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 God and the rope-maker bear me witness
  That I was sent for nothing but a rope!
PINCH.
 Mistress, both man and master is possess'd;
  I know it by their pale and deadly looks.

  They must be bound, and laid in some dark room.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Say, wherefore didst thou lock me forth to-day?
  And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?
ADRIANA.
 I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 And, gentle master, I receiv'd no gold;
  But I confess, sir, that we were lock'd out.

ADRIANA.
 Dissembling villain, thou speak'st false in both.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all,
  And art confederate with a damned pack
  To make a loathsome abject scorn of me;
  But with these nails I'll pluck out these false eyes
  That would behold in me this shameful sport.

ADRIANA.

PINCH.


Enter three or four, and offer to bind him.
 He strives

LUCIANA.
 Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 What, will you murder me? Thou gaoler, thou,
  I am thy prisoner.
 Masters, let him go;
  He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.
 Go bind this man, for he is frantic too.
 What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer?
  Hast thou delight to see a wretched man
  Do outrage and displeasure to himself?
OFFICER.
 I will discharge thee ere I go from thee;
  Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,
  And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.

  Good Master Doctor, see him safe convey'd
  Home to my house.
 O most unhappy day!
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 O most unhappy strumpet!
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Out on thee, villian! Wherefore
  dost thou mad me?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Will you be bound for nothing?
  Be mad, good master; cry 'The devil!'
LUCIANA.
 Go bear him hence.
 Sister, go you with me.

<Exeunt all but ADRIANA, LUCIANA, OFFICERS, and COURTEZAN
  Say now, whose suit is he arrested at?
OFFICER.

ADRIANA.
 Say, how grows it due?
OFFICER.
 Due for a chain your husband had of him.

ADRIANA.
 He did bespeak a chain for me, but had it not.
 When as your husband, all in rage, to-day
  Came to my house, and took away my ring-
  The ring I saw upon his finger now-
  Straight after did I meet him with a chain.

ADRIANA.
 It may be so, but I did never see it.

  Come, gaoler, bring me where the goldsmith is;
  I long to know the truth hereof at large.


Enter ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE, with his rapier drawn, and
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 God, for thy mercy! they are loose again.

ADRIANA.
 Away, they'll kill us!
<Exeunt all but ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE and
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE as fast as may be, frighted
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Faith, stay here this night; they will
  surely do us no harm; you saw they speak us fair, give us
  gold; methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for
  the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of me,
  could find in my heart to stay here still and turn witch.

<Exeunt


<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
 I am sorry, sir, that I have hind'red you;
  But I protest he had the chain of me,
  Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.

SECOND MERCHANT.
 Of very reverend reputation, sir,
  Of credit infinite, highly belov'd,
  Second to none that lives here in the city;
  His word might bear my wealth at any time.

SECOND MERCHANT.
 Speak softly; yonder, as I think, he walks.

  Good sir, draw near to me, I'll speak to him.

  Signior Andpholus, I wonder much
  That you would put me to this shame and trouble;
  And, not without some scandal to yourself,
  With circumstance and oaths so to deny
  This chain, which now you wear so openly.

  Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
  You have done wrong to this my honest friend;
  Who, but for staying on our controversy,
  Had hoisted sail and put to sea to-day.

  This chain you had of me; can you deny it?
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?
SECOND MERCHANT.
 Thou art a villain to impeach me thus;
  I'll prove mine honour and mine honesty
  Against thee presently, if thou dar'st stand.

SECOND MERCHANT.
 I dare, and do defy thee for a villain.

[They draw]

Enter ADRIANA, LUCIANA, the COURTEZAN, and OTHERS

ADRIANA.
 Hold, hurt him not, for God's sake! He is mad.

  Some get within him, take his sword away;
  Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Run, master, run; for God's sake take a house.

  This is some priory.
 In, or we are spoil'd.
 Be quiet, people.

  Let us come in, that we may bind him fast,
  And bear him home for his recovery.
 I knew he was not in his perfect wits.

ABBESS.
 This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad,
  And much different from the man he was;
  But till this afternoon his passion
  Ne'er brake into extremity of rage.
 To none of these, except it be the last;
  Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.

ABBESS.
 You should for that have reprehended him.
 Why, so I did.

ADRIANA.

ABBESS.
 Haply in private.

ADRIANA.

ABBESS.
 Ay, but not enough.

ADRIANA.
 It was the copy of our conference.

  In bed, he slept not for my urging it;
  At board, he fed not for my urging it;
  Alone, it was the subject of my theme;
  In company, I often glanced it;
  Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.

ABBESS.

  It seems his sleeps were hind'red by thy railing,
  And thereof comes it that his head is light.

  Sweet recreation barr'd, what doth ensue
  But moody and dull melancholy,
  Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,
  And at her heels a huge infectious troop
  Of pale distemperatures and foes to life?
  In food, in sport, and life-preserving rest,
  To be disturb'd would mad or man or beast.

  The consequence is, then, thy jealous fits
  Hath scar'd thy husband from the use of wits.

LUCIANA.
 She never reprehended him but mildly,
  When he demean'd himself rough, rude, and wildly.

  Why bear you these rebukes, and answer not?
ADRIANA.

ABBESS.
 No, not a creature enters in my house.

ADRIANA.
 Then let your servants bring my husband forth.

ABBESS.

ADRIANA.
 I will attend my husband, be his nurse,
  Diet his sickness, for it is my office,
  And will have no attorney but myself;
  And therefore let me have him home with me.
 Be patient; for I will not let him stir
  Till I have us'd the approved means I have,
  With wholesome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers,
  To make of him a formal man again.

  It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,
  A charitable duty of my order;
  Therefore depart, and leave him here with me.

ADRIANA.
 I will not hence and leave my husband here;
  And ill it doth beseem your holiness
  To separate the husband and the wife.

ABBESS.

<Exit
LUCIANA.

ADRIANA.

SECOND MERCHANT.

ANGELO.
 To see a reverend Syracusian merchant,
  Who put unluckily into this bay
  Against the laws and statutes of this town,
  Beheaded publicly for his offence.
 See where they come; we will behold his death.

LUCIANA.


Enter the DUKE, attended; AEGEON, bareheaded;
with the HEADSMAN and other OFFICERS

DUKE.
 Justice, most sacred Duke, against the Abbess!
DUKE.

ADRIANA.

  Once did I get him bound and sent him home,
  Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went,
  That here and there his fury had committed.

  Anon, I wot not by what strong escape,
  He broke from those that had the guard of him,
  And with his mad attendant and himself,
  Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords,
  Met us again and, madly bent on us,
  Chas'd us away; till, raising of more aid,
  We came again to bind them.

DUKE.
 Long since thy husband serv'd me in my wars,
  And I to thee engag'd a prince's word,
  When thou didst make him master of thy bed,
  To do him all the grace and good I could.

  Go, some of you, knock at the abbey gate,
  And bid the Lady Abbess come to me,
  I will determine this before I stir.


Enter a MESSENGER

MESSENGER.
 O mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself!
  My master and his man are both broke loose,
  Beaten the maids a-row and bound the doctor,
  Whose beard they have sing'd off with brands of fire;
  And ever, as it blaz'd, they threw on him
  Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair.
 Peace, fool! thy master and his man are here,
  And that is false thou dost report to us.

  He cries for you, and vows, if he can take you,
  To scorch your face, and to disfigure you.

ADRIANA.
 Ay me, it is my husband! Witness you
  That he is borne about invisible.


Enter ANTIPHOLUS OFEPHESUS and DROMIO OFEPHESUS

ANTIPHOLUS OFEPHESUS.
 Justice, most gracious Duke; O, grant me justice!
  Even for the service that long since I did thee,
  When I bestrid thee in the wars, and took
  Deep scars to save thy life; even for the blood
  That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.

AEGEON.
 Unless the fear of death doth make me dote,
  I see my son Antipholus, and Dromio.

ANTIPHOLUS OFEPHESUS.
 This day, great Duke, she shut the doors upon me,
  While she with harlots feasted in my house.

DUKE.
 A grievous fault.
 Say, woman, didst thou so?
ADRIANA.
 Myself, he, and my sister,
  To-day did dine together.

  In this the madman justly chargeth them.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

  This woman lock'd me out this day from dinner;
  That goldsmith there, were he not pack'd with her,
  Could witness it, for he was with me then;
  Who parted with me to go fetch a chain,
  Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
  Where Balthazar and I did dine together.

  Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,
  I went to seek him.
 In the street I met him,
  And in his company that gentleman.

  By th' way we met my wife, her sister, and a rabble more
  Of vile confederates.
 Then all together
  They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence,
  And in a dark and dankish vault at home
  There left me and my man, both bound together;
  Till, gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,
  I gain'd my freedom, and immediately
  Ran hither to your Grace; whom I beseech
  To give me ample satisfaction
  For these deep shames and great indignities.

DUKE.
 He had, my lord, and when he ran in here,
  These people saw the chain about his neck.

SECOND MERCHANT.

DUKE.
 Why, what an intricate impeach is this!
  I think you all have drunk of Circe's cup.

  If here you hous'd him, here he would have been;
  If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly.
 He did; and from my finger snatch'd that ring.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 'Tis true, my liege; this ring I had of her.

DUKE.
 As sure, my liege, as I do see your Grace.

DUKE.
 Why, this is strange.

<Exit one to the ABBESS
AEGEON.
 Most mighty Duke, vouchsafe me speak a word:
  Haply I see a friend will save my life
  And pay the sum that may deliver me.

DUKE.
 Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt.

AEGEON.
 Is not your name, sir, call'd Antipholus?
  And is not that your bondman Dromio?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Within this hour I was his bondman, sir,
  But he, I thank him, gnaw'd in two my cords
  Now am I Dromio and his man unbound.
 I am sure you both of you remember me.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 I never saw you in my life till now.

AEGEON.

  But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Neither.

AEGEON.
 Dromio, nor thou?
DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 No, trust me, sir, nor I.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not; and
  whatsoever a man denies, you are now bound to believe him.

AEGEON.
 Not know my voice! O time's extremity,
  Hast thou so crack'd and splitted my poor tongue
  In seven short years that here my only son
  Knows not my feeble key of untun'd cares?
  Though now this grained face of mine be hid
  In sap-consuming winter's drizzled snow,
  And all the conduits of my blood froze up,
  Yet hath my night of life some memory,
  My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left,
  My dull deaf ears a little use to hear;
  All these old witnesses-I cannot err-
  Tell me thou art my son Antipholus.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

AEGEON.
 But seven years since, in Syracuse, boy,
  Thou know'st we parted; but perhaps, my son,
  Thou sham'st to acknowledge me in misery.
 The Duke and all that know me in
  the city Can witness with me that it is not so:
  I ne'er saw Syracuse in my life.

DUKE.
 I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years
  Have I been patron to Antipholus,
  During which time he ne'er saw Syracuse.


Re-enter the ABBESS, with ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE and DROMIO OF SYRACUSE

ABBESS.
 Most mighty Duke, behold a man much wrong'd.

[All gather to see them]
ADRIANA.

DUKE.
 Which is the natural man,
  And which the spirit? Who deciphers them?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 I, Sir, am Dromio; pray let me stay.
 Aegeon, art thou not? or else his
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.

  Speak, old Aegeon, if thou be'st the man
  That hadst a wife once call'd Aemilia,
  That bore thee at a burden two fair sons.

  O, if thou be'st the same Aegeon, speak,
  And speak unto the same Aemilia!
AEGEON.
 If I dream not, thou art Aemilia.
 By men of Epidamnum he and I
  And the twin Dromio, all were taken up;
  But by and by rude fishermen of Corinth
  By force took Dromio and my son from them,
  And me they left with those of Epidamnum.

  What then became of them I cannot tell;
  I to this fortune that you see me in.

DUKE.
 Why, here begins his morning story right.

  These two Antipholus', these two so like,
  And these two Dromios, one in semblance-
  Besides her urging of her wreck at sea-
  These are the parents to these children,
  Which accidentally are met together.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Brought to this town by that most famous warrior,
  Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle.

ADRIANA.
 Which of you two did dine with me to-day?
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.

ADRIANA.
 And are not you my husband?
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 No; I say nay to that.
  [To LUCIANA]  What I told you then,
  I hope I shall have leisure to make good;
  If this be not a dream I see and hear.

ANGELO.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 I think it be, sir; I deny it not.
 And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.

ADRIANA.
 I sent you money, sir, to be your bail,
  By Dromio; but I think he brought it not.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 This purse of ducats I receiv'd from you,
  And Dromio my man did bring them me.

DUKE.

COURTEZAN.
 Renowned Duke, vouchsafe to take the pains
  To go with us into the abbey here,
  And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes;
  And all that are assembled in this place
  That by this sympathized one day's error
  Have suffer'd wrong, go keep us company,
  And we shall make full satisfaction.

  Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail
  Of you, my sons; and till this present hour
  My heavy burden ne'er delivered.
 With all my heart, I'll gossip at this feast.
 Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?
ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
 Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embark'd?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
 I am your master, Dromio.

  Come, go with us; we'll look to that anon.

<Exeunt ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE and ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 There is a fat friend at your master's house,
  That kitchen'd me for you to-day at dinner;
  She now shall be my sister, not my wife.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
 Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother;
  I see by you I am a sweet-fac'd youth.

  Will you walk in to see their gossiping?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 Not I, sir; you are my elder.
 That's a question; how shall we try it?
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
 We'll draw cuts for the senior; till then,
    lead thou first.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



SCENE:
Rome and the neighbourhood; Corioli and the neighbourhood; Antium



ACT I.
 A street

Enter a company of mutinous citizens, with staves, clubs, and other weapons

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.

  ALL.
 Speak, speak.
 YOU are all resolv'd rather to die than to famish?
  ALL.
 Resolv'd, resolv'd.

  FIRST CITIZEN.

  ALL.
 We know't, we know't.
 Is't a verdict?
  ALL.
 No more talking on't; let it be done.
 Away, away!
  SECOND CITIZEN.

  FIRST CITIZEN.

    What authority surfeits on would relieve us; if they would yield
    us but the superfluity while it were wholesome, we might guess
    they relieved us humanely; but they think we are too dear.
 The
    leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an  
    inventory to particularize their abundance; our sufferance is a
    gain to them.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 Against him first; he's a very dog to the
    commonalty.
 Consider you what services he has done for his
    country?
  FIRST CITIZEN.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 I say unto you, what he hath done famously he did it
    to that end; though soft-conscienc'd men can be content to say it
    was for his country, he did it to please his mother and to be
    partly proud, which he is, even to the altitude of his virtue.

  SECOND CITIZEN.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations;
    he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition.
 Why stay we prating here? To th' Capitol!
  ALL.
 Come, come.
 Soft! who comes here?

                       Enter MENENIUS AGRIPPA

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 Worthy Menenius Agrippa; one that hath always lov'd
    the people.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Our business is not unknown to th' Senate; they have
    had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, which now we'll
    show 'em in deeds.

  MENENIUS.
 Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours,
    Will you undo yourselves?
  FIRST CITIZEN.
 We cannot, sir; we are undone already.

  MENENIUS.
 I tell you, friends, most charitable care  
    Have the patricians of you.
 For the dearth,
    The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
    Your knees to them, not arms, must help.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Suffer us to famish, and their storehouses cramm'd with
    grain; make edicts for usury, to support usurers; repeal daily
    any wholesome act established against the rich, and provide more
    piercing statutes daily to chain up and restrain the poor.
 If the
    wars eat us not up, they will; and there's all the love they bear
    us.
 Either you must
    Confess yourselves wondrous malicious,
    Or be accus'd of folly.
 It may be you have heard it;
    But, since it serves my purpose, I will venture
    To stale't a little more.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Well, I'll hear it, sir; yet you must not think to
    fob off our disgrace with a tale.
 But, an't please you, deliver.

  MENENIUS.
 There was a time when all the body's members
    Rebell'd against the belly; thus accus'd it:
    That only like a gulf it did remain
    I' th' midst o' th' body, idle and unactive,
    Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
    Like labour with the rest; where th' other instruments
    Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
    And, mutually participate, did minister
    Unto the appetite and affection common
    Of the whole body.
 The belly answer'd-
  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Well, sir, what answer made the belly?
  MENENIUS.
 With a kind of smile,  
    Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus-
    For look you, I may make the belly smile
    As well as speak- it tauntingly replied
    To th' discontented members, the mutinous parts
    That envied his receipt; even so most fitly
    As you malign our senators for that
    They are not such as you.
 Well, what then?
  FIRST CITIZEN.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Y'are long about it.

  MENENIUS.

    'True is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he
    'That I receive the general food at first
    Which you do live upon; and fit it is,
    Because I am the storehouse and the shop
    Of the whole body.
 The senators of Rome are this good belly,
    And you the mutinous members; for, examine
    Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
    Touching the weal o' th' common, you shall find
    No public benefit which you receive
    But it proceeds or comes from them to you,
    And no way from yourselves.
 What do you think,
    You, the great toe of this assembly?
  FIRST CITIZEN.
 I the great toe? Why the great toe?
  MENENIUS.
 For that, being one o' th' lowest, basest, poorest,
    Of this most wise rebellion, thou goest foremost.

    Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
    Lead'st first to win some vantage.

    But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs.
  
    Rome and her rats are at the point of battle;
    The one side must have bale.
 Thanks.
 We have ever your good word.

  MARCIUS.
 He that will give good words to thee will flatter
    Beneath abhorring.
 Who deserves greatness  
    Deserves your hate; and your affections are
    A sick man's appetite, who desires most that
    Which would increase his evil.
 For corn at their own rates, whereof they say
    The city is well stor'd.
 Hang 'em! They say!
    They'll sit by th' fire and presume to know
    What's done i' th' Capitol, who's like to rise,
    Who thrives and who declines; side factions, and give out
    Conjectural marriages, making parties strong,
    And feebling such as stand not in their liking  
    Below their cobbled shoes.
 They say there's grain enough!
    Would the nobility lay aside their ruth
    And let me use my sword, I'd make a quarry
    With thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high
    As I could pick my lance.

  MENENIUS.
 But, I beseech you,
    What says the other troop?
  MARCIUS.
 They are dissolv'd.
 With these shreds
    They vented their complainings; which being answer'd,
    And a petition granted them- a strange one,
    To break the heart of generosity
    And make bold power look pale- they threw their caps
    As they would hang them on the horns o' th' moon,
    Shouting their emulation.
  
  MENENIUS.
 One's Junius Brutus-
    Sicinius Velutus, and I know not.
 'Sdeath!
    The rabble should have first unroof'd the city
    Ere so prevail'd with me; it will in time
    Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
    For insurrection's arguing.

  MENENIUS.
 This is strange.
 Go get you home, you fragments.


                     Enter a MESSENGER, hastily

  MESSENGER.
 Here.

  MARCIUS.
 See, our best elders.


         Enter COMINIUS, TITUS LARTIUS, with other SENATORS;  
                  JUNIUS BRUTUS and SICINIUS VELUTUS

  FIRST SENATOR.
 Marcius, 'tis true that you have lately told us:
    The Volsces are in arms.

    I sin in envying his nobility;
    And were I anything but what I am,
    I would wish me only he.

  COMINIUS.
 You have fought together?
  MARCIUS.
 Were half to half the world by th' ears, and he
    Upon my party, I'd revolt, to make
    Only my wars with him.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 Then, worthy Marcius,
    Attend upon Cominius to these wars.

  COMINIUS.
 It is your former promise.

  MARCIUS.
 Sir, it is;
    And I am constant.
 Titus Lartius, thou
    Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face.
  
    What, art thou stiff? Stand'st out?
  LARTIUS.
 No, Caius Marcius;
    I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other
    Ere stay behind this business.
 O, true bred!
  FIRST SENATOR.
 Your company to th' Capitol; where, I know,
    Our greatest friends attend us.

  LARTIUS.
  [To COMINIUS]  Lead you on.

    [To MARCIUS]  Follow Cominius; we must follow you;
    Right worthy you priority.

  COMINIUS.
 Noble Marcius!
  FIRST SENATOR.

  MARCIUS.

    The Volsces have much corn: take these rats thither
    To gnaw their garners.
 Worshipful mutineers,
    Your valour puts well forth; pray follow.

         Ciitzens steal away.
 Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius?
  BRUTUS.
 He has no equal.

  SICINIUS.
 When we were chosen tribunes for the people-  
  BRUTUS.
 Mark'd you his lip and eyes?
  SICINIUS.
 Nay, but his taunts!
  BRUTUS.
 Being mov'd, he will not spare to gird the gods.

  SICINIUS.
 Bemock the modest moon.
 The present wars devour him! He is grown
    Too proud to be so valiant.

  SICINIUS.
 Such a nature,
    Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
    Which he treads on at noon.
 Fame, at the which he aims-
    In whom already he is well grac'd- cannot
    Better be held nor more attain'd than by
    A place below the first; for what miscarries
    Shall be the general's fault, though he perform
    To th' utmost of a man, and giddy censure
    Will then cry out of Marcius 'O, if he
    Had borne the business!'
  SICINIUS.
 Besides, if things go well,  
    Opinion, that so sticks on Marcius, shall
    Of his demerits rob Cominius.

  BRUTUS.
 Come.

  SICINIUS.
 Let's hence and hear
    How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
    More than his singularity, he goes
    Upon this present action.
 Let's along.

Corioli.
 The Senate House.


Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS with SENATORS of Corioli

  FIRST SENATOR.
 So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
    That they of Rome are ent'red in our counsels
    And know how we proceed.
 Most likely 'tis for you;  
    Consider of it.
 Nor did you think it folly
    To keep your great pretences veil'd till when
    They needs must show themselves; which in the hatching,
    It seem'd, appear'd to Rome.
 By the discovery
    We shall be short'ned in our aim, which was
    To take in many towns ere almost Rome
    Should know we were afoot.
 Noble Aufidius,
    Take your commission; hie you to your bands;
    Let us alone to guard Corioli.

    If they set down before's, for the remove
    Bring up your army; but I think you'll find
    Th' have not prepar'd for us.
 O, doubt not that!
    I speak from certainties.

    If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet,
    'Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike
    Till one can do no more.
 The gods assist you!
  AUFIDIUS.
 And keep your honours safe!
  FIRST SENATOR.

  SECOND SENATOR.
 Farewell.

  ALL.
 Farewell.
                                           Exeunt




SCENE III.
 MARCIUS' house

Enter VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIA, mother and wife to MARCIUS;
they set them down on two low stools and sew

  VOLUMNIA.
 If my son were my husband, I should freelier
    rejoice in that absence wherein he won honour than in the
    embracements of his bed where he would show most love.
 To a cruel war I sent him, from whence he
    return'd his brows bound with oak.
 I tell thee, daughter, I
    sprang not more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child than
    now in first seeing he had proved himself a man.
 But had he died in the business, madam, how then?
  VOLUMNIA.
 Then his good report should have been my son; I therein  
    would have found issue.
 Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.

  VIRGILIA.
 Beseech you give me leave to retire myself.

    Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum;
    See him pluck Aufidius down by th' hair;
    As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him.

  VIRGILIA.
 His bloody brow? O Jupiter, no blood!  
  VOLUMNIA.
 Away, you fool! It more becomes a man
    Than gilt his trophy.
 Tell Valeria
    We are fit to bid her welcome.
              Exit GENTLEWOMAN
  VIRGILIA.
 Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!
  VOLUMNIA.
 He'll beat Aufidius' head below his knee
    And tread upon his neck.

  VOLUMNIA.
 How do you both? You are manifest housekeepers.
 What are
    you sewing here? A fine spot, in good faith.
 How does your little
    son?
  VIRGILIA.

  VOLUMNIA.

  VALERIA.
 O' my word, the father's son! I'll swear 'tis a very
    pretty boy.
 O' my troth, I look'd upon him a Wednesday half an
    hour together; has such a confirm'd countenance! I saw him run
    after a gilded butterfly; and when he caught it he let it go
    again, and after it again, and over and over he comes, and up
    again, catch'd it again; or whether his fall enrag'd him, or how
    'twas, he did so set his teeth and tear it.
 One on's father's moods.

  VALERIA.

  VIRGILIA.

  VALERIA.
 Not out of doors!
  VOLUMNIA.
 She shall, she shall.

  VIRGILIA.
 Indeed, no, by your patience; I'll not over the threshold
    till my lord return from the wars.

  VIRGILIA.
 I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with my
    prayers; but I cannot go thither.
 Why, I pray you?
  VIRGILIA.

  VALERIA.
 You would be another Penelope; yet they say all the yarn
    she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill Ithaca full of moths.

    Come, I would your cambric were sensible as your finger, that you
    might leave pricking it for pity.
 Come, you shall go with us.

  VIRGILIA.
 No, good madam, pardon me; indeed I will not forth.

  VIRGILIA.

  VALERIA.

  VIRGILIA.
 In earnest, it's true; I heard a senator speak it.
 Your lord and
    Titus Lartius are set down before their city Corioli; they  
    nothing doubt prevailing and to make it brief wars.
 This is true,
    on mine honour; and so, I pray, go with us.
 Give me excuse, good madam; I will obey you in everything
    hereafter.

  VOLUMNIA.
 Let her alone, lady; as she is now, she will but disease
    our better mirth.

  VALERIA.
 In troth, I think she would.
 Fare you well, then.
 Come,
    good sweet lady.
 Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy solemness out o'
    door and go along with us.

  VIRGILIA.
 No, at a word, madam; indeed I must not.

  VALERIA.
 Well then, farewell.

Before Corioli

Enter MARCIUS, TITUS LARTIUS, with drum and colours,
with CAPTAINS and soldiers.
 To them a MESSENGER

  MARCIUS.
 Yonder comes news; a wager- they have met.

  LARTIUS.
 My horse to yours- no.

  MARCIUS.
 'Tis done.
 Agreed.

  MARCIUS.
 Say, has our general met the enemy?
  MESSENGER.

  LARTIUS.
 So, the good horse is mine.

  MARCIUS.
 I'll buy him of you.

  LARTIUS.
 How far off lie these armies?
  MESSENGER.
 Within this mile and half.

    Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work,
    That we with smoking swords may march from hence
    To help our fielded friends! Come, blow thy blast.
  

          They sound a parley.
 Enter two SENATORS with others,
                      on the walls of Corioli

    Tullus Aufidius, is he within your walls?
  FIRST SENATOR.
 No, nor a man that fears you less than he:
    That's lesser than a little.
  [Drum afar off]  Hark, our drums
    Are bringing forth our youth.
 We'll break our walls
    Rather than they shall pound us up; our gates,
    Which yet seem shut, we have but pinn'd with rushes;
    They'll open of themselves.
  [Alarum far off]  Hark you far off!
    There is Aufidius.
 List what work he makes
    Amongst your cloven army.

  MARCIUS.
 O, they are at it!
  LARTIUS.
 Their noise be our instruction.
 Ladders, ho!

                   Enter the army of the Volsces

  MARCIUS.
 They fear us not, but issue forth their city.
 Advance, brave Titus.

    They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts,
    Which makes me sweat with wrath.

    He that retires, I'll take him for a Volsce,
    And he shall feel mine edge.


          Alarum.
 The Romans are beat back to their trenches.
 Look to't.
 Come on;  
    If you'll stand fast we'll beat them to their wives,
    As they us to our trenches.
 Follow me.


         Another alarum.
 Mark me, and do the like.


                    [MARCIUS enters the gates]

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Fool-hardiness; not I.

  SECOND SOLDIER.
 To th' pot, I warrant him.
 Slain, sir, doubtless.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 He is himself alone,
    To answer all the city.

  LARTIUS.
 Thou art left, Marcius;
    A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
    Were not so rich a jewel.
 Thou wast a soldier
    Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible
    Only in strokes; but with thy grim looks and
    The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds
    Thou mad'st thine enemies shake, as if the world
    Were feverous and did tremble.
 Look, sir.

  LARTIUS.
 O, 'tis Marcius!  
    Let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.

                            [They fight, and all enter the city]




SCENE V.

  THIRD ROMAN.
 A murrain on 't! I took this for silver.

                               [Alarum continues still afar off]

          Enter MARCIUS and TITUS LARTIUS With a trumpeter

  MARCIUS.

  LARTIUS.
 Worthy sir, thou bleed'st;
    Thy exercise hath been too violent
    For a second course of fight.

  MARCIUS.
 Sir, praise me not;
    My work hath yet not warm'd me.
 Fare you well;
    The blood I drop is rather physical
    Than dangerous to me.

  LARTIUS.
 Now the fair goddess, Fortune,
    Fall deep in love with thee, and her great charms
    Misguide thy opposers' swords! Bold gentleman,
    Prosperity be thy page!
  MARCIUS.

  LARTIUS.
 Thou worthiest Marcius!                  Exit MARCIUS
    Go sound thy trumpet in the market-place;
    Call thither all the officers o' th' town,
    Where they shall know our mind.
 Away!                 Exeunt




SCENE VI.
 Breathe you, my friends.
 Believe me, sirs,
    We shall be charg'd again.
  
  COMINIUS.
 Though thou speak'st truth,
    Methinks thou speak'st not well.
 How long is't since?
  MESSENGER.
 Above an hour, my lord.
 'Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums.

    How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour,
    And bring thy news so late?
  MESSENGER.
 Spies of the Volsces
    Held me in chase, that I was forc'd to wheel
    Three or four miles about; else had I, sir,
    Half an hour since brought my report.


                           Enter MARCIUS

  COMINIUS.

  MARCIUS.
 Come I too late?
  COMINIUS.

  MARCIUS.
 Flower of warriors,
    How is't with Titus Lartius?
  MARCIUS.
 Where is that slave
    Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
    Where is he? Call him hither.

  MARCIUS.
 Let him alone;  
    He did inform the truth.

    Where is the enemy? Are you lords o' th' field?
    If not, why cease you till you are so?
  COMINIUS.
 As I guess, Marcius,
    Their bands i' th' vaward are the Antiates,
    Of their best trust; o'er them Aufidius,
    Their very heart of hope.

  MARCIUS.
 I do beseech you,
    By all the battles wherein we have fought,
    By th' blood we have shed together, by th' vows  
    We have made to endure friends, that you directly
    Set me against Aufidius and his Antiates;
    And that you not delay the present, but,
    Filling the air with swords advanc'd and darts,
    We prove this very hour.

  MARCIUS.
 If any such be here-
    As it were sin to doubt- that love this painting
    Wherein you see me smear'd; if any fear
    Lesser his person than an ill report;
    If any think brave death outweighs bad life
    And that his country's dearer than himself;
    Let him alone, or so many so minded,
    Wave thus to express his disposition,
    And follow Marcius.
           [They all shout and wave their  
       swords, take him up in their arms and cast up their caps]
    O, me alone! Make you a sword of me?
    If these shows be not outward, which of you
    But is four Volsces? None of you but is
    Able to bear against the great Aufidius
    A shield as hard as his.

  COMINIUS.
 March on, my fellows;
    Make good this ostentation, and you shall
    Divide in all with us.
                                Exeunt




SCENE VII.

The gates of Corioli

TITUS LARTIUS, having set a guard upon Corioli, going with drum and trumpet
toward COMINIUS and CAIUS MARCIUS, enters with a LIEUTENANT, other soldiers,
and a scout

  LARTIUS.
 If I do send, dispatch
    Those centuries to our aid; the rest will serve
    For a short holding.
 If we lose the field
    We cannot keep the town.

  LIEUTENANT.

  LARTIUS.

A field of battle between the Roman and the Volscian camps

Alarum, as in battle.
 Enter MARCIUS and AUFIDIUS at several doors

  MARCIUS.
 Fix thy foot.
 Let the first budger die the other's slave,
    And the gods doom him after!
  AUFIDIUS.
 Within these three hours, Tullus,
    Alone I fought in your Corioli walls,
    And made what work I pleas'd.
                            Exeunt




SCENE IX.

The Roman camp

Flourish.
 Alarum.
 A retreat is sounded.
'
    Yet cam'st thou to a morsel of this feast,
    Having fully din'd before.


         Enter TITUS LARTIUS, with his power, from the pursuit

  LARTIUS.
 I have done
    As you have done- that's what I can; induc'd
    As you have been- that's for my country.

  COMINIUS.
 'Twere a concealment
    Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
    To hide your doings and to silence that
    Which, to the spire and top of praises vouch'd,
    Would seem but modest.
 Therefore, I beseech you,
    In sign of what you are, not to reward
    What you have done, before our army hear me.

  MARCIUS.
 I have some wounds upon me, and they smart
    To hear themselves rememb'red.
  
  COMINIUS.
 Should they not,
    Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude
    And tent themselves with death.
 I thank you, General,
    But cannot make my heart consent to take
    A bribe to pay my sword.


           A long flourish.
 When steel grows
    Soft as the parasite's silk, let him be made
    An overture for th' wars.

    For that I have not wash'd my nose that bled,
    Or foil'd some debile wretch, which without note
    Here's many else have done, you shout me forth
    In acclamations hyperbolical,
    As if I lov'd my little should be dieted
    In praises sauc'd with lies.

  COMINIUS.
 Therefore be it known,
    As to us, to all the world, that Caius Marcius
    Wears this war's garland; in token of the which,
    My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
    With all his trim belonging; and from this time,
    For what he did before Corioli, can him  
    With all th' applause-and clamour of the host,
    Caius Marcius Coriolanus.
 Caius Marcius Coriolanus!
  CORIOLANUS.
 Howbeit, I thank you;
    I mean to stride your steed, and at all times
    To undercrest your good addition
    To th' fairness of my power.

  COMINIUS.
 You, Titus Lartius,
    Must to Corioli back.

  LARTIUS.

  CORIOLANUS.
 The gods begin to mock me.

  COMINIUS.
 Take't- 'tis yours; what is't?
  CORIOLANUS.

    He cried to me; I saw him prisoner;
    But then Aufidius was within my view,
    And wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity.
 I request you
    To give my poor host freedom.
 O, well begg'd!
    Were he the butcher of my son, he should
    Be free as is the wind.
 Deliver him, Titus.

  LARTIUS.

    Have we no wine here?
  COMINIUS.
 Go we to our tent.
 Come.

The camp of the Volsces

A flourish.
 Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS bloody, with two or three soldiers

  AUFIDIUS.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 'Twill be deliver'd back on good condition.
 Condition!
    I would I were a Roman; for I cannot,
    Being a Volsce, be that I am.
 By th' elements,
    If e'er again I meet him beard to beard,
    He's mine or I am his.
 Mine emulation
    Hath not that honour in't it had; for where
    I thought to crush him in an equal force,
    True sword to sword, I'll potch at him some way,
    Or wrath or craft may get him.
  
  FIRST SOLDIER.
 He's the devil.

  AUFIDIUS.
 My valour's poison'd
    With only suff'ring stain by him; for him
    Shall fly out of itself.
 Nor sleep nor sanctuary,
    Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,
    The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
    Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up
    Their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst
    My hate to Marcius.
 Go you to th' city;
    Learn how 'tis held, and what they are that must
    Be hostages for Rome.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Will not you go?
  AUFIDIUS.
 I am attended at the cypress grove; I pray you-
    'Tis south the city mills- bring me word thither
    How the world goes, that to the pace of it
    I may spur on my journey.
 I shall, sir.
                            Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.
 SCENE I.
 A public place

Enter MENENIUS, with the two Tribunes of the people, SICINIUS and BRUTUS

  MENENIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 Good or bad?
  MENENIUS.
 Not according to the prayer of the people, for they love
    not Marcius.

  SICINIUS.
 Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.

  MENENIUS.
 The lamb.

  MENENIUS.

  MENENIUS.
 You two are
    old men; tell me one thing that I shall ask you.

  BOTH TRIBUNES.

  MENENIUS.
 He's poor in no one fault, but stor'd with all.
  
  SICINIUS.
 Especially in pride.
 And topping all others in boasting.
 Do you two know how you are censured
    here in the city- I mean of us o' th' right-hand file? Do you?
  BOTH TRIBUNES.
 Why, how are we censur'd?
  MENENIUS.
 Well, well, sir, well.
 Why, 'tis no great matter; for a very little thief of
    occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience.
 Give your
    dispositions the reins, and be angry at your pleasures- at the
    least, if you take it as a pleasure to you in being so.
 You blame
    Marcius for being proud?
  BRUTUS.
 What then, sir?  
  MENENIUS.
 Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting,
    proud, violent, testy magistrates-alias fools- as any in Rome.

  SICINIUS.
 Menenius, you are known well enough too.

  MENENIUS.
 I cannot say your worships have
    deliver'd the matter well, when I find the ass in compound with
    the major part of your syllables; and though I must be content to
    bear with those that say you are reverend grave men, yet they lie
    deadly that tell you you have good faces.
 If you see this in the
    map of my microcosm, follows it that I am known well enough too?
    What harm can your bisson conspectuities glean out of this
    character, if I be known well enough too?
  BRUTUS.
 Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.
  
  MENENIUS.
 You know neither me, yourselves, nor any thing.
 When you are hearing a matter
    between party and party, if you chance to be pinch'd with the
    colic, you make faces like mummers, set up the bloody flag
    against all patience, and, in roaring for a chamber-pot, dismiss
    the controversy bleeding, the more entangled by your hearing.
 You are a pair of strange ones.

  BRUTUS.
 Come, come, you are well understood to be a perfecter giber
    for the table than a necessary bencher in the Capitol.
 When you speak
    best unto the purpose, it is not worth the wagging of your
    beards; and your beards deserve not so honourable a grave as to
    stuff a botcher's cushion or to be entomb'd in an ass's
    pack-saddle.
 God-den to your worships.
 More of your conversation
    would infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly
    plebeians.
 I will be bold to take my leave of you.

                                  [BRUTUS and SICINIUS go aside]

               Enter VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, and VALERIA

    How now, my as fair as noble ladies- and the moon, were she
    earthly, no nobler- whither do you follow your eyes so fast?
  VOLUMNIA.
 Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches; for the
    love of Juno, let's go.

  MENENIUS.
 Ay, worthy Menenius, and with most prosperous
    approbation.

  MENENIUS.
 Hoo!
    Marcius coming home!
  VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA.
 Nay, 'tis true.

  VOLUMNIA.
 Look, here's a letter from him; the state hath another,
    his wife another; and I think there's one at home for you.
 I will make my very house reel to-night.

  MENENIUS.
 A letter for me! It gives me an estate of seven years'
    health; in which time I will make a lip at the physician.
 The
    most sovereign prescription in Galen is but empiricutic and, to
    this preservative, of no better report than a horse-drench.
 Is he
    not wounded? He was wont to come home wounded.

  VOLUMNIA.
 O, he is wounded, I thank the gods for't.

  MENENIUS.
 So do I too, if it be not too much.
 Brings a victory in
    his pocket? The wounds become him.

  VOLUMNIA.
 On's brows, Menenius, he comes the third time home with
    the oaken garland.

  MENENIUS.

  MENENIUS.
 Is the Senate
    possess'd of this?  
  VOLUMNIA.
 Yes, yes, yes: the Senate has
    letters from the general, wherein he gives my son the whole name
    of the war; he hath in this action outdone his former deeds
    doubly.

  VALERIA.

  MENENIUS.
 Wondrous! Ay, I warrant you, and not without his true
    purchasing.
 True! pow, waw.

  MENENIUS.
 I' th' shoulder and i' th' left arm; there will be large
    cicatrices to show the people when he shall stand for his place.

    He received in the repulse of Tarquin seven hurts i' th' body.

  MENENIUS.

  VOLUMNIA.
 He had before this last expedition twenty-five wounds
    upon him.

  MENENIUS.
  
    [A shout and flourish]  Hark! the trumpets.
 These are the ushers of Marcius.
 Before him he carries
      noise, and behind him he leaves tears;
    Death, that dark spirit, in's nervy arm doth lie,
    Which, being advanc'd, declines, and then men die.
 Trumpets sound.
 Enter COMINIUS the
              GENERAL, and TITUS LARTIUS; between them,
           CORIOLANUS, crown'd with an oaken garland; with
                   CAPTAINS and soldiers and a HERALD

  HERALD.

    Pray now, no more.

  COMINIUS.

  MENENIUS.
 Now the gods crown thee!
  CORIOLANUS.

  VOLUMNIA.
 I know not where to turn.

    O, welcome home! And welcome, General.

    And y'are welcome all.
 A hundred thousand welcomes.
 Welcome!
    A curse begin at very root on's heart
    That is not glad to see thee! You are three
    That Rome should dote on; yet, by the faith of men,
    We have some old crab trees here at home that will not
    Be grafted to your relish.
 Yet welcome, warriors.

  COMINIUS.
 Ever right.

  HERALD.
 Give way there, and go on.

  CORIOLANUS.
  [To his wife and mother]  Your hand, and yours.

  VOLUMNIA.
 I have lived
    To see inherited my very wishes,
    And the buildings of my fancy; only
    There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but  
    Our Rome will cast upon thee.
 Know, good mother,
    I had rather be their servant in my way
    Than sway with them in theirs.
 On, to the Capitol.

                 [Flourish.
 Exeunt in state, as before]

                BRUTUS and SICINIUS come forward

  BRUTUS.
 Your prattling nurse
    Into a rapture lets her baby cry
    While she chats him; the kitchen malkin pins
    Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck,
    Clamb'ring the walls to eye him; stalls, bulks, windows,
    Are smother'd up, leads fill'd and ridges hors'd
    With variable complexions, all agreeing
    In earnestness to see him.
 Seld-shown flamens
    Do press among the popular throngs and puff
    To win a vulgar station; our veil'd dames  
    Commit the war of white and damask in
    Their nicely gawded cheeks to th' wanton spoil
    Of Phoebus' burning kisses.
 Such a pother,
    As if that whatsoever god who leads him
    Were slily crept into his human powers,
    And gave him graceful posture.
 On the sudden
    I warrant him consul.
 Then our office may
    During his power go sleep.

  SICINIUS.
 He cannot temp'rately transport his honours
    From where he should begin and end, but will
    Lose those he hath won.

  BRUTUS.
 In that there's comfort.

  SICINIUS.
 Doubt not
    The commoners, for whom we stand, but they
    Upon their ancient malice will forget
    With the least cause these his new honours; which
    That he will give them make I as little question
    As he is proud to do't.
 I heard him swear,
    Were he to stand for consul, never would he
    Appear i' th' market-place, nor on him put
    The napless vesture of humility;
    Nor, showing, as the manner is, his wounds
    To th' people, beg their stinking breaths.

  SICINIUS.
 'Tis right.

  BRUTUS.
 I wish no better
    Than have him hold that purpose, and to put it
    In execution.

  SICINIUS.
 It shall be to him then as our good wills:
    A sure destruction.

  BRUTUS.
 This, as you say, suggested
    At some time when his soaring insolence
    Shall touch the people- which time shall not want,
    If he be put upon't, and that's as easy
    As to set dogs on sheep- will be his fire
    To kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze
    Shall darken him for ever.


                           Enter A MESSENGER

  BRUTUS.
 You are sent for to the Capitol.
 'Tis thought
    That Marcius shall be consul.

    I never saw the like.

  SICINIUS.
 Have with you.

Rome.
 The Capitol

Enter two OFFICERS, to lay cushions, as it were in the Capitol

  FIRST OFFICER.
 Come, come, they are almost here.
 How many stand for
    consulships?
  SECOND OFFICER.

  FIRST OFFICER.
 That's a brave fellow; but he's vengeance proud and
    loves not the common people.

  SECOND OFFICER.
 Faith, there have been many great men that have
    flatter'd the people, who ne'er loved them; and there be many
    that they have loved, they know not wherefore; so that, if they
    love they know not why, they hate upon no better a ground.
 He hath deserved worthily of his country; and his
    ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who, having been
    supple and courteous to the people, bonneted, without any further
    deed to have them at all, into their estimation and report; but
    he hath so planted his honours in their eyes and his actions in
    their hearts that for their tongues to be silent and not confess
    so much were a kind of ingrateful injury; to report otherwise
    were a malice that, giving itself the lie, would pluck reproof
    and rebuke from every car that heard it.

  FIRST OFFICER.
 Having determin'd of the Volsces, and
    To send for Titus Lartius, it remains,
    As the main point of this our after-meeting,
    To gratify his noble service that
    Hath thus stood for his country.
                 [CORIOLANUS sits]
  FIRST SENATOR.
 Speak, good Cominius.
 Masters o' th' people,
    We do request your kindest ears; and, after,  
    Your loving motion toward the common body,
    To yield what passes here.
 We are convented
    Upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts
    Inclinable to honour and advance
    The theme of our assembly.

  BRUTUS.
 Which the rather
    We shall be bless'd to do, if he remember
    A kinder value of the people than
    He hath hereto priz'd them at.
 Please you
    To hear Cominius speak?
  BRUTUS.
 Most willingly.

    But yet my caution was more pertinent
    Than the rebuke you give it.
 He loves your people;
    But tie him not to be their bedfellow.

    Worthy Cominius, speak.

                       [CORIOLANUS rises, and offers to go away]  
    Nay, keep your place.
 Sit, Coriolanus, never shame to hear
    What you have nobly done.

  CORIOLANUS.

    I had rather have my wounds to heal again
    Than hear say how I got them.
 Sir, I hope
    My words disbench'd you not.
 No, sir; yet oft,
    When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.

    You sooth'd not, therefore hurt not.
 But your people,
    I love them as they weigh-
  MENENIUS.
 Pray now, sit down.

  CORIOLANUS.
 I had rather have one scratch my head i' th' sun
    When the alarum were struck than idly sit
    To hear my nothings monster'd.
                          Exit
  MENENIUS.
 Masters of the people,
    Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter-
    That's thousand to one good one- when you now see
    He had rather venture all his limbs for honour  
    Than one on's ears to hear it? Proceed, Cominius.

  COMINIUS.
 At sixteen years,
    When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought
    Beyond the mark of others; our then Dictator,
    Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight
    When with his Amazonian chin he drove
    The bristled lips before him; he bestrid
    An o'erpress'd Roman and i' th' consul's view
    Slew three opposers; Tarquin's self he met,
    And struck him on his knee.
 In that day's feats,
    When he might act the woman in the scene,
    He prov'd best man i' th' field, and for his meed
    Was brow-bound with the oak.
 His pupil age
    Man-ent'red thus, he waxed like a sea,
    And in the brunt of seventeen battles since  
    He lurch'd all swords of the garland.
 Now all's his.
 He cannot but with measure fit the honours
    Which we devise him.

  COMINIUS.
 He covets less
    Than misery itself would give, rewards
    His deeds with doing them, and is content
    To spend the time to end it.

  MENENIUS.
 He's right noble;
    Let him be call'd for.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 Call Coriolanus.

    OFFICER.
 He doth appear.


                            Re-enter CORIOLANUS

  MENENIUS.
  
  CORIOLANUS.
 It then remains
    That you do speak to the people.
 Sir, the people
    Must have their voices; neither will they bate
    One jot of ceremony.

  MENENIUS.
 Put them not to't.
 It is a part
    That I shall blush in acting, and might well
    Be taken from the people.
 Mark you that?  
  CORIOLANUS.
 Do not stand upon't.

    We recommend to you, Tribunes of the People,
    Our purpose to them; and to our noble consul
    Wish we all joy and honour.

  SENATORS.
 Cornets.
 Then exeunt all
                                        but SICINIUS and BRUTUS]
  BRUTUS.

  SICINIUS.
 May they perceive's intent! He will require them
    As if he did contemn what he requested
    Should be in them to give.
 Come, we'll inform them
    Of our proceedings here.
                             Exeunt




SCENE III.

Rome.
 Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to
    deny him.

  SECOND CITIZEN.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a
    power that we have no power to do; for if he show us his wounds
    and tell us his deeds, we are to put our tongues into those
    wounds and speak for them; so, if he tell us his noble deeds, we
    must also tell him our noble acceptance of them.
 Ingratitude is
    monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful were to make a
    monster of the multitude; of the which we being members should
    bring ourselves to be monstrous members.
 We have been call'd so of many; not that our heads
    are some brown, some black, some abram, some bald, but that our
    wits are so diversely colour'd; and truly I think if all our wits  
    were to issue out of one skull, they would fly east, west, north,
    south, and their consent of one direct way should be at once to
    all the points o' th' compass.

  SECOND CITIZEN.

  SECOND CITIZEN.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 YOU are never without your tricks; you may, you
    may.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 I say, if he would
    incline to the people, there was never a worthier man.
 Mark his behaviour.
 Content, content.
 What must I say?
    'I pray, sir'- Plague upon't! I cannot bring
    My tongue to such a pace.
 'Look, sir, my wounds
    I got them in my country's service, when
    Some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran
    From th' noise of our own drums.
'
  MENENIUS.
 You must desire them
    To think upon you.

  CORIOLANUS.

    I'll leave you.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 We do, sir; tell us what hath brought you to't.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Mine own desert.
 Your own desert?
  CORIOLANUS.
 Ay, not mine own desire.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 YOU MUST think, if we give you anything, we hope to
    gain by you.
 Well then, I pray, your price o' th' consulship?
  FIRST CITIZEN.
 The price is to ask it kindly.
 Your good voice, sir; what
    say you?
  SECOND CITIZEN.

  CORIOLANUS.
 There's in all two worthy voices begg'd.
 Adieu.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 An 'twere to give again- but 'tis no matter.

                                       Exeunt the three citizens

                      Re-enter two other citizens

  CORIOLANUS.
 Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your
    voices that I may be consul, I have here the customary gown.

  FOURTH CITIZEN.
 You have deserved nobly of your country, and you
    have not deserved nobly.
 Your enigma?
  FOURTH CITIZEN.
 You have been a scourge to her enemies; you have  
    been a rod to her friends.
 You have not indeed loved the common
    people.

  CORIOLANUS.
 You should account me the more virtuous, that I have
    not been common in my love.
 That
    is, sir, I will counterfeit the bewitchment of some popular man
    and give it bountiful to the desirers.

  FOURTH CITIZEN.

  CORIOLANUS.
 The gods give you joy, sir, heartily!
                                                 Exeunt citizens
  CORIOLANUS.
 Most sweet voices!
    Better it is to die, better to starve,  
    Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
 I am half through:
    The one part suffered, the other will I do.


                      Re-enter three citizens more

    Here come moe voices.

    Your voices.
 For your voices I have fought;
    Watch'd for your voices; for your voices bear
    Of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six
    I have seen and heard of; for your voices have
    Done many things, some less, some more.
 Your voices?  
    Indeed, I would be consul.

  SIXTH CITIZEN.
 He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest
    man's voice.

  SEVENTH CITIZEN.
 God save thee, noble consul!
                                                 Exeunt citizens
  CORIOLANUS.
 You have stood your limitation, and the tribunes
    Endue you with the people's voice.
 Remains
    That, in th' official marks invested, you
    Anon do meet the Senate.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Is this done?
  SICINIUS.
 The custom of request you have discharg'd.
 Where? At the Senate House?  
  SICINIUS.
 May I change these garments?
  SICINIUS.

  CORIOLANUS.
 That I'll straight do, and, knowing myself again,
    Repair to th' Senate House.
 Will you along?
  BRUTUS.
 We stay here for the people.

                                  Exeunt CORIOLANUS and MENENIUS
    He has it now; and by his looks methinks
    'Tis warm at's heart.
 With a proud heart he wore
    His humble weeds.
 Will you dismiss the people?

                            Re-enter citizens

  SICINIUS.
 He has our voices, sir.
 We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 To my poor unworthy notice,  
    He mock'd us when he begg'd our voices.
 Certainly;
    He flouted us downright.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 No, 'tis his kind of speech- he did not mock us.

  SECOND CITIZEN.

  SICINIUS.
 Why, so he did, I am sure.

  ALL.
 No, no; no man saw 'em.
 He said he had wounds which he could show in
      private,
    And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn,
    'I would be consul,' says he; 'aged custom
    But by your voices will not so permit me;
    Your voices therefore.
' When we granted that,
    Here was 'I thank you for your voices.
 Thank you,
    Your most sweet voices.
 Why either were you ignorant to see't,
    Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness  
    To yield your voices?
  BRUTUS.
 Could you not have told him-
    As you were lesson'd- when he had no power
    But was a petty servant to the state,
    He was your enemy; ever spake against
    Your liberties and the charters that you bear
    I' th' body of the weal; and now, arriving
    A place of potency and sway o' th' state,
    If he should still malignantly remain
    Fast foe to th' plebeii, your voices might
    Be curses to yourselves? You should have said
    That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
    Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
    Would think upon you for your voices, and
    Translate his malice towards you into love,
    Standing your friendly lord.

  SICINIUS.
 So, putting him to rage,
    You should have ta'en th' advantage of his choler
    And pass'd him unelected.
 Did you perceive
    He did solicit you in free contempt
    When he did need your loves; and do you think
    That his contempt shall not be bruising to you
    When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies
    No heart among you? Or had you tongues to cry
    Against the rectorship of judgment?
  SICINIUS.
 Have you
    Ere now denied the asker, and now again,
    Of him that did not ask but mock, bestow
    Your su'd-for tongues?
  THIRD CITIZEN.
 He's not confirm'd: we may deny him yet.
 And will deny him;
    I'll have five hundred voices of that sound.
  
  FIRST CITIZEN.
 I twice five hundred, and their friends to piece
    'em.

  BRUTUS.
 Lay
    A fault on us, your tribunes, that we labour'd,
    No impediment between, but that you must  
    Cast your election on him.

  SICINIUS.
 Lay the fault on us.

  BRUTUS.
 Say we read lectures to you,
    How youngly he began to serve his country,
    How long continued; and what stock he springs of-
    The noble house o' th' Marcians; from whence came
    That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son,
    Who, after great Hostilius, here was king;
    Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
    That our best water brought by conduits hither;
    And Censorinus, nobly named so,
    Twice being by the people chosen censor,
    Was his great ancestor.

  SICINIUS.
 One thus descended,
    That hath beside well in his person wrought  
    To be set high in place, we did commend
    To your remembrances; but you have found,
    Scaling his present bearing with his past,
    That he's your fixed enemy, and revoke
    Your sudden approbation.

  BRUTUS.

  CITIZENS.

    If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
    With their refusal, both observe and answer
    The vantage of his anger.

  SICINIUS.

    We will be there before the stream o' th' people;
    And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own,  
    Which we have goaded onward.
                          Exeunt




ACT III.

Rome.
 A street

Cornets.
 Tullus Aufidius, then, had made new head?
  LARTIUS.
 He had, my lord; and that it was which caus'd
    Our swifter composition.
 So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
    Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road
    Upon's again.

  COMINIUS.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Saw you Aufidius?
  LARTIUS.
 On safeguard he came to me, and did curse
    Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
    Yielded the town.
 He is retir'd to Antium.

  CORIOLANUS.
 He did, my lord.

  CORIOLANUS.
 How? What?  
  LARTIUS.
 How often he had met you, sword to sword;
    That of all things upon the earth he hated
    Your person most; that he would pawn his fortunes
    To hopeless restitution, so he might
    Be call'd your vanquisher.

  CORIOLANUS.
 I do despise them,
    For they do prank them in authority,
    Against all noble sufferance.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Ha! What is that?
  BRUTUS.
 It will be dangerous to go on- no further.
 The matter?
  COMINIUS.
 Hath he not pass'd the noble and the common?
  BRUTUS.
 Cominius, no.

  CORIOLANUS.

  BRUTUS.
 The people are incens'd against him.

  SICINIUS.
 Stop,
    Or all will fall in broil.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Are these your herd?
    Must these have voices, that can yield them now
    And straight disclaim their tongues? What are your offices?
    You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth?
    Have you not set them on?
  MENENIUS.
 Be calm, be calm.

  CORIOLANUS.
 It is a purpos'd thing, and grows by plot,
    To curb the will of the nobility;
    Suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule
    Nor ever will be rul'd.

  BRUTUS.
 Call't not a plot.

    The people cry you mock'd them; and of late,  
    When corn was given them gratis, you repin'd;
    Scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them
    Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Why, this was known before.

  BRUTUS.
 Not to them all.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Have you inform'd them sithence?
  BRUTUS.
 How? I inform them!
  COMINIUS.
 You are like to do such business.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
    Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
    Your fellow tribune.

  SICINIUS.
 You show too much of that
    For which the people stir; if you will pass
    To where you are bound, you must enquire your way,
    Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
    Or never be so noble as a consul,
    Nor yoke with him for tribune.

  MENENIUS.
  
  COMINIUS.
 The people are abus'd; set on.
 This palt'ring
    Becomes not Rome; nor has Coriolanus
    Deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely
    I' th' plain way of his merit.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Not now, not now.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 Not in this heat, sir, now.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Now, as I live, I will.

    My nobler friends, I crave their pardons.

    For the mutable, rank-scented meiny, let them
    Regard me as I do not flatter, and
    Therein behold themselves.

  MENENIUS.
 Well, no more.
  
  FIRST SENATOR.

  CORIOLANUS.
 How? no more!
    As for my country I have shed my blood,
    Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs
    Coin words till their decay against those measles
    Which we disdain should tetter us, yet sought
    The very way to catch them.
 You speak o' th' people
    As if you were a god, to punish; not
    A man of their infirmity.
 What, what? his choler?
  CORIOLANUS.
 It is a mind
    That shall remain a poison where it is,
    Not poison any further.

  CORIOLANUS.
 'Twas from the canon.

  CORIOLANUS.
 If you are learn'd,
    Be not as common fools; if you are not,
    Let them have cushions by you.
 They choose their magistrate;
    And such a one as he, who puts his 'shall,'
    His popular 'shall,' against a graver bench  
    Than ever frown'd in Greece.
 By Jove himself,
    It makes the consuls base; and my soul aches
    To know, when two authorities are up,
    Neither supreme, how soon confusion
    May enter 'twixt the gap of both and take
    The one by th' other.

  COMINIUS.
 Why shall the people give
    One that speaks thus their voice?
  CORIOLANUS.
 I'll give my reasons,
    More worthier than their voices.
 This kind of service
    Did not deserve corn gratis.
 Being i' th' war,
    Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd
    Most valour, spoke not for them.
 Th' accusation
    Which they have often made against the Senate,
    All cause unborn, could never be the native
    Of our so frank donation.
 Well, what then?
    How shall this bosom multiplied digest
    The Senate's courtesy? Let deeds express
    What's like to be their words: 'We did request it;
    We are the greater poll, and in true fear
    They gave us our demands.
 Come, enough.

  BRUTUS.
  
    What may be sworn by, both divine and human,
    Seal what I end withal! This double worship,
    Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
    Insult without all reason; where gentry, title, wisdom,
    Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
    Of general ignorance- it must omit
    Real necessities, and give way the while
    To unstable slightness.
 Purpose so barr'd, it follows
    Nothing is done to purpose.
 Therefore, beseech you-
    You that will be less fearful than discreet;
    That love the fundamental part of state
    More than you doubt the change on't; that prefer
    A noble life before a long, and wish
    To jump a body with a dangerous physic
    That's sure of death without it- at once pluck out
    The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick
    The sweet which is their poison.
 Your dishonour
    Mangles true judgment, and bereaves the state
    Of that integrity which should become't,
    Not having the power to do the good it would,  
    For th' ill which doth control't.

  BRUTUS.
 Has said enough.
 Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee!
    What should the people do with these bald tribunes,
    On whom depending, their obedience fails
    To the greater bench? In a rebellion,
    When what's not meet, but what must be, was law,
    Then were they chosen; in a better hour
    Let what is meet be said it must be meet,
    And throw their power i' th' dust.

  BRUTUS.

  BRUTUS.
 The aediles, ho!

                           Enter an AEDILE

    Let him be apprehended.

  SICINIUS.
 Go call the people,  [Exit AEDILE]  in whose name myself  
    Attach thee as a traitorous innovator,
    A foe to th' public weal.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Hence, old goat!
  PATRICIANS.
 We'll surety him.

  COMINIUS.
 Ag'd sir, hands off.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Hence, rotten thing! or I shall shake thy bones
    Out of thy garments.

  SICINIUS.
 On both sides more respect.
 Here's he that would take from you all your power.

    PLEBEIANS.
 Weapons, weapons, weapons!
                              [They all bustle about CORIOLANUS]
  ALL.
 Tribunes! patricians! citizens! What, ho! Sicinius!
    Brutus! Coriolanus! Citizens!  
  PATRICIANS.
 What is about to be? I am out of breath;
    Confusion's near; I cannot speak.
 You tribunes
    To th' people- Coriolanus, patience!
    Speak, good Sicinius.

  SICINIUS.
 Let's hear our tribune.
 Peace! Speak, speak, speak.
 Fie, fie, fie!
    This is the way to kindle, not to quench.

  FIRST SENATOR.

  SICINIUS.
 What is the city but the people?
  PLEBEIANS.
 True,
    The people are the city.
 By the consent of all we were establish'd
    The people's magistrates.

  PLEBEIANS.
 You so remain.

  MENENIUS.
  
  COMINIUS.

  SICINIUS.
 Or let us stand to our authority
    Or let us lose it.

  BRUTUS.
 AEdiles, seize him.
 Yield, Marcius, yield.
 Hear me one word; beseech you, Tribunes,
    Hear me but a word.
 Peace, peace!
  MENENIUS.
 Be that you seem, truly your country's friend,
    And temp'rately proceed to what you would  
    Thus violently redress.

  BRUTUS.
 Sir, those cold ways,
    That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
    Where the disease is violent.

    There's some among you have beheld me fighting;
    Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.

  MENENIUS.
 Down with that sword! Tribunes, withdraw awhile.

  BRUTUS.
 Lay hands upon him.

  MENENIUS.

  PLEBEIANS.

    All will be nought else.

  SECOND SENATOR.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Stand fast;  
    We have as many friends as enemies.

  MENENIUS.
 Shall it be put to that?
  FIRST SENATOR.
 Come, sir, along with us.
 I would they were barbarians, as they are,
    Though in Rome litter'd; not Romans, as they are not,
    Though calved i' th' porch o' th' Capitol.

  CORIOLANUS.
 On fair ground
    I could beat forty of them.

  MENENIUS.
 I could myself
    Take up a brace o' th' best of them; yea, the two tribunes.

  COMINIUS.
 But now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic,
    And manhood is call'd foolery when it stands  
    Against a falling fabric.
 Will you hence,
    Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend
    Like interrupted waters, and o'erbear
    What they are us'd to bear.

  MENENIUS.

    I'll try whether my old wit be in request
    With those that have but little; this must be patch'd
    With cloth of any colour.
 Nay, come away.

  MENENIUS.
 His heart's his mouth;
    What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent;
    And, being angry, does forget that ever
    He heard the name of death.
 I would they were in Tiber.
  
    What the vengeance, could he not speak 'em fair?

            Re-enter BRUTUS and SICINIUS, the rabble again

  SICINIUS.
 He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
    With rigorous hands; he hath resisted law,
    And therefore law shall scorn him further trial
    Than the severity of the public power,
    Which he so sets at nought.

  FIRST CITIZEN.

  PLEBEIANS.
 He shall, sure on't.

  MENENIUS.
 Sir, sir-
  SICINIUS.

  SICINIUS.
 Hear me speak.

  SICINIUS.
 Consul! What consul?
  MENENIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 No, no, no, no, no.

  MENENIUS.
 If, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people,
    I may be heard, I would crave a word or two;
    The which shall turn you to no further harm
    Than so much loss of time.
 Speak briefly, then,
    For we are peremptory to dispatch
    This viperous traitor; to eject him hence
    Were but one danger, and to keep him here
    Our certain death; therefore it is decreed
    He dies to-night.
  
  MENENIUS.

  MENENIUS.
 O, he's a limb that has but a disease-
    Mortal, to cut it off: to cure it, easy.
 This is clean kam.

  BRUTUS.
 Merely awry.
 When he did love his country,
    It honour'd him.

  SICINIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 We'll hear no more.
 Proceed by process,
    Lest parties- as he is belov'd- break out,
    And sack great Rome with Romans.

  BRUTUS.
 What do ye talk?
    Have we not had a taste of his obedience-
    Our aediles smote, ourselves resisted? Come!
  MENENIUS.
 Consider this: he has been bred i' th' wars
    Since 'a could draw a sword, and is ill school'd
    In bolted language; meal and bran together
    He throws without distinction.
 Give me leave,
    I'll go to him and undertake to bring him  
    Where he shall answer by a lawful form,
    In peace, to his utmost peril.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 Noble Tribunes,
    It is the humane way; the other course
    Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
    Unknown to the beginning.

  SICINIUS.
 Noble Menenius,
    Be you then as the people's officer.

    Masters, lay down your weapons.

  BRUTUS.
 Meet on the market-place.
 We'll attend you there;
    Where, if you bring not Marcius, we'll proceed
    In our first way.
 I'll bring him to you.
 Pray you let's to him.

Rome.
 The house of CORIOLANUS

Enter CORIOLANUS with NOBLES

  CORIOLANUS.
 Let them pull all about mine ears, present me
    Death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels;
    Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
    That the precipitation might down stretch
    Below the beam of sight; yet will I still
    Be thus to them.
 You do the nobler.
 I muse my mother
    Does not approve me further, who was wont
    To call them woollen vassals, things created
    To buy and sell with groats; to show bare heads
    In congregations, to yawn, be still, and wonder,
    When one but of my ordinance stood up
    To speak of peace or war.


                          Enter VOLUMNIA
  
    I talk of you:
    Why did you wish me milder? Would you have me
    False to my nature? Rather say I play
    The man I am.
 Let go.

  VOLUMNIA.
 You might have been enough the man you are
    With striving less to be so; lesser had been
    The thwartings of your dispositions, if
    You had not show'd them how ye were dispos'd,
    Ere they lack'd power to cross you.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Let them hang.
 Come, come, you have been too rough, something too rough;
    You must return and mend it.
  
  FIRST SENATOR.
 There's no remedy,
    Unless, by not so doing, our good city
    Cleave in the midst and perish.

  VOLUMNIA.
 Pray be counsell'd;
    I have a heart as little apt as yours,
    But yet a brain that leads my use of anger
    To better vantage.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Return to th' tribunes.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Repent what you have spoke.

  CORIOLANUS.
 For them! I cannot do it to the gods;
    Must I then do't to them?
  VOLUMNIA.
 You are too absolute;
    Though therein you can never be too noble  
    But when extremities speak.
 I have heard you say
    Honour and policy, like unsever'd friends,
    I' th' war do grow together; grant that, and tell me
    In peace what each of them by th' other lose
    That they combine not there.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Tush, tush!
  MENENIUS.
 A good demand.
 Why force you this?
  VOLUMNIA.
 Because that now it lies you on to speak
    To th' people, not by your own instruction,
    Nor by th' matter which your heart prompts you,
    But with such words that are but roted in
    Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
    Of no allowance to your bosom's truth.
  
    Now, this no more dishonours you at all
    Than to take in a town with gentle words,
    Which else would put you to your fortune and
    The hazard of much blood.
 I am in this
    Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles;
    And you will rather show our general louts
    How you can frown, than spend a fawn upon 'em
    For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard
    Of what that want might ruin.

  VOLUMNIA.
 Or say to them
    Thou art their soldier and, being bred in broils,
    Hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess,
    Were fit for thee to use, as they to claim,
    In asking their good loves; but thou wilt frame
    Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far
    As thou hast power and person.
 This but done
    Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours;
    For they have pardons, being ask'd, as free
    As words to little purpose.

  VOLUMNIA.
 Prithee now,
    Go, and be rul'd; although I know thou hadst rather
    Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf
    Than flatter him in a bower.

  COMINIUS.
 I have been i' th' market-place; and, sir, 'tis fit
    You make strong party, or defend yourself
    By calmness or by absence; all's in anger.
 Only fair speech.

  COMINIUS.
 I think 'twill serve, if he
    Can thereto frame his spirit.

  VOLUMNIA.

    Prithee now, say you will, and go about it.
 Must I go show them my unbarb'd sconce? Must I
    With my base tongue give to my noble heart
    A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do't;
    Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
    This mould of Marcius, they to dust should grind it,
    And throw't against the wind.
  
  VOLUMNIA.
 I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said
    My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
    To have my praise for this, perform a part
    Thou hast not done before.
 Well, I must do't.

    Away, my disposition, and possess me
    Some harlot's spirit! My throat of war be turn'd,
    Which quier'd with my drum, into a pipe
    Small as an eunuch or the virgin voice
    That babies lulls asleep! The smiles of knaves
    Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up
    The glasses of my sight! A beggar's tongue
    Make motion through my lips, and my arm'd knees,
    Who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his
    That hath receiv'd an alms! I will not do't,
    Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth,
    And by my body's action teach my mind
    A most inherent baseness.
 At thy choice, then.

    Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck'dst it from me;
    But owe thy pride thyself.
 Pray be content.

    Mother, I am going to the market-place;
    Chide me no more.
 I'll mountebank their loves,
    Cog their hearts from them, and come home belov'd
    Of all the trades in Rome.
 Look, I am going.

    Commend me to my wife.
 Do your will.
                                   Exit
  COMINIUS.
 Away! The tribunes do attend you.
 The word is 'mildly.
' Pray you let us go.

  MENENIUS.

  CORIOLANUS.

Rome.
 The Forum

Enter SICINIUS and BRUTUS

  BRUTUS.
 In this point charge him home, that he affects
    Tyrannical power.
 If he evade us there,
    Enforce him with his envy to the people,
    And that the spoil got on the Antiates
    Was ne'er distributed.


                           Enter an AEDILE

    What, will he come?
  AEDILE.
 He's coming.

  BRUTUS.
 How accompanied?
  AEDILE.

  SICINIUS.
 Have you a catalogue
    Of all the voices that we have procur'd,
    Set down by th' poll?
  AEDILE.
 Have you corrected them by tribes?
  AEDILE.
 I have.

  SICINIUS.
 Assemble presently the people hither;
    And when they hear me say 'It shall be so
    I' th' right and strength o' th' commons' be it either
    For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them,
    If I say fine, cry 'Fine!'- if death, cry 'Death!'
    Insisting on the old prerogative
    And power i' th' truth o' th' cause.

  AEDILE.
 I shall inform them.
 And when such time they have begun to cry,
    Let them not cease, but with a din confus'd
    Enforce the present execution
    Of what we chance to sentence.

  AEDILE.

  SICINIUS.
 Go about it.
                               Exit AEDILE
    Put him to choler straight.
 He hath been us'd
    Ever to conquer, and to have his worth  
    Of contradiction; being once chaf'd, he cannot
    Be rein'd again to temperance; then he speaks
    What's in his heart, and that is there which looks
    With us to break his neck.


          Enter CORIOLANUS, MENENIUS and COMINIUS, with others

  SICINIUS.
 Well, here he comes.

  MENENIUS.
 Calmly, I do beseech you.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Ay, as an ostler, that for th' poorest piece
    Will bear the knave by th' volume.
 Th' honour'd gods
    Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice
    Supplied with worthy men! plant love among's!
    Throng our large temples with the shows of peace,
    And not our streets with war!
  FIRST SENATOR.
 A noble wish.


                  Re-enter the.
 Draw near, ye people.
 List to your tribunes.
 Audience! peace, I say!
  CORIOLANUS.
 First, hear me speak.
 Well, say.
 Peace, ho!
  CORIOLANUS.
 I do demand,
    If you submit you to the people's voices,
    Allow their officers, and are content
    To suffer lawful censure for such faults
    As shall be prov'd upon you.

  MENENIUS.
 Lo, citizens, he says he is content.

    The warlike service he has done, consider; think
    Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
    Like graves i' th' holy churchyard.

  COMINIUS.
 Well, well! No more.
 Answer to us.

  CORIOLANUS.
 How- traitor?
  MENENIUS.
 Nay, temperately! Your promise.

  CORIOLANUS.
 The fires i' th' lowest hell fold in the people!
    Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune!
    Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths,  
    In thy hands clutch'd as many millions, in
    Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say
    'Thou liest' unto thee with a voice as free
    As I do pray the gods.
 To th' rock, to th' rock, with him!
  SICINIUS.

    What you have seen him do and heard him speak,
    Beating your officers, cursing yourselves,
    Opposing laws with strokes, and here defying
    Those whose great power must try him- even this,
    So criminal and in such capital kind,
    Deserves th' extremest death.
 But since he hath
    Serv'd well for Rome-
  CORIOLANUS.
 What do you prate of service?
  BRUTUS.
 I talk of that that know it.
 Know, I pray you-
  CORIOLANUS.
 I'll know no further.

    Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
    Vagabond exile, flaying, pent to linger
    But with a grain a day, I would not buy
    Their mercy at the price of one fair word,
    Nor check my courage for what they can give,
    To have't with saying 'Good morrow.
'
  SICINIUS.
 For that he has-
    As much as in him lies- from time to time
    Envied against the people, seeking means
    To pluck away their power; as now at last
    Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
    Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
    That do distribute it- in the name o' th' people,
    And in the power of us the tribunes, we,
    Ev'n from this instant, banish him our city,
    In peril of precipitation
    From off the rock Tarpeian, never more
    To enter our Rome gates.
 I' th' people's name,  
    I say it shall be so.

  PLEBEIANS.
 It shall be so, it shall be so! Let him away!
    He's banish'd, and it shall be so.

  COMINIUS.
 Let me speak.

    I have been consul, and can show for Rome
    Her enemies' marks upon me.
 I do love
    My country's good with a respect more tender,
    More holy and profound, than mine own life,
    My dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase
    And treasure of my loins.
 We know your drift.
 Speak what?
  BRUTUS.

    It shall be so.
 It shall be so, it shall be so.

  CORIOLANUS.
 YOU common cry of curs, whose breath I hate
    As reek o' th' rotten fens, whose loves I prize  
    As the dead carcasses of unburied men
    That do corrupt my air- I banish you.

    And here remain with your uncertainty!
    Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts;
    Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
    Fan you into despair! Have the power still
    To banish your defenders, till at length
    Your ignorance- which finds not till it feels,
    Making but reservation of yourselves
    Still your own foes- deliver you
    As most abated captives to some nation
    That won you without blows! Despising
    For you the city, thus I turn my back;
    There is a world elsewhere.

                                              Exeunt CORIOLANUS,
                   COMINIUS, MENENIUS, with the other PATRICIANS
  AEDILE.
 Our enemy is banish'd, he is gone! Hoo-oo!
  SICINIUS.

  PLEBEIANS.
 Come, come, let's see him out at gates; come!
    The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come.
           Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE I.
 Come, leave your tears; a brief farewell.
 Nay, mother,
    Where is your ancient courage? You were us'd
    To say extremities was the trier of spirits;
    That common chances common men could bear;
    That when the sea was calm all boats alike
    Show'd mastership in floating; fortune's blows,
    When most struck home, being gentle wounded craves
    A noble cunning.
 Nay, I prithee, woman-
  VOLUMNIA.
 Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
    And occupations perish!
  CORIOLANUS.
 What, what, what!  
    I shall be lov'd when I am lack'd.
 Nay, mother,
    Resume that spirit when you were wont to say,
    If you had been the wife of Hercules,
    Six of his labours you'd have done, and sav'd
    Your husband so much sweat.
 Cominius,
    Droop not; adieu.
 Thou old and true Menenius,
    Thy tears are salter than a younger man's
    And venomous to thine eyes.
 My sometime General,
    I have seen thee stern, and thou hast oft beheld
    Heart-hard'ning spectacles; tell these sad women
    'Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes,
    As 'tis to laugh at 'em.
 My mother, you wot well
    My hazards still have been your solace; and
    Believe't not lightly- though I go alone,
    Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen
    Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen- your son
    Will or exceed the common or be caught
    With cautelous baits and practice.

  VOLUMNIA.
 My first son,  
    Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
    With thee awhile; determine on some course
    More than a wild exposture to each chance
    That starts i' th' way before thee.
 O the gods!
  COMINIUS.
 I'll follow thee a month, devise with the
    Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us,
    And we of thee; so, if the time thrust forth
    A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send
    O'er the vast world to seek a single man,
    And lose advantage, which doth ever cool
    I' th' absence of the needer.

  CORIOLANUS.
 I pray you come.

    While I remain above the ground you shall  
    Hear from me still, and never of me aught
    But what is like me formerly.

  MENENIUS.
 That's worthily
    As any ear can hear.
 Come, let's not weep.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Give me thy hand.
                                                 Exeunt




SCENE II.

Rome.

    The nobility are vex'd, whom we see have sided
    In his behalf.

  BRUTUS.

  SICINIUS.
 Bid them home.

    Say their great enemy is gone, and they
    Stand in their ancient strength.
 Dismiss them home.


                   Enter VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, and MENENIUS

  SICINIUS.
 Why?  
  SICINIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 They have ta'en note of us; keep on your way.
 Peace, peace, be not so loud.

  VOLUMNIA.
 I would I had the
      power
    To say so to my husband.

  SICINIUS.
 Ay, fool; is that a shame? Note but this, fool:
    Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship
    To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
    Than thou hast spoken words?
  SICINIUS.
 O blessed heavens!
  VOLUMNIA.
 Moe noble blows than ever thou wise words;
    And for Rome's good.
 I'll tell thee what- yet go!
    Nay, but thou shalt stay too.
 I would my son
    Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him,  
    His good sword in his hand.
 What then?
  VIRGILIA.
 What then!
    He'd make an end of thy posterity.

  VOLUMNIA.

    Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!
  MENENIUS.
 Come, come, peace.
 I would he had continued to his country
    As he began, and not unknit himself
    The noble knot he made.

  BRUTUS.

  VOLUMNIA.
 'I would he had!' 'Twas you incens'd the rabble-
    Cats that can judge as fitly of his worth
    As I can of those mysteries which heaven
    Will not have earth to know.

  BRUTUS.
 Pray, let's go.

  BRUTUS.

    I would the gods had nothing else to do
    But to confirm my curses.
 Could I meet 'em
    But once a day, it would unclog my heart
    Of what lies heavy to't.
 Anger's my meat; I sup upon myself,
    And so shall starve with feeding.
 Come, let's go.

    Leave this faint puling and lament as I do,
    In anger, Juno-like.
 Come, come, come.
 I know you well, sir, and you know me; your name, I think,
    is Adrian.

    Know you me yet?
  VOLSCE.
 Nicanor? No!
  ROMAN.
 The same, sir.

  VOLSCE.
 YOU had more beard when I last saw you, but your favour is
    well appear'd by your tongue.

  ROMAN.

  ROMAN.
 The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing would make  
    it flame again; for the nobles receive so to heart the banishment
    of that worthy Coriolanus that they are in a ripe aptness to take
    all power from the people, and to pluck from them their tribunes
    for ever.
 This lies glowing, I can tell you, and is almost mature
    for the violent breaking out.
 Coriolanus banish'd!
  ROMAN.
 You will be welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor.
 Your noble Tullus Aufidius will appear well in
    these wars, his great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no
    request of his country.

  VOLSCE.
 He cannot choose.
 I shall between this and supper tell you most strange things
    from Rome, all tending to the good of their adversaries.

  VOLSCE.
 You take my part from me, sir.

  ROMAN.





SCENE IV.

Antium.
 Before AUFIDIUS' house

Enter CORIOLANUS, in mean apparel, disguis'd and muffled

  CORIOLANUS.
 Then know me not.

    Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones,
    In puny battle slay me.

  CITIZEN.
 And you.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Is he in Antium?
  CITIZEN.
 He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
    At his house this night.

  CORIOLANUS.
 This here before you.
             Exit CITIZEN
    O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
    Whose double bosoms seems to wear one heart,
    Whose hours, whose bed, whose meal and exercise
    Are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love,
    Unseparable, shall within this hour,
    On a dissension of a doit, break out
    To bitterest enmity; so fellest foes,
    Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep
    To take the one the other, by some chance,
    Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
    And interjoin their issues.
 So with me:
    My birthplace hate I, and my love's upon
    This enemy town.
 If he slay me,
    He does fair justice: if he give me way,
    I'll do his country service.





SCENE V.
 AUFIDIUS' house

Music plays.
                                     Exit

                     Enter another SERVINGMAN

  SECOND SERVANT.
Where's Cotus? My master calls for him.
 A goodly house.
 What would you have, friend?
    Whence are you? Here's no place for you: pray go to the door.
 I have deserv'd no better entertainment
    In being Coriolanus.


                   Re-enter second SERVINGMAN

  SECOND SERVANT.
 Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in his
    head that he gives entrance to such companions? Pray get you out.
 Away!
  SECOND SERVANT.
 Away? Get you away.

  CORIOLANUS.

  SECOND SERVANT.
 Are you so brave? I'll have you talk'd with anon.


          Enter a third SERVINGMAN.
 The first meets him

  THIRD SERVANT.
 What fellow's this?
  FIRST SERVANT.
 Prithee call my master to him.

  THIRD SERVANT.
 What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you avoid the
    house.
  
  CORIOLANUS.
 Let me but stand- I will not hurt your hearth.

  THIRD SERVANT.
 What are you?
  CORIOLANUS.
 A gentleman.

  THIRD SERVANT.
 A marv'llous poor one.

  THIRD SERVANT.
 Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other
    station; here's no place for you.
 Come.

  CORIOLANUS.

  SECOND SERVANT.
 Where dwell'st thou?
  CORIOLANUS.

  THIRD SERVANT.
 Under the canopy?
  CORIOLANUS.
 Ay.
 Where's that?
  CORIOLANUS.
 I' th' city of kites and crows!
    What an ass it is! Then thou dwell'st with daws too?  
  CORIOLANUS.
 No, I serve not thy master.
 Thou prat'st and prat'st; serve with thy trencher;
    hence!                                      [Beats him away]

             Enter AUFIDIUS with the second SERVINGMAN

  AUFIDIUS.
 Here, sir; I'd have beaten him like a dog, but for
    disturbing the lords within.
 What's thy name?
  CORIOLANUS.
  [Unmuffling]  If, Tullus,
    Not yet thou know'st me, and, seeing me, dost not
    Think me for the man I am, necessity
    Commands me name myself.

  AUFIDIUS.
 What is thy name?
  CORIOLANUS.
 Say, what's thy name?
    Thou has a grim appearance, and thy face
    Bears a command in't; though thy tackle's torn,
    Thou show'st a noble vessel.
 What's thy name?
  CORIOLANUS.
 I know thee not.
 My name is Caius Marcius, who hath done
    To thee particularly, and to all the Volsces,
    Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may
    My surname, Coriolanus.
 Only that name remains;
    The cruelty and envy of the people,
    Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
    Have all forsook me, hath devour'd the rest,
    An suffer'd me by th' voice of slaves to be
    Whoop'd out of Rome.
 Now this extremity  
    Hath brought me to thy hearth; not out of hope,
    Mistake me not, to save my life; for if
    I had fear'd death, of all the men i' th' world
    I would have 'voided thee; but in mere spite,
    To be full quit of those my banishers,
    Stand I before thee here.
 Then if thou hast
    A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
    Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims
    Of shame seen through thy country, speed thee straight
    And make my misery serve thy turn.
 So use it
    That my revengeful services may prove
    As benefits to thee; for I will fight
    Against my cank'red country with the spleen
    Of all the under fiends.

  AUFIDIUS.
 O Marcius, Marcius!
    Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart
    A root of ancient envy.
 Let me twine
    Mine arms about that body, where against
    My grained ash an hundred times hath broke
    And scarr'd the moon with splinters; here I clip
    The anvil of my sword, and do contest
    As hotly and as nobly with thy love
    As ever in ambitious strength I did
    Contend against thy valour.
 Know thou first,
    I lov'd the maid I married; never man
    Sigh'd truer breath; but that I see thee here,
    Thou noble thing, more dances my rapt heart
    Than when I first my wedded mistress saw  
    Bestride my threshold.
 Why, thou Mars, I tell the
    We have a power on foot, and I had purpose
    Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn,
    Or lose mine arm for't.
 Thou hast beat me out
    Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
    Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me-
    We have been down together in my sleep,
    Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat-
    And wak'd half dead with nothing.
 Worthy Marcius,
    Had we no other quarrel else to Rome but that
    Thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all
    From twelve to seventy, and, pouring war
    Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
    Like a bold flood o'erbeat.
 You bless me, gods!
  AUFIDIUS.
 Therefore, most.
 A thousand welcomes!
    And more a friend than e'er an enemy;
    Yet, Marcius, that was much.
 Here's a strange alteration!
  SECOND SERVANT.

  FIRST SERVANT.
 What an arm he has! He turn'd me about with his  
    finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.

  SECOND SERVANT.
 Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in
    him; he had, sir, a kind of face, methought- I cannot tell how to
    term it.
 He had so, looking as it were- Would I were hang'd,
    but I thought there was more in him than I could think.
 So did I, I'll be sworn.

  FIRST SERVANT.
 I think he is; but a greater soldier than he you wot
    on.
 Who, my master?
  FIRST SERVANT.
 Nay, it's no matter for that.

  SECOND SERVANT.
 Worth six on him.
 Nay, not so neither; but I take him to be the
    greater soldier.

  SECOND SERVANT.
 Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that;
    for the defence of a town our general is excellent.
 Ay, and for an assault too.


                       Re-enter the third SERVINGMAN  

  THIRD SERVANT.
 O slaves, I can tell you news- news, you rascals!
  BOTH.

  THIRD SERVANT.
 I would not be a Roman, of all nations;
    I had as lief be a condemn'd man.
 Wherefore? wherefore?
  THIRD SERVANT.
 Why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general-
    Caius Marcius.
 I do not say 'thwack our general,' but he was always
    good enough for him.
 He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth
    on't; before Corioli he scotch'd him and notch'd him like a
    carbonado.
 An he had been cannibally given, he might have
    broil'd and eaten him too.
 But more of thy news!
  THIRD SERVANT.

  SECOND SERVANT.
 And he's as like to do't as any man I can imagine.

  THIRD SERVANT.

  FIRST SERVANT.

  SECOND SERVANT.
 Why, then we shall have a stirring world again.

    Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy; mull'd, deaf, sleepy,
    insensible; a getter of more bastard children than war's a
    destroyer of men.

  SECOND SERVANT.

  FIRST SERVANT.
 Ay, and it makes men hate one another.
 The
    wars for my money.

    They are rising, they are rising.

  BOTH.

Rome.
 A public place

Enter the two Tribunes, SICINIUS and BRUTUS

  SICINIUS.
 We hear not of him, neither need we fear him.
 The present peace
    And quietness of the people, which before
    Were in wild hurry, here do make his friends
    Blush that the world goes well; who rather had,
    Though they themselves did suffer by't, behold
    Dissentious numbers pest'ring streets than see
    Our tradesmen singing in their shops, and going
    About their functions friendly.
 Is this Menenius?
  SICINIUS.
 'Tis he, 'tis he.
 O, he is grown most kind
    Of late.
 Hail, sir!
  MENENIUS.
 Your Coriolanus is not much miss'd  
    But with his friends.
 The commonwealth doth stand,
    And so would do, were he more angry at it.

  MENENIUS.
 All's well, and might have been much better
    He could have temporiz'd.
 Where is he, hear you?
  MENENIUS.
 Nay, I hear nothing; his mother and his wife
    Hear nothing from him.


                     Enter three or four citizens

  CITIZENS.
 God-den, our neighbours.

  BRUTUS.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees
    Are bound to pray for you both.

  SICINIUS.
 Live and thrive!
  BRUTUS.
 Farewell, kind neighbours; we wish'd Coriolanus
    Had lov'd you as we did.

  BRUTUS.

  MENENIUS.
 I think not so.

  SICINIUS.
 We should by this, to all our lamentation,
    If he had gone forth consul, found it so.

  BRUTUS.


                             Enter an AEDILE

  AEDILE.
 Worthy tribunes,
    There is a slave, whom we have put in prison,
    Reports the Volsces with several powers  
    Are ent'red in the Roman territories,
    And with the deepest malice of the war
    Destroy what lies before 'em.
 'Tis Aufidius,
    Who, hearing of our Marcius' banishment,
    Thrusts forth his horns again into the world,
    Which were inshell'd when Marcius stood for Rome,
    And durst not once peep out.

  SICINIUS.
 Come, what talk you of Marcius?
  BRUTUS.
 Go see this rumourer whipp'd.

  MENENIUS.
 But reason with the fellow
    Before you punish him, where he heard this,
    Lest you shall chance to whip your information
    And beat the messenger who bids beware
    Of what is to be dreaded.

  SICINIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 Not Possible.

  SICINIUS.
 'Tis this slave-
    Go whip him fore the people's eyes- his raising,
    Nothing but his report.

  SICINIUS.
 What more fearful?
  MESSENGER.
 Rais'd only that the weaker sort may wish
    Good Marcius home again.

  SICINIUS.
 The very trick on 't.
 You are sent for to the Senate.

    A fearful army, led by Caius Marcius
    Associated with Aufidius, rages
    Upon our territories, and have already
    O'erborne their way, consum'd with fire and took
    What lay before them.


                            Enter COMINIUS

  COMINIUS.
 What news? what news?
  COMINIUS.
 You have holp to ravish your own daughters and
    To melt the city leads upon your pates,
    To see your wives dishonour'd to your noses-
  MENENIUS.
 Pray now, your news?
    You have made fair work, I fear me.

  MENENIUS.

  MENENIUS.
 As Hercules
    Did shake down mellow fruit.
 You have made fair work!
  BRUTUS.
 All the regions
    Do smilingly revolt, and who resists
    Are mock'd for valiant ignorance,
    And perish constant fools.

  MENENIUS.
 We are all undone unless
    The noble man have mercy.

  COMINIUS.
 Who shall ask it?
    The tribunes cannot do't for shame; the people
    Deserve such pity of him as the wolf
    Does of the shepherds; for his best friends, if they
    Should say 'Be good to Rome'- they charg'd him even  
    As those should do that had deserv'd his hate,
    And therein show'd fike enemies.

  MENENIUS.
 'Tis true;
    If he were putting to my house the brand
    That should consume it, I have not the face
    To say 'Beseech you, cease.
' You have made fair hands,
    You and your crafts! You have crafted fair!
  COMINIUS.
 Say not we brought it.
 How! Was't we? We lov'd him, but, like beasts
    And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,
    Who did hoot him out o' th' city.
 But I fear
    They'll roar him in again.
  

                       Enter a troop of citizens

  MENENIUS.
 Here comes the clusters.

    And is Aufidius with him? You are they
    That made the air unwholesome when you cast
    Your stinking greasy caps in hooting at
    Coriolanus' exile.
 'Tis no matter;
    If he could burn us all into one coal
    We have deserv'd it.

  PLEBEIANS.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 And so did I.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 And so did I; and, to say the truth, so did very
    many of us.
 That we did, we did for the best; and though we  
    willingly consented to his banishment, yet it was against our
    will.

  COMINIUS.
 Y'are goodly things, you voices!
  MENENIUS.
 You have made
    Good work, you and your cry! Shall's to the Capitol?
  COMINIUS.
 O, ay, what else?
                                    Exeunt COMINIUS and MENENIUS
  SICINIUS.
 Go home,
    And show no sign of fear.
 I
    ever said we were i' th' wrong when we banish'd him.
 So did we all.
 But come, let's home.
 I do not like this news.

  SICINIUS.
 Nor I.

  BRUTUS.
 Let's to the Capitol.
 Would half my wealth
    Would buy this for a lie!
  SICINIUS.
 Pray let's go.
 I do not know what witchcraft's in him, but
    Your soldiers use him as the grace fore meat,
    Their talk at table, and their thanks at end;
    And you are dark'ned in this action, sir,
    Even by your own.

  AUFIDIUS.
 I cannot help it now,
    Unless by using means I lame the foot
    Of our design.
 He bears himself more proudlier,
    Even to my person, than I thought he would
    When first I did embrace him; yet his nature
    In that's no changeling, and I must excuse
    What cannot be amended.

  LIEUTENANT.
 Yet I wish, sir-
    I mean, for your particular- you had not
    Join'd in commission with him, but either
    Had borne the action of yourself, or else  
    To him had left it solely.
 Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?
  AUFIDIUS.
 All places yield to him ere he sits down,
    And the nobility of Rome are his;
    The senators and patricians love him too.
 Whether 'twas pride,
    Which out of daily fortune ever taints
    The happy man; whether defect of judgment,
    To fail in the disposing of those chances
    Which he was lord of; or whether nature,
    Not to be other than one thing, not moving
    From th' casque to th' cushion, but commanding peace
    Even with the same austerity and garb
    As he controll'd the war; but one of these-
    As he hath spices of them all- not all,
    For I dare so far free him- made him fear'd,
    So hated, and so banish'd.
 So our virtues
    Lie in th' interpretation of the time;
    And power, unto itself most commendable,
    Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair
    T' extol what it hath done.

    One fire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail;
    Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail.
  
    Come, let's away.

                                                          Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.
 A public place

Enter MENENIUS, COMINIUS, SICINIUS and BRUTUS, the two Tribunes, with others

  MENENIUS.
 He call'd me father;
    But what o' that? Go, you that banish'd him:
    A mile before his tent fall down, and knee
    The way into his mercy.
 Nay, if he coy'd
    To hear Cominius speak, I'll keep at home.

  COMINIUS.
 He would not seem to know me.
 Do you hear?
  COMINIUS.
 Yet one time he did call me by my name.
  
  MENENIUS.
 Why, so! You have made good work.

    A pair of tribunes that have wrack'd for Rome
    To make coals cheap- a noble memory!
  COMINIUS.
 I minded him how royal 'twas to pardon
    When it was less expected; he replied,
    It was a bare petition of a state
    To one whom they had punish'd.

  MENENIUS.

    Could he say less?
  COMINIUS.
 I offer'd to awaken his regard
    For's private friends; his answer to me was,
    He could not stay to pick them in a pile
    Of noisome musty chaff.
 He said 'twas folly,
    For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt
    And still to nose th' offence.
 For one poor grain or two!
    I am one of those.
 His mother, wife, his child,
    And this brave fellow too- we are the grains:
    You are the musty chaff, and you are smelt
    Above the moon.
 But sure, if you
    Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue,
    More than the instant army we can make,
    Might stop our countryman.

  MENENIUS.
 No; I'll not meddle.

  SICINIUS.
 Yet your good will
    Must have that thanks from Rome after the measure
    As you intended well.

  MENENIUS.
 Yet to bite his lip
    And hum at good Cominius much unhearts me.

    He was not taken well: he had not din'd;
    The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then
    We pout upon the morning, are unapt
    To give or to forgive; but when we have stuff'd
    These pipes and these conveyances of our blood
    With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls
    Than in our priest-like fasts.

  BRUTUS.
 You know the very road into his kindness
    And cannot lose your way.

  MENENIUS.
 Good faith, I'll prove him,
    Speed how it will.
 I shall ere long have knowledge
    Of my success.
                                          Exit
  COMINIUS.
 He'll never hear him.
 What he would do,
    He sent in writing after me; what he would not,
    Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions;
    So that all hope is vain,
    Unless his noble mother and his wife,
    Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him
    For mercy to his country.
 Therefore let's hence,
    And with our fair entreaties haste them on.
           Exeunt




SCENE II.

The Volscian camp before Rome

Enter MENENIUS to the WATCH on guard

  FIRST WATCH.
 Stay.
 Whence are you?
  SECOND WATCH.
 Stand, and go back.

  MENENIUS.

  FIRST WATCH.
 Our general
    Will no more hear from thence.
 You'll see your Rome embrac'd with fire before
    You'll speak with Coriolanus.
 Good my friends,
    If you have heard your general talk of Rome
    And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks
    My name hath touch'd your ears: it is Menenius.
 The virtue of your name
    Is not here passable.
 Nay, sometimes,
    Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,
    I have tumbled past the throw, and in his praise
    Have almost stamp'd the leasing; therefore, fellow,
    I must have leave to pass.

  FIRST WATCH.
 Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his behalf
    as you have uttered words in your own, you should not pass here;
    no, though it were as virtuous to lie as to live chastely.

  MENENIUS.
 Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you
    have, I am one that, telling true under him, must say you cannot
    pass.
  
  MENENIUS.

  FIRST WATCH.
 I am as thy general is.

  FIRST WATCH.
 Then you should hate Rome, as he does.
 Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would use me
    with estimation.

  FIRST WATCH.
 Come, my captain knows you not.

  FIRST WATCH.
 Back, I say; go, lest I
    let forth your half pint of blood.

  MENENIUS.
 What's the matter?
  MENENIUS.
 Now, you companion, I'll say an errand for you; you shall
    know now that I am in estimation; you shall perceive that a Jack
    guardant cannot office me from my son Coriolanus.
 Guess but by my
    entertainment with him if thou stand'st not i' th' state of
    hanging, or of some death more long in spectatorship and crueller
    in suffering; behold now presently, and swoon for what's to come
    upon thee.
 I was hardly moved to come
    to thee; but being assured none but myself could move thee, I
    have been blown out of your gates with sighs, and conjure thee to
    pardon Rome and thy petitionary countrymen.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Wife, mother, child, I know not.
 My affairs
    Are servanted to others.
 That we have been familiar,
    Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison rather
    Than pity note how much.
 Therefore be gone.

    Mine ears against your suits are stronger than
    Your gates against my force.
 Yet, for I lov'd thee,
    Take this along; I writ it for thy sake     [Gives a letter]
    And would have sent it.
 Another word, Menenius,
    I will not hear thee speak.
 This man, Aufidius,
    Was my belov'd in Rome; yet thou behold'st.
 You keep a constant temper.

                                  Exeunt CORIOLANUS and Aufidius
  FIRST WATCH.
 Now, sir, is your name Menenius?
  SECOND WATCH.
  
  FIRST WATCH.
 Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your
    greatness back?
  SECOND WATCH.
 I neither care for th' world nor your general; for such
    things as you, I can scarce think there's any, y'are so slight.

    Let your general do his worst.

  SECOND WATCH.
                            Exeunt




SCENE III.

The tent of CORIOLANUS

Enter CORIOLANUS, AUFIDIUS, and others

  CORIOLANUS.
 We will before the walls of Rome to-morrow
    Set down our host.

  AUFIDIUS.
 Only their ends
    You have respected; stopp'd your ears against
    The general suit of Rome; never admitted
    A private whisper- no, not with such friends
    That thought them sure of you.
 To grace him only,  
    That thought he could do more, a very little
    I have yielded to; fresh embassies and suits,
    Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter
    Will I lend ear to.
  [Shout within]  Ha! what shout is this?
    Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
    In the same time 'tis made? I will not.


       Enter, in mourning habits, VIRGILIA, VOLUMNIA, VALERIA,
                   YOUNG MARCIUS, with attendants

    My wife comes foremost, then the honour'd mould
    Wherein this trunk was fram'd, and in her hand
    The grandchild to her blood.

    What is that curtsy worth? or those doves' eyes,
    Which can make gods forsworn? I melt, and am not
    Of stronger earth than others.
 My mother bows,
    As if Olympus to a molehill should
    In supplication nod; and my young boy  
    Hath an aspect of intercession which
    Great nature cries 'Deny not.
 My lord and husband!
  CORIOLANUS.
 These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.

  VIRGILIA.
 The sorrow that delivers us thus chang'd
    Makes you think so.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Like a dull actor now
    I have forgot my part and I am out,
    Even to a full disgrace.
 Best of my flesh,
    Forgive my tyranny; but do not say,
    For that, 'Forgive our Romans.
 You gods! I prate,
    And the most noble mother of the world  
    Leave unsaluted.
                       [Kneels]
  CORIOLANUS.
 What's this?
    Your knees to me, to your corrected son?
    Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
    Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds
    Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun,
    Murd'ring impossibility, to make
    What cannot be slight work.

  VOLUMNIA.
 Thou art my warrior;
    I holp to frame thee.
 This is a poor epitome of yours,
    Which by th' interpretation of full time
    May show like all yourself.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Your knee, sirrah.

  VOLUMNIA.

  CORIOLANUS.
 I beseech you, peace!
    Or, if you'd ask, remember this before:
    The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
    Be held by you denials.
 Do not bid me
    Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate
    Again with Rome's mechanics.
 Tell me not  
    Wherein I seem unnatural; desire not
    T'allay my rages and revenges with
    Your colder reasons.

  VOLUMNIA.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Your request?
  VOLUMNIA.
 Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
    And state of bodies would bewray what life
    We have led since thy exile.
 Think with thyself
    How more unfortunate than all living women
    Are we come hither; since that thy sight, which should
    Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts,
    Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow,
    Making the mother, wife, and child, to see
    The son, the husband, and the father, tearing  
    His country's bowels out.
 We must find
    An evident calamity, though we had
    Our wish, which side should win; for either thou
    Must as a foreign recreant be led
    With manacles through our streets, or else
    Triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin,
    And bear the palm for having bravely shed
    Thy wife and children's blood.
 For myself, son,
    I purpose not to wait on fortune till
    These wars determine; if I can not persuade thee
    Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
    Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner  
    March to assault thy country than to tread-
    Trust to't, thou shalt not- on thy mother's womb
    That brought thee to this world.

  VIRGILIA.
 Ay, and mine,
    That brought you forth this boy to keep your name
    Living to time.

  BOY.
 'A shall not tread on me!
    I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight.
 Nay, go not from us thus.

    If it were so that our request did tend
    To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
    The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us
    As poisonous of your honour.
' Speak to me, son.

    Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour,
    To imitate the graces of the gods,
    To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' th' air,
    And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt
    That should but rive an oak.
 Why dost not speak?
    Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man
    Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you:
    He cares not for your weeping.
 There's no man in the world
    More bound to's mother, yet here he lets me prate  
    Like one i' th' stocks.
 Thou hast never in thy life
    Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy,
    When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
    Has cluck'd thee to the wars, and safely home
    Loaden with honour.
 Say my request's unjust,
    And spurn me back; but if it he not so,
    Thou art not honest, and the gods will plague thee,
    That thou restrain'st from me the duty which
    To a mother's part belongs.
 Down.
 An end;
    This is the last.

    This fellow had a Volscian to his mother;
    His wife is in Corioli, and his child  
    Like him by chance.
 Yet give us our dispatch.
 O mother, mother!
    What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
    The gods look down, and this unnatural scene
    They laugh at.
 O my mother, mother! O!
    You have won a happy victory to Rome;
    But for your son- believe it, O, believe it!-
    Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd,
    If not most mortal to him.
 I was mov'd withal.
 I dare be sworn you were!
    And, sir, it is no little thing to make
    Mine eyes to sweat compassion.
 But, good sir,  
    What peace you'fl make, advise me.
 For my part,
    I'll not to Rome, I'll back with you; and pray you
    Stand to me in this cause.
  [Aside]  I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and thy
      honour
    At difference in thee.
 Out of that I'll work
    Myself a former fortune.

  CORIOLANUS.
  [To the ladies]  Ay, by and by;
    But we will drink together; and you shall bear
    A better witness back than words, which we,
    On like conditions, will have counter-seal'd.

    Come, enter with us.
 Ladies, you deserve
    To have a temple built you.
 All the swords
    In Italy, and her confederate arms,
    Could not have made this peace.
                       Exeunt




SCENE IV.
 See you yond coign o' th' Capitol, yond cornerstone?
  SICINIUS.
 If it be possible for you to displace it with your little
    finger, there is some hope the ladies of Rome, especially his
    mother, may prevail with him.
 But I say there is no hope in't;
    our throats are sentenc'd, and stay upon execution.

  SICINIUS.
 Is't possible that so short a time can alter the
    condition of a man?
  MENENIUS.
 This Marcius is grown from man to
    dragon; he has wings, he's more than a creeping thing.

  SICINIUS.
 He lov'd his mother dearly.

  MENENIUS.
 So did he me; and he no more remembers his mother now
    than an eight-year-old horse.
 He sits in  
    his state as a thing made for Alexander.
 What he bids be done is
    finish'd with his bidding.
 He wants nothing of a god but
    eternity, and a heaven to throne in.

  SICINIUS.
 Yes- mercy, if you report him truly.

  MENENIUS.
 And all this
    is 'long of you.

  SICINIUS.
 The gods be good unto us!
  MENENIUS.

    When we banish'd him we respected not them; and, he returning to
    break our necks, they respect not us.


                           Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER.
 Sir, if you'd save your life, fly to your house.

    The plebeians have got your fellow tribune
    And hale him up and down; all swearing if
    The Roman ladies bring not comfort home
    They'll give him death by inches.
 What's the news?
  SECOND MESSENGER.

    A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
    No, not th' expulsion of the Tarquins.

  SICINIUS.
 Friend,
    Art thou certain this is true? Is't most certain?
  SECOND MESSENGER.

    Where have you lurk'd, that you make doubt of it?
    Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide
    As the recomforted through th' gates.
 Why, hark you!
                  [Trumpets, hautboys, drums beat, all together]
    The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries, and fifes,
    Tabors and cymbals, and the shouting Romans,
    Make the sun dance.

    I will go meet the ladies.
 This Volumnia  
    Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians,
    A city full; of tribunes such as you,
    A sea and land full.
 You have pray'd well to-day:
    This morning for ten thousand of your throats
    I'd not have given a doit.
 First, the gods bless you for your tidings; next,
    Accept my thankfulness.
 Sir, we have all
    Great cause to give great thanks.

  SICINIUS.
 Almost at point to enter.
 A street near the gate

Enter two SENATORS With VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, VALERIA, passing over the stage,
'With other LORDS

  FIRST SENATOR.

    Unshout the noise that banish'd Marcius,
    Repeal him with the welcome of his mother;
  ALL.
 Welcome, ladies, welcome!
                    [A flourish with drums and trumpets.
 Exeunt]




SCENE VI.

Corioli.
 A public place

Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS with attendents

  AUFIDIUS.
 Dispatch.
 Even so
    As with a man by his own alms empoison'd,
    And with his charity slain.
  
  SECOND CONSPIRATOR.
 Sir, I cannot tell;
    We must proceed as we do find the people.

  THIRD CONSPIRATOR.
 The people will remain uncertain whilst
    'Twixt you there's difference; but the fall of either
    Makes the survivor heir of all.
 I know it;
    And my pretext to strike at him admits
    A good construction.
 I rais'd him, and I pawn'd
    Mine honour for his truth; who being so heighten'd,
    He watered his new plants with dews of flattery,
    Seducing so my friends; and to this end
    He bow'd his nature, never known before
    But to be rough, unswayable, and free.

  THIRD CONSPIRATOR.
 That I would have spoken of.

    Being banish'd for't, he came unto my hearth,
    Presented to my knife his throat.
 Till, at the last,
    I seem'd his follower, not partner; and
    He wag'd me with his countenance as if
    I had been mercenary.
 So he did, my lord.

    The army marvell'd at it; and, in the last,
    When he had carried Rome and that we look'd
    For no less spoil than glory-
  AUFIDIUS.

    At a few drops of women's rheum, which are  
    As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour
    Of our great action; therefore shall he die,
    And I'll renew me in his fall.
 Your native town you enter'd like a post,
    And had no welcomes home; but he returns
    Splitting the air with noise.

  SECOND CONSPIRATOR.
 And patient fools,
    Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
    With giving him glory.

  THIRD CONSPIRATOR.
 Therefore, at your vantage,
    Ere he express himself or move the people
    With what he would say, let him feel your sword,
    Which we will second.
 When he lies along,
    After your way his tale pronounc'd shall bury
    His reasons with his body.

  AUFIDIUS.
 Say no more:
    Here come the lords.

  
                     Enter the LORDS of the city

  LORDS.

  AUFIDIUS.

    But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused
    What I have written to you?
  LORDS.
 We have.

  FIRST LORD.
 And grieve to hear't.

    What faults he made before the last, I think
    Might have found easy fines; but there to end
    Where he was to begin, and give away
    The benefit of our levies, answering us
    With our own charge, making a treaty where
    There was a yielding- this admits no excuse.


            Enter CORIOLANUS, marching with drum and colours;
                      the commoners being with him

  CORIOLANUS.
 Hail, lords! I am return'd your soldier;  
    No more infected with my country's love
    Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting
    Under your great command.

  AUFIDIUS.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Ay, traitor, Marcius.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Marcius!
  AUFIDIUS.
 Ay, Marcius, Caius Marcius! Dost thou think  
    I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name
    Coriolanus, in Corioli?
    You lords and heads o' th' state, perfidiously
    He has betray'd your business and given up,
    For certain drops of salt, your city Rome-
    I say your city- to his wife and mother;
    Breaking his oath and resolution like
    A twist of rotten silk; never admitting
    Counsel o' th' war; but at his nurse's tears
    He whin'd and roar'd away your victory,
    That pages blush'd at him, and men of heart
    Look'd wond'ring each at others.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Name not the god, thou boy of tears-
  CORIOLANUS.
 Ha!
  AUFIDIUS.
 -no more.

  CORIOLANUS.
 Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart
    Too great for what contains it.
 'Boy'! O slave!
    Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever
    I was forc'd to scold.
 Your judgments, my grave lords,  
    Must give this cur the lie; and his own notion-
    Who wears my stripes impress'd upon him, that
    Must bear my beating to his grave- shall join
    To thrust the lie unto him.

  FIRST LORD.
 Cut me to pieces, Volsces; men and lads,
    Stain all your edges on me.
 'Boy'! False hound!
    If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there
    That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I
    Flutter'd your Volscians in Corioli.
 Let him die for't.
 Do it presently.
 He kill'd my
    father.

  SECOND LORD.

  CORIOLANUS.
 O that I had him,
    With six Aufidiuses, or more- his tribe,
    To use my lawful sword!
  AUFIDIUS.
 Insolent villain!
  CONSPIRATORS.

                                         AUFIDIUS stands on him]
  LORDS.
 Hold, hold, hold, hold!
  AUFIDIUS.

  FIRST LORD.
 O Tullus!
  SECOND LORD.
 Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.

  THIRD LORD.
 Tread not upon him.
 Masters all, be quiet;
    Put up your swords.

  AUFIDIUS.
 My lords, when you shall know- as in this rage,
    Provok'd by him, you cannot- the great danger
    Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice  
    That he is thus cut off.

  FIRST LORD.
 Bear from hence his body,
    And mourn you for him.
 Let him be regarded
    As the most noble corse that ever herald
    Did follow to his um.

  SECOND LORD.
 His own impatience
    Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.

    Let's make the best of it.

  AUFIDIUS.

    Help, three o' th' chiefest soldiers; I'll be one.
 Though in this city he
    Hath widowed and unchilded many a one,
    Which to this hour bewail the injury,
    Yet he shall have a noble memory.

    Assist.
               Exeunt, bearing the body of CORIOLANUS  
                                          [A dead march sounded]


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1609

CYMBELINE

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  CYMBELINE, King of Britain
  CLOTEN, son to the Queen by a former husband
  POSTHUMUS LEONATUS, a gentleman, husband to Imogen
  BELARIUS, a banished lord, disguised under the name of Morgan

  GUIDERIUS and ARVIRAGUS, sons to Cymbeline, disguised under the
            names of POLYDORE and CADWAL, supposed sons to Belarius
  PHILARIO, Italian, friend to Posthumus
  IACHIMO,  Italian, friend to Philario
  A FRENCH GENTLEMAN, friend to Philario
  CAIUS LUCIUS, General of the Roman Forces
  A ROMAN CAPTAIN
  TWO BRITISH CAPTAINS
  PISANIO, servant to Posthumus
  CORNELIUS, a physician
  TWO LORDS of Cymbeline's court
  TWO GENTLEMEN of the same
  TWO GAOLERS

  QUEEN, wife to Cymbeline  
  IMOGEN, daughter to Cymbeline by a former queen
  HELEN, a lady attending on Imogen

  APPARITIONS

  Lords, Ladies, Roman Senators, Tribunes, a Soothsayer, a
    Dutch Gentleman, a Spanish Gentleman, Musicians, Officers,
    Captains, Soldiers, Messengers, and Attendants



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>




SCENE:
Britain; Italy



ACT I.
 SCENE I.
 The garden of CYMBELINE'S palace

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 But what's the matter?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 His daughter, and the heir of's kingdom, whom
    He purpos'd to his wife's sole son- a widow
    That late he married- hath referr'd herself
    Unto a poor but worthy gentleman.
 She's wedded;
    Her husband banish'd; she imprison'd.
 None but the King?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 So is the Queen,
    That most desir'd the match.
 But not a courtier,
    Although they wear their faces to the bent
    Of the King's looks, hath a heart that is not
    Glad at the thing they scowl at.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 And why so?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 He that hath miss'd the Princess is a thing  
    Too bad for bad report; and he that hath her-
    I mean that married her, alack, good man!
    And therefore banish'd- is a creature such
    As, to seek through the regions of the earth
    For one his like, there would be something failing
    In him that should compare.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 I do extend him, sir, within himself;
    Crush him together rather than unfold
    His measure duly.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 I cannot delve him to the root; his father
    Was call'd Sicilius, who did join his honour
    Against the Romans with Cassibelan,
    But had his titles by Tenantius, whom
    He serv'd with glory and admir'd success,
    So gain'd the sur-addition Leonatus;
    And had, besides this gentleman in question,  
    Two other sons, who, in the wars o' th' time,
    Died with their swords in hand; for which their father,
    Then old and fond of issue, took such sorrow
    That he quit being; and his gentle lady,
    Big of this gentleman, our theme, deceas'd
    As he was born.
 The King he takes the babe
    To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
    Breeds him and makes him of his bed-chamber,
    Puts to him all the learnings that his time
    Could make him the receiver of; which he took,
    As we do air, fast as 'twas minist'red,
    And in's spring became a harvest, liv'd in court-
    Which rare it is to do- most prais'd, most lov'd,
    A sample to the youngest; to th' more mature
    A glass that feated them; and to the graver
    A child that guided dotards.
 I honour him
    Even out of your report.
 But pray you tell me,
    Is she sole child to th' King?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.

    He had two sons- if this be worth your hearing,
    Mark it- the eldest of them at three years old,
    I' th' swathing clothes the other, from their nursery
    Were stol'n; and to this hour no guess in knowledge
    Which way they went.
 How long is this ago?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Howsoe'er 'tis strange,
    Or that the negligence may well be laugh'd at,
    Yet is it true, sir.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
                              Exeunt  

              Enter the QUEEN, POSTHUMUS, and IMOGEN

  QUEEN.
 You're my prisoner, but
    Your gaoler shall deliver you the keys
    That lock up your restraint.
 For you, Posthumus,
    So soon as I can win th' offended King,
    I will be known your advocate.
 Marry, yet
    The fire of rage is in him, and 'twere good
    You lean'd unto his sentence with what patience
    Your wisdom may inform you.

  POSTHUMUS.
 You know the peril.

    I'll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying
    The pangs of barr'd affections, though the King
    Hath charg'd you should not speak together.
             Exit
  IMOGEN.
 O dissembling courtesy! How fine this tyrant  
    Can tickle where she wounds! My dearest husband,
    I something fear my father's wrath, but nothing-
    Always reserv'd my holy duty- what
    His rage can do on me.
 You must be gone;
    And I shall here abide the hourly shot
    Of angry eyes, not comforted to live
    But that there is this jewel in the world
    That I may see again.

  POSTHUMUS.
 My queen! my mistress!
    O lady, weep no more, lest I give cause
    To be suspected of more tenderness
    Than doth become a man.


                     Re-enter QUEEN  

  QUEEN.

    If the King come, I shall incur I know not
    How much of his displeasure.
                              Exit
  POSTHUMUS.
 Should we be taking leave
    As long a term as yet we have to live,
    The loathness to depart would grow.
 Adieu!
  IMOGEN.
 Look here, love:
    This diamond was my mother's; take it, heart;
    But keep it till you woo another wife,
    When Imogen is dead.

  POSTHUMUS.
 For my sake wear this;
    It is a manacle of love; I'll place it
    Upon this fairest prisoner.
 Alack, the King!
  CYMBELINE.
 Away!
    Thou'rt poison to my blood.
 The gods protect you,
    And bless the good remainders of the court!
    I am gone.
 There cannot be a pinch in death
    More sharp than this is.

  CYMBELINE.
 I beseech you, sir,
    Harm not yourself with your vexation.
 Past grace? obedience?
  IMOGEN.
 Past hope, and in despair; that way past grace.

  CYMBELINE.
 O blessed that I might not! I chose an eagle,
    And did avoid a puttock.

  CYMBELINE.
 Sir,  
    It is your fault that I have lov'd Posthumus.

    You bred him as my playfellow, and he is
    A man worth any woman; overbuys me
    Almost the sum he pays.

  CYMBELINE.
 What, art thou mad?
  IMOGEN.
 Heaven restore me! Would I were
    A neat-herd's daughter, and my Leonatus
    Our neighbour shepherd's son!

                          Re-enter QUEEN

  CYMBELINE.
 Thou foolish thing!
    [To the QUEEN] They were again together.

  QUEEN.
 Beseech your patience.

  CYMBELINE.
 Nay, let her languish  
    A drop of blood a day and, being aged,
    Die of this folly.
                          Exit, with LORDS

                          Enter PISANIO

  QUEEN.
 Fie! you must give way.
 My lord your son drew on my master.
 There might have been,
    But that my master rather play'd than fought,
    And had no help of anger; they were parted
    By gentlemen at hand.

  QUEEN.
 I am very glad on't.

  IMOGEN.
 On his command.
 This hath been
    Your faithful servant.
 I dare lay mine honour
    He will remain so.
 I humbly thank your Highness.

  QUEEN.
 Pray walk awhile.
 You shall at least
    Go see my lord aboard.
 For this time leave me.
        Exeunt




SCENE II.

Britain.
 A public place

Enter CLOTEN and two LORDS

  FIRST LORD.
 Sir, I would advise you to shift a shirt; the violence
    of action hath made you reek as a sacrifice.
 Where air comes out,
    air comes in; there's none abroad so wholesome as that you vent.

  CLOTEN.
 Have I hurt him?
  SECOND LORD.
 [Aside] No, faith; not so much as his patience.
 Hurt him! His body's a passable carcass if he be not
    hurt.

  SECOND LORD.

  CLOTEN.

  SECOND LORD.
 [Aside] No; but he fled forward still, toward your
    face.

  FIRST LORD.

  SECOND LORD.
 [Aside] As many inches as you have oceans.

    Puppies!
  CLOTEN.
 [Aside] So would I, till you had measur'd how long a
    fool you were upon the ground.

  CLOTEN.

  FIRST LORD.
 [Aside] She shines not upon fools, lest the reflection
    should hurt her.

  CLOTEN.
 Come, I'll to my chamber.
 Would there had been some hurt
    done!
  SECOND LORD.
 You'll go with us?
  FIRST LORD.
 I'll attend your lordship.
 Nay, come, let's go together.

  SECOND LORD.
 Well, my lord.
                             Exeunt




SCENE III.

Britain.
 CYMBELINE'S palace

Enter IMOGEN and PISANIO

  IMOGEN.
 What was the last
    That he spake to thee?
  PISANIO.
 And kiss'd it, madam.
  
  IMOGEN.
 Thou shouldst have made him
    As little as a crow, or less, ere left
    To after-eye him.

  PISANIO.

  IMOGEN.
 I would have broke mine eyestrings, crack'd them but
    To look upon him, till the diminution
    Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle;
    Nay, followed him till he had melted from
    The smallness of a gnat to air, and then
    Have turn'd mine eye and wept.
 Be assur'd, madam,
    With his next vantage.
 I did not take my leave of him, but had
    Most pretty things to say.
 Ere I could tell him
    How I would think on him at certain hours
    Such thoughts and such; or I could make him swear
    The shes of Italy should not betray
    Mine interest and his honour; or have charg'd him,
    At the sixth hour of morn, at noon, at midnight,  
    T' encounter me with orisons, for then
    I am in heaven for him; or ere I could
    Give him that parting kiss which I had set
    Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father,
    And like the tyrannous breathing of the north
    Shakes all our buds from growing.


                        Enter a LADY

  LADY.
 The Queen, madam,
    Desires your Highness' company.

  IMOGEN.

  PISANIO.
                                Exeunt




SCENE IV.

Rome.
 PHILARIO'S house

Enter PHILARIO, IACHIMO, a FRENCHMAN, a DUTCHMAN, and a SPANIARD

  IACHIMO.
 Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain.

  FRENCHMAN.
 I have seen him in France; we had very many there could
    behold the sun with as firm eyes as he.

  IACHIMO.
 His father and I were soldiers together, to whom I have
    been often bound for no less than my life.

  FRENCHMAN.
 Sir, we have known together in Orleans.

  POSTHUMUS.
 Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies,
    which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still.

  FRENCHMAN.
 Sir, you o'errate my poor kindness.
 By your pardon, sir.
 I was then a young traveller;
    rather shunn'd to go even with what I heard than in my every
    action to be guided by others' experiences; but upon my mended
    judgment- if I offend not to say it is mended- my quarrel was not
    altogether slight.
 Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrement of swords, and
    by such two that would by all likelihood have confounded one the
    other or have fall'n both.

  IACHIMO.
 Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference?
  FRENCHMAN.
 Safely, I think.
 'Twas a contention in public, which
    may, without contradiction, suffer the report.
  
  POSTHUMUS.
 Being so far provok'd as I was in France, I would abate
    her nothing, though I profess myself her adorer, not her friend.
 As fair and as good- a kind of hand-in-hand comparison-
    had been something too fair and too good for any lady in Britain.

    If she went before others I have seen as that diamond of yours
    outlustres many I have beheld, I could not but believe she
    excelled many; but I have not seen the most precious diamond that
    is, nor you the lady.

  POSTHUMUS.
 I prais'd her as I rated her.

  IACHIMO.
 What do you esteem it at?
  POSTHUMUS.
 More than the world enjoys.
 Either your unparagon'd mistress is dead, or she's
    outpriz'd by a trifle.
 You are mistaken: the one may be sold or given, if there
    were wealth enough for the purchase or merit for the gift; the
    other is not a thing for sale, and only the gift of the gods.

  IACHIMO.
 Which the gods have given you?
  POSTHUMUS.

  IACHIMO.
 You may wear her in title yours; but you know strange fowl
    light upon neighbouring ponds.
 Your ring may be stol'n too.
 So  
    your brace of unprizable estimations, the one is but frail and
    the other casual; a cunning thief, or a that-way-accomplish'd
    courtier, would hazard the winning both of first and last.

  POSTHUMUS.
 Let us leave here, gentlemen.

  POSTHUMUS.
 Sir, with all my heart.
 This worthy signior, I thank
    him, makes no stranger of me; we are familiar at first.

  IACHIMO.

  POSTHUMUS.

  IACHIMO.
 I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to your
    ring, which, in my opinion, o'ervalues it something.

  POSTHUMUS.
 Gentlemen, enough of this.
 It came in too suddenly; let
    it die as it was born, and I pray you be better acquainted.

  IACHIMO.
 Would I had put my estate and my neighbour's on th'
    approbation of what I have spoke!
  POSTHUMUS.
 What lady would you choose to assail?
  IACHIMO.
 Yours, whom in constancy you think stands so safe.
 I will
    lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring that, commend me to the
    court where your lady is, with no more advantage than the
    opportunity of a second conference, and I will bring from thence
    that honour of hers which you imagine so reserv'd.

  POSTHUMUS.
 I will wage against your gold, gold to it.
 My ring I
    hold dear as my finger; 'tis part of it.

  IACHIMO.
 You are a friend, and therein the wiser.
 If you buy
    ladies' flesh at a million a dram, you cannot preserve it from
    tainting.
 But I see you have some religion in you, that you fear.

  IACHIMO.
 I am the master of my speeches, and would undergo what's
    spoken, I swear.

  POSTHUMUS.
 Will you? I Shall but lend my diamond till your return.

    Let there be covenants drawn between's.
 My mistress exceeds in
    goodness the hugeness of your unworthy thinking.
 I will have it no lay.
 By the gods, it is one.
 If I bring you no sufficient
    testimony that I have enjoy'd the dearest bodily part of your
    mistress, my ten thousand ducats are yours; so is your diamond
    too.
 I embrace these conditions; let us have articles betwixt
    us.
 Your hand- a covenant! We will have these things set down
    by lawful counsel, and straight away for Britain, lest the
    bargain should catch cold and starve.
                Exeunt POSTHUMUS and IACHIMO
  FRENCHMAN.
 Pray let us follow 'em.

Britain.
 CYMBELINE'S palace

Enter QUEEN, LADIES, and CORNELIUS

  QUEEN.
 Whiles yet the dew's on ground, gather those flowers;
    Make haste; who has the note of them?
  LADY.
                                 Exeunt LADIES
    Now, Master Doctor, have you brought those drugs?
  CORNELIUS.

                                              [Presenting a box]
    But I beseech your Grace, without offence-
    My conscience bids me ask- wherefore you have
    Commanded of me these most poisonous compounds
    Which are the movers of a languishing death,
    But, though slow, deadly?
  QUEEN.
 I wonder, Doctor,
    Thou ask'st me such a question.
 Have I not been
    Thy pupil long? Hast thou not learn'd me how
    To make perfumes? distil? preserve? yea, so
    That our great king himself doth woo me oft  
    For my confections? Having thus far proceeded-
    Unless thou think'st me devilish- is't not meet
    That I did amplify my judgment in
    Other conclusions? I will try the forces
    Of these thy compounds on such creatures as
    We count not worth the hanging- but none human-
    To try the vigour of them, and apply
    Allayments to their act, and by them gather
    Their several virtues and effects.

  QUEEN.


                        Enter PISANIO

    [Aside] Here comes a flattering rascal; upon him
    Will I first work.
 He's for his master,
    An enemy to my son.
- How now, Pisanio!  
    Doctor, your service for this time is ended;
    Take your own way.
 [Aside] I do suspect you, madam;
    But you shall do no harm.

  QUEEN.

  CORNELIUS.
 She doth think she has
    Strange ling'ring poisons.
 Those she has
    Will stupefy and dull the sense awhile,
    Which first perchance she'll prove on cats and dogs,
    Then afterward up higher; but there is
    No danger in what show of death it makes,
    More than the locking up the spirits a time,
    To be more fresh, reviving.
 She is fool'd
    With a most false effect; and I the truer
    So to be false with her.

  CORNELIUS.
 I humbly take my leave.
 Weeps she still, say'st thou? Dost thou think in time
    She will not quench, and let instructions enter
    Where folly now possesses? Do thou work.
 Return he cannot, nor
    Continue where he is.
 To shift his being
    Is to exchange one misery with another,
    And every day that comes comes comes to
    A day's work in him.
 PISANIO takes it up]
    Thou tak'st up
    Thou know'st not what; but take it for thy labour.
 Tell thy mistress how
    The case stands with her; do't as from thyself.
 I'll move the King
    To any shape of thy preferment, such
    As thou'lt desire; and then myself, I chiefly,
    That set thee on to this desert, am bound
    To load thy merit richly.
                              Exit PISANIO
    A sly and constant knave,
    Not to be shak'd; the agent for his master,
    And the remembrancer of her to hold
    The hand-fast to her lord.
 I have given him that
    Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her
    Of leigers for her sweet; and which she after,
    Except she bend her humour, shall be assur'd
    To taste of too.
  

                   Re-enter PISANIO and LADIES

    So, so.
 Well done, well done.
 Fare thee well, Pisanio;
    Think on my words.
                   Exeunt QUEEN and LADIES
  PISANIO.
 And shall do.

    But when to my good lord I prove untrue
    I'll choke myself- there's all I'll do for you.
         Exit




SCENE VI.
 The palace

Enter IMOGEN alone

  IMOGEN.
 Blessed be those,
    How mean soe'er, that have their honest wills,
    Which seasons comfort.
 Who may this be? Fie!

                    Enter PISANIO and IACHIMO

  PISANIO.
 Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome
    Comes from my lord with letters.

  IACHIMO.
 Change you, madam?
    The worthy Leonatus is in safety,
    And greets your Highness dearly.
         [Presents a letter]  
  IMOGEN.
 Thanks, good sir.

    You're kindly welcome.
 Boldness be my friend!
    Arm me, audacity, from head to foot!
    Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight;
    Rather, directly fly.

  IMOGEN.
 Reflect upon him
    accordingly, as you value your trust.
'

    So far I read aloud;
    But even the very middle of my heart
    Is warm'd by th' rest and takes it thankfully.

    You are as welcome, worthy sir, as I
    Have words to bid you; and shall find it so
    In all that I can do.

  IACHIMO.
  
    What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes
    To see this vaulted arch and the rich crop
    Of sea and land, which can distinguish 'twixt
    The fiery orbs above and the twinn'd stones
    Upon the number'd beach, and can we not
    Partition make with spectacles so precious
    'Twixt fair and foul?
  IMOGEN.
 What makes your admiration?
  IACHIMO.
 It cannot be i' th' eye, for apes and monkeys,
    'Twixt two such shes, would chatter this way and
    Contemn with mows the other; nor i' th' judgment,
    For idiots in this case of favour would
    Be wisely definite; nor i' th' appetite;
    Sluttery, to such neat excellence oppos'd,
    Should make desire vomit emptiness,
    Not so allur'd to feed.

  IMOGEN.
 The cloyed will-
    That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that tub
    Both fill'd and running- ravening first the lamb,  
    Longs after for the garbage.

  IMOGEN.
- Beseech you, sir,
    Desire my man's abode where I did leave him.

    He's strange and peevish.

  PISANIO.
 Continues well my lord? His health beseech you?
  IACHIMO.
 Well, madam.
 Is he dispos'd to mirth? I hope he is.

  IACHIMO.
 He furnaces
    The thick sighs from him; whiles the jolly Briton-
    Your lord, I mean- laughs from's free lungs, cries 'O,
    Can my sides hold, to think that man- who knows
    By history, report, or his own proof,
    What woman is, yea, what she cannot choose
    But must be- will's free hours languish for
    Assured bondage?'
  IMOGEN.
 Will my lord say so?
  IACHIMO.
 Ay, madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter.
 But heavens know
    Some men are much to blame.

  IACHIMO.
 Not he; but yet heaven's bounty towards him might
    Be us'd more thankfully.
 In himself, 'tis much;
    In you, which I account his, beyond all talents.
 Two creatures heartily.

  IMOGEN.
 Lamentable! What,
    To hide me from the radiant sun and solace
    I' th' dungeon by a snuff?
  IMOGEN.
 Why do you pity me?
  IACHIMO.

  IMOGEN.
 You do seem to know
    Something of me, or what concerns me; pray you-
    Since doubting things go ill often hurts more
    Than to be sure they do; for certainties
    Either are past remedies, or, timely knowing,
    The remedy then born- discover to me  
    What both you spur and stop.

  IACHIMO.
 My lord, I fear,
    Has forgot Britain.

  IACHIMO.
 And himself.
 Reveng'd?
    How should I be reveng'd? If this be true-
    As I have such a heart that both mine ears
    Must not in haste abuse- if it be true,
    How should I be reveng'd?
  IACHIMO.

    I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure,
    More noble than that runagate to your bed,
    And will continue fast to your affection,
    Still close as sure.
 Away! I do condemn mine ears that have
    So long attended thee.
- What ho, Pisanio!
  IACHIMO.
 O happy Leonatus! I may say
    The credit that thy lady hath of thee
    Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness
    Her assur'd credit.
 Blessed live you long,
    A lady to the worthiest sir that ever
    Country call'd his! and you his mistress, only
    For the most worthiest fit! Give me your pardon.

    I have spoke this to know if your affiance
    Were deeply rooted, and shall make your lord
    That which he is new o'er; and he is one
    The truest manner'd, such a holy witch
    That he enchants societies into him,
    Half all men's hearts are his.
 You make amends.

  IACHIMO.
 He sits 'mongst men like a descended god:
    He hath a kind of honour sets him of  
    More than a mortal seeming.
 Be not angry,
    Most mighty Princess, that I have adventur'd
    To try your taking of a false report, which hath
    Honour'd with confirmation your great judgment
    In the election of a sir so rare,
    Which you know cannot err.
 The love I bear him
    Made me to fan you thus; but the gods made you,
    Unlike all others, chaffless.
 Pray your pardon.

  IMOGEN.
 All's well, sir; take my pow'r i' th' court for yours.
 Some dozen Romans of us, and your lord-
    The best feather of our wing- have mingled sums
    To buy a present for the Emperor;
    Which I, the factor for the rest, have done
    In France.
 May it please you
    To take them in protection?
  IMOGEN.
 Since
    My lord hath interest in them, I will keep them
    In my bedchamber.

  IACHIMO.
 They are in a trunk,
    Attended by my men.
 O, no, no.

  IACHIMO.
 From Gallia
    I cross'd the seas on purpose and on promise
    To see your Grace.

  IMOGEN.
 I thank you for your pains.

    But not away to-morrow!
  IACHIMO.
 O, I must, madam.
  
    Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
    To greet your lord with writing, do't to-night.
 I will write.
           Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.
 Before CYMBELINE'S palace

Enter CLOTEN and the two LORDS

  CLOTEN.

  SECOND LORD.
 [Aside] If his wit had been like him that broke it, it
    would have run all out.
 When a gentleman is dispos'd to swear, it is not for any
    standers-by to curtail his oaths.
 Ha?
  SECOND LORD.
 No, my lord; [Aside] nor crop the ears of them.
 Whoreson dog! I give him satisfaction? Would he had been
    one of my rank!
  SECOND LORD.
 [Aside] To have smell'd like a fool.

  CLOTEN.
 I am not vex'd more at anything in th' earth.
 A pox on't! I
    had rather not be so noble as I am; they dare not fight with me,  
    because of the Queen my mother.
 Every jackslave hath his bellyful
    of fighting, and I must go up and down like a cock that nobody
    can match.

  SECOND LORD.
 Sayest thou?
  SECOND LORD.
 It is not fit your lordship should undertake every
    companion that you give offence to.

  CLOTEN.
 No, I know that; but it is fit I should commit offence to
    my inferiors.
 Ay, it is fit for your lordship only.

  CLOTEN.

  FIRST LORD.
 Did you hear of a stranger that's come to court
    to-night?
  CLOTEN.

  FIRST LORD.

  CLOTEN.
 Leonatus? A banish'd rascal; and he's another, whatsoever  
    he be.
 One of your lordship's pages.
 You cannot derogate, my lord.

  CLOTEN.

  CLOTEN.
 Come, go.
 I'll attend your lordship.
 Alas, poor princess,
    Thou divine Imogen, what thou endur'st,
    Betwixt a father by thy step-dame govern'd,
    A mother hourly coining plots, a wooer  
    More hateful than the foul expulsion is
    Of thy dear husband, than that horrid act
    Of the divorce he'd make! The heavens hold firm
    The walls of thy dear honour, keep unshak'd
    That temple, thy fair mind, that thou mayst stand
    T' enjoy thy banish'd lord and this great land!         Exit




SCENE II.

Britain.
 IMOGEN'S bedchamber in CYMBELINE'S palace; a trunk in one corner

Enter IMOGEN in her bed, and a LADY attending

  IMOGEN.
 Please you, madam.
 What hour is it?
  LADY.
 Almost midnight, madam.
 I have read three hours then.
 To bed.

    Take not away the taper, leave it burning;
    And if thou canst awake by four o' th' clock,
    I prithee call me.
 Sleep hath seiz'd me wholly.
    Exit LADY
    To your protection I commend me, gods.

    From fairies and the tempters of the night
    Guard me, beseech ye!
                          [Sleeps.
 Our Tarquin thus
    Did softly press the rushes ere he waken'd  
    The chastity he wounded.
 But my design
    To note the chamber.

    Ah, but some natural notes about her body
    Above ten thousand meaner movables
    Would testify, t' enrich mine inventory.

    O sleep, thou ape of death, lie dull upon her!
    And be her sense but as a monument,
    Thus in a chapel lying! Come off, come off;  
                                       [Taking off her bracelet]
    As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard!
    'Tis mine; and this will witness outwardly,
    As strongly as the conscience does within,
    To th' madding of her lord.
 On her left breast
    A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops
    I' th' bottom of a cowslip.
 Here's a voucher
    Stronger than ever law could make; this secret
    Will force him think I have pick'd the lock and ta'en
    The treasure of her honour.
 I have enough.

    Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning
    May bare the raven's eye! I lodge in fear;
    Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.

CYMBELINE'S palace.
 An ante-chamber adjoining IMOGEN'S apartments

Enter CLOTEN and LORDS

  FIRST LORD.
 Your lordship is the most patient man in loss, the most
    coldest that ever turn'd up ace.
 It would make any man cold to lose.

  FIRST LORD.
 Day, my lord.
 I would this music would come.


                       Enter musicians

    Come on, tune.
 If you can penetrate her with your fingering, so.

    We'll try with tongue too.
 If none will do, let her remain; but  
    I'll never give o'er.


                 SONG

      Hark, hark! the lark at heaven's gate sings,
        And Phoebus 'gins arise,
      His steeds to water at those springs
        On chalic'd flow'rs that lies;
      And winking Mary-buds begin
        To ope their golden eyes.
                      Exeunt musicians  

                    Enter CYMBELINE and QUEEN

  SECOND LORD.
 Here comes the King.

  CLOTEN.
 I am glad I was up so late, for that's the reason I was up
    so early.
 He cannot choose but take this service I have done
    fatherly.
- Good morrow to your Majesty and to my gracious mother.
 Attend you here the door of our stern daughter?
    Will she not forth?
  CLOTEN.
 I have assail'd her with musics, but she vouchsafes no
    notice.

  CYMBELINE.
 The exile of her minion is too new;
    She hath not yet forgot him; some more time
    Must wear the print of his remembrance out,
    And then she's yours.

  QUEEN.
 You are most bound to th' King,
    Who lets go by no vantages that may
    Prefer you to his daughter.
 Frame yourself
    To orderly soliciting, and be friended
    With aptness of the season; make denials  
    Increase your services; so seem as if
    You were inspir'd to do those duties which
    You tender to her; that you in all obey her,
    Save when command to your dismission tends,
    And therein you are senseless.

  CLOTEN.
 Senseless? Not so.


                    Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER.
 So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome;
    The one is Caius Lucius.

  CYMBELINE.
 Our dear son,
    When you have given good morning to your mistress,
    Attend the Queen and us; we shall have need
    T' employ you towards this Roman.
 Come, our queen.
  
                                           Exeunt all but CLOTEN
  CLOTEN.
 If she be up, I'll speak with her; if not,
    Let her lie still and dream.
 What
    Can it not do and undo? I will make
    One of her women lawyer to me, for
    I yet not understand the case myself.
 Who's there that knocks?
  CLOTEN.
 A gentleman.

  LADY.
 No more?  
  CLOTEN.
 Yes, and a gentlewoman's son.

  LADY.
 That's more
    Than some whose tailors are as dear as yours
    Can justly boast of.
 What's your lordship's pleasure?
  CLOTEN.
 Your lady's person; is she ready?
  LADY.
 Ay,
    To keep her chamber.

  CLOTEN.
 There is gold for you; sell me your good report.

  LADY.
 Good morrow, fairest sister.
 Your sweet hand.

                                                       Exit LADY
  IMOGEN.
 Good morrow, sir.
 Still I swear I love you.

    If you swear still, your recompense is still
    That I regard it not.

  CLOTEN.
 This is no answer.
 But that you shall not say I yield, being silent,
    I would not speak.
 I pray you spare me.
 Faith,
    I shall unfold equal discourtesy
    To your best kindness; one of your great knowing
    Should learn, being taught, forbearance.

  CLOTEN.
 To leave you in your madness 'twere my sin;
    I will not.
 Fools are not mad folks.
 Do you call me fool?
  IMOGEN.
 As I am mad, I do;
    If you'll be patient, I'll no more be mad;
    That cures us both.
 I am much sorry, sir,
    You put me to forget a lady's manners
    By being so verbal; and learn now, for all,
    That I, which know my heart, do here pronounce,
    By th' very truth of it, I care not for you,  
    And am so near the lack of charity
    To accuse myself I hate you; which I had rather
    You felt than make't my boast.
 You sin against
    Obedience, which you owe your father.
 For
    The contract you pretend with that base wretch,
    One bred of alms and foster'd with cold dishes,
    With scraps o' th' court- it is no contract, none.
 Profane fellow!
    Wert thou the son of Jupiter, and no more
    But what thou art besides, thou wert too base  
    To be his groom.
 Thou wert dignified enough,
    Even to the point of envy, if 'twere made
    Comparative for your virtues to be styl'd
    The under-hangman of his kingdom, and hated
    For being preferr'd so well.

  CLOTEN.
 He never can meet more mischance than come
    To be but nam'd of thee.
 His mean'st garment
    That ever hath but clipp'd his body is dearer
    In my respect than all the hairs above thee,
    Were they all made such men.
 How now, Pisanio!

                    Enter PISANIO

  CLOTEN.
 'His garments'! Now the devil-
  IMOGEN.
 To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently.
 I am sprited with a fool;
    Frighted, and ang'red worse.

    I hope it be not gone to tell my lord
    That I kiss aught but he.

  PISANIO.
 'Twill not be lost.
 Go and search.
 You have abus'd me.
 Ay, I said so, sir.

  CLOTEN.

    'His mean'st garment'! Well.
 PHILARIO'S house

Enter POSTHUMUS and PHILARIO

  POSTHUMUS.
 Fear it not, sir; I would I were so sure
    To win the King as I am bold her honour
    Will remain hers.

  PHILARIO.
 What means do you make to him?
  POSTHUMUS.
 Not any; but abide the change of time,
    Quake in the present winter's state, and wish
    That warmer days would come.
 In these fear'd hopes
    I barely gratify your love; they failing,
    I must die much your debtor.
 By this your king
    Hath heard of great Augustus.

  POSTHUMUS.
 I do believe  
    Statist though I am none, nor like to be,
    That this will prove a war; and you shall hear
    The legions now in Gallia sooner landed
    In our not-fearing Britain than have tidings
    Of any penny tribute paid.
 Their discipline,
    Now mingled with their courages, will make known
    To their approvers they are people such
    That mend upon the world.


                      Enter IACHIMO

  PHILARIO.
 The swiftest harts have posted you by land,
    And winds of all the comers kiss'd your sails,
    To make your vessel nimble.

  POSTHUMUS.
 I hope the briefness of your answer made  
    The speediness of your return.

  IACHIMO.
 Your lady
    Is one of the fairest that I have look'd upon.
 And therewithal the best; or let her beauty
    Look through a casement to allure false hearts,
    And be false with them.

  IACHIMO.
 Here are letters for you.

  POSTHUMUS.
 Their tenour good, I trust.

  IACHIMO.
 'Tis very like.

  POSTHUMUS.
 All is well yet.
 If I have lost it,
    I should have lost the worth of it in gold.

    I'll make a journey twice as far t' enjoy
    A second night of such sweet shortness which  
    Was mine in Britain; for the ring is won.

  POSTHUMUS.

  IACHIMO.
 Not a whit,
    Your lady being so easy.

  IACHIMO.
 Good sir, we must,
    If you keep covenant.

  POSTHUMUS.

  IACHIMO.
 Sir, my circumstances,
    Being so near the truth as I will make them,
    Must first induce you to believe- whose strength
    I will confirm with oath; which I doubt not
    You'll give me leave to spare when you shall find
    You need it not.
 Proceed.

  IACHIMO.
 First, her bedchamber,
    Where I confess I slept not, but profess
    Had that was well worth watching-it was hang'd
    With tapestry of silk and silver; the story,
    Proud Cleopatra when she met her Roman
    And Cydnus swell'd above the banks, or for
    The press of boats or pride.
 A piece of work
    So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive
    In workmanship and value; which I wonder'd
    Could be so rarely and exactly wrought,
    Since the true life on't was-
  POSTHUMUS.
 This is true;  
    And this you might have heard of here, by me
    Or by some other.

  POSTHUMUS.
 So they must,
    Or do your honour injury.
 Never saw I figures
    So likely to report themselves.
 The cutter
    Was as another nature, dumb; outwent her,
    Motion and breath left out.

  IACHIMO.
  
  POSTHUMUS.

  IACHIMO.

  POSTHUMUS.

    She stripp'd it from her arm; I see her yet;
    Her pretty action did outsell her gift,
    And yet enrich'd it too.
 May be she pluck'd it of
    To send it me.

  IACHIMO.
 Here, take this too;
                                                [Gives the ring]
    It is a basilisk unto mine eye,
    Kills me to look on't.
 Let there be no honour
    Where there is beauty; truth where semblance; love
    Where there's another man.

    It may be probable she lost it, or
    Who knows if one her women, being corrupted
    Hath stol'n it from her?
  POSTHUMUS.
 Very true;
    And so I hope he came by't.
 By Jupiter, I had it from her arm!
  POSTHUMUS.
 Hark you, he swears; by Jupiter he swears.
 I am sure
    She would not lose it.

    There, take thy hire; and all the fiends of hell
    Divide themselves between you!
  PHILARIO.
 Sir, be patient;
    This is not strong enough to be believ'd
    Of one persuaded well of.

  POSTHUMUS.
 If you seek
    For further satisfying, under her breast-
    Worthy the pressing- lies a mole, right proud
    Of that most delicate lodging.
 By my life,
    I kiss'd it; and it gave me present hunger
    To feed again, though full.

    Once, and a million!
  IACHIMO.
 I'll be sworn-
  POSTHUMUS.
 No swearing.
 I'll deny nothing.

  IACHIMO.
                             Exeunt




SCENE V.

Rome.
 Another room in PHILARIO'S house

Enter POSTHUMUS

  POSTHUMUS.
 Is there no way for men to be, but women
    Must be half-workers? We are all bastards,
    And that most venerable man which I
    Did call my father was I know not where
    When I was stamp'd.
 Some coiner with his tools
    Made me a counterfeit; yet my mother seem'd
    The Dian of that time.
 O, all the devils!
    This yellow Iachimo in an hour- was't not?
    Or less!- at first? Perchance he spoke not, but,
    Like a full-acorn'd boar, a German one,
    Cried 'O!' and mounted; found no opposition  
    But what he look'd for should oppose and she
    Should from encounter guard.
 Could I find out
    The woman's part in me! For there's no motion
    That tends to vice in man but I affirm
    It is the woman's part.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT III.

  QUEEN.
 Britain is
    A world by itself, and we will nothing pay
    For wearing our own noses.
  
  QUEEN.
 That opportunity,
    Which then they had to take from 's, to resume
    We have again.
 Remember, sir, my liege,
    The kings your ancestors, together with
    The natural bravery of your isle, which stands
    As Neptune's park, ribb'd and pal'd in
    With rocks unscalable and roaring waters,
    With sands that will not bear your enemies' boats
    But suck them up to th' top-mast.
 A kind of conquest
    Caesar made here; but made not here his brag
    Of 'came, and saw, and overcame.
' With shame-
    The first that ever touch'd him- he was carried
    From off our coast, twice beaten; and his shipping-
    Poor ignorant baubles!- on our terrible seas,
    Like egg-shells mov'd upon their surges, crack'd
    As easily 'gainst our rocks; for joy whereof
    The fam'd Cassibelan, who was once at point-
    O, giglot fortune!- to master Caesar's sword,
    Made Lud's Town with rejoicing fires bright
    And Britons strut with courage.
  
  CLOTEN.
 Come, there's no more tribute to be paid.
 Our kingdom is
    stronger than it was at that time; and, as I said, there is no
    moe such Caesars.
 Other of them may have crook'd noses; but to
    owe such straight arms, none.

  CYMBELINE.
 Son, let your mother end.
 We have yet many among us can gripe as hard as Cassibelan.

    I do not say I am one; but I have a hand.
 Why tribute? Why should
    we pay tribute? If Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket,
    or put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute for light;
    else, sir, no more tribute, pray you now.

  CYMBELINE.
 You must know,
    Till the injurious Romans did extort
    This tribute from us, we were free.
 Caesar's ambition-
    Which swell'd so much that it did almost stretch
    The sides o' th' world- against all colour here
    Did put the yoke upon's; which to shake of
    Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
    Ourselves to be.
 Mulmutius made our laws,
    Who was the first of Britain which did put
    His brows within a golden crown, and call'd
    Himself a king.

  LUCIUS.
 I am sorry, Cymbeline,
    That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar-
    Caesar, that hath moe kings his servants than
    Thyself domestic officers- thine enemy.

    Receive it from me, then: war and confusion
    In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee; look
    For fury not to be resisted.
 Thou art welcome, Caius.

    Thy Caesar knighted me; my youth I spent
    Much under him; of him I gather'd honour,
    Which he to seek of me again, perforce,  
    Behoves me keep at utterance.
 I am perfect
    That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for
    Their liberties are now in arms, a precedent
    Which not to read would show the Britons cold;
    So Caesar shall not find them.
 If you seek us afterwards in other terms, you
    shall find us in our salt-water girdle.
 If you beat us out of it,
    it is yours; if you fall in the adventure, our crows shall fare
    the better for you; and there's an end.
 So, sir.

Britain.
 Another room in CYMBELINE'S palace

Enter PISANIO reading of a letter

  PISANIO.
 How? that I should murder her?
    Upon the love, and truth, and vows, which I
    Have made to thy command? I, her? Her blood?
    If it be so to do good service, never
    Let me be counted serviceable.
' O damn'd paper,
    Black as the ink that's on thee! Senseless bauble,
    Art thou a fedary for this act, and look'st
    So virgin-like without? Lo, here she comes.


                      Enter IMOGEN

    I am ignorant in what I am commanded.
 How now, Pisanio!
  PISANIO.

  IMOGEN.
 Who? thy lord? That is my lord- Leonatus?
    O, learn'd indeed were that astronomer
    That knew the stars as I his characters-
    He'd lay the future open.
 You good gods,
    Let what is here contain'd relish of love,
    Of my lord's health, of his content; yet not
    That we two are asunder- let that grieve him!
    Some griefs are med'cinable; that is one of them,
    For it doth physic love- of his content,  
    All but in that.
 Good wax, thy leave.
 Blest be
    You bees that make these locks of counsel! Lovers
    And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike;
    Though forfeiters you cast in prison, yet
    You clasp young Cupid's tables.
 Take notice that I
    am in Cambria, at Milford Haven.
 What your own love will out of
    this advise you, follow.
 So he wishes you all happiness that
    remains loyal to his vow, and your increasing in love
                                            LEONATUS POSTHUMUS.
'

    O for a horse with wings! Hear'st thou, Pisanio?
    He is at Milford Haven.
 Read, and tell me
    How far 'tis thither.
 One score 'twixt sun and sun,
    Madam, 's enough for you, and too much too.

  IMOGEN.
 But this is fool'ry.
 Madam, you're best consider.

  IMOGEN.
 I see before me, man.
 Nor here, nor here,
    Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them
    That I cannot look through.
                   Exeunt




SCENE III.

Wales.
 A mountainous country with a cave

Enter from the cave BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS

  BELARIUS.
 The gates of monarchs
    Are arch'd so high that giants may jet through
    And keep their impious turbans on without
    Good morrow to the sun.
 Hail, thou fair heaven!
    We house i' th' rock, yet use thee not so hardly
    As prouder livers do.
 Hail, heaven!
  ARVIRAGUS.
 Up to yond hill,
    Your legs are young; I'll tread these flats.
 Consider,
    When you above perceive me like a crow,
    That it is place which lessens and sets off;
    And you may then revolve what tales I have told you
    Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war.
 O, this life
    Is nobler than attending for a check,
    Richer than doing nothing for a bribe,
    Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk:
    Such gain the cap of him that makes him fine,
    Yet keeps his book uncross'd.
 Haply this life is best,
    If quiet life be best; sweeter to you
    That have a sharper known; well corresponding
    With your stiff age.
  
  ARVIRAGUS.
 What should we speak of
    When we are old as you? When we shall hear
    The rain and wind beat dark December, how,
    In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse.

    The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing;
    We are beastly: subtle as the fox for prey,
    Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat.

  BELARIUS.
 How you speak!
    Did you but know the city's usuries,
    And felt them knowingly- the art o' th' court,
    As hard to leave as keep, whose top to climb
    Is certain falling, or so slipp'ry that
    The fear's as bad as falling; the toil o' th' war,
    A pain that only seems to seek out danger
    I' th'name of fame and honour, which dies i' th'search,
    And hath as oft a sland'rous epitaph
    As record of fair act; nay, many times,  
    Doth ill deserve by doing well; what's worse-
    Must curtsy at the censure.
 O, boys, this story
    The world may read in me; my body's mark'd
    With Roman swords, and my report was once
    first with the best of note.
 Cymbeline lov'd me;
    And when a soldier was the theme, my name
    Was not far off.

  GUIDERIUS.

                                  Exeunt GUIDERIUS and ARVIRAGUS
    How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
    These boys know little they are sons to th' King,
    Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
 This Polydore,
    The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
    The King his father call'd Guiderius- Jove!
    When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell
    The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
    Into my story; say 'Thus mine enemy fell,  
    And thus I set my foot on's neck'; even then
    The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,
    Strains his young nerves, and puts himself in posture
    That acts my words.
 The younger brother, Cadwal,
    Once Arviragus, in as like a figure
    Strikes life into my speech, and shows much more
    His own conceiving.
 Euriphile,
    Thou wast their nurse; they took thee for their mother,
    And every day do honour to her grave.
           Exit




SCENE IV.
 Thou told'st me, when we came from horse, the place
    Was near at hand.
 Ne'er long'd my mother so
    To see me first as I have now.
 Pisanio! Man!
    Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind
    That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh
    From th' inward of thee? One but painted thus
    Would be interpreted a thing perplex'd
    Beyond self-explication.
 Put thyself
    Into a haviour of less fear, ere wildness
    Vanquish my staider senses.
 What's the matter?
    Why tender'st thou that paper to me with
    A look untender! If't be summer news,
    Smile to't before; if winterly, thou need'st
    But keep that count'nance still.
 Speak, man; thy tongue
    May take off some extremity, which to read  
    Would be even mortal to me.
 Please you read,
    And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing
    The most disdain'd of fortune.
 [Reads] 'Thy mistress, Pisanio, hath play'd the strumpet in
    my bed, the testimonies whereof lie bleeding in me.
'
  PISANIO.
 What shall I need to draw my sword? The paper
    Hath cut her throat already.
 No, 'tis slander,
    Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue
    Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath
    Rides on the posting winds and doth belie
    All corners of the world.
 Kings, queens, and states,
    Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave,  
    This viperous slander enters.
 False to his bed? What is it to be false?
    To lie in watch there, and to think on him?
    To weep twixt clock and clock? If sleep charge nature,
    To break it with a fearful dream of him,
    And cry myself awake? That's false to's bed,
    Is it?
  PISANIO.
 Alas, good lady!
  IMOGEN.
 I false! Thy conscience witness! Iachimo,
    Thou didst accuse him of incontinency;
    Thou then look'dst like a villain; now, methinks,
    Thy favour's good enough.

    Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion,
    And for I am richer than to hang by th' walls
    I must be ripp'd.

  IMOGEN.
 True honest men being heard, like false Aeneas,
    Were, in his time, thought false; and Sinon's weeping
    Did scandal many a holy tear, took pity
    From most true wretchedness.
 Come, fellow, be thou honest;
    Do thou thy master's bidding; when thou seest him,
    A little witness my obedience.

    Fear not; 'tis empty of all things but grief;
    Thy master is not there, who was indeed
    The riches of it.
 Do his bidding; strike.

  IMOGEN.
 Against self-slaughter
    There is a prohibition so divine
    That cravens my weak hand.
 Come, here's my heart-
    Something's afore't.
 Soft, soft! we'll no defence!-
    Obedient as the scabbard.
 Prithee dispatch.

    The lamp entreats the butcher.

  PISANIO.
 O gracious lady,
    Since I receiv'd command to do this busines
    I have not slept one wink.

  PISANIO.

  IMOGEN.
 Why hast thou gone so far
    To be unbent when thou hast ta'en thy stand,
    Th' elected deer before thee?
  PISANIO.
 But to win time
    To lose so bad employment, in the which  
    I have consider'd of a course.

    I have heard I am a strumpet, and mine ear,
    Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
    Nor tent to bottom that.
 But speak.

  PISANIO.
 Then, madam,
    I thought you would not back again.
 Most like-
    Bringing me here to kill me.
 Not so, neither;
    But if I were as wise as honest, then
    My purpose would prove well.
 Some villain,
    Ay, and singular in his art, hath done you both
    This cursed injury.

  IMOGEN.
 Some Roman courtezan!
  PISANIO.
 No, on my life!
    I'll give but notice you are dead, and send him
    Some bloody sign of it, for 'tis commanded  
    I should do so.

  IMOGEN.
 Why, good fellow,
    What shall I do the while? where bide? how live?
    Or in my life what comfort, when I am
    Dead to my husband?
  PISANIO.
 If you'll back to th' court-
  IMOGEN.
 No court, no father, nor no more ado
    With that harsh, noble, simple nothing-
    That Cloten, whose love-suit hath been to me
    As fearful as a siege.

  IMOGEN.
 Where then?
    Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night,
    Are they not but in Britain? I' th' world's volume
    Our Britain seems as of it, but not in't;
    In a great pool a swan's nest.

  PISANIO.
 I am most glad  
    You think of other place.
 Now, if you could wear a mind
    Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise
    That which t' appear itself must not yet be
    But by self-danger, you should tread a course
    Pretty and full of view; yea, happily, near
    The residence of Posthumus; so nigh, at least,
    That though his actions were not visible, yet
    Report should render him hourly to your ear
    As truly as he moves.

  IMOGEN.

  PISANIO.
 Well then, here's the point:
    You must forget to be a woman; change
    Command into obedience; fear and niceness-
    The handmaids of all women, or, more truly,
    Woman it pretty self- into a waggish courage;
    Ready in gibes, quick-answer'd, saucy, and  
    As quarrelous as the weasel.
 Nay, you must
    Forget that rarest treasure of your cheek,
    Exposing it- but, O, the harder heart!
    Alack, no remedy!- to the greedy touch
    Of common-kissing Titan, and forget
    Your laboursome and dainty trims wherein
    You made great Juno angry.

  IMOGEN.
 Nay, be brief;
    I see into thy end, and am almost
    A man already.
 Would you, in their serving,
    And with what imitation you can borrow
    From youth of such a season, fore noble Lucius
    Present yourself, desire his service, tell him
    Wherein you're happy- which will make him know
    If that his head have ear in music; doubtless
    With joy he will embrace you; for he's honourable,  
    And, doubling that, most holy.
 Your means abroad-
    You have me, rich; and I will never fail
    Beginning nor supplyment.

  IMOGEN.
 Thou art all the comfort
    The gods will diet me with.
 Prithee away!
    There's more to be consider'd; but we'll even
    All that good time will give us.
 My noble mistress,
    Here is a box; I had it from the Queen.

    What's in't is precious.
 If you are sick at sea
    Or stomach-qualm'd at land, a dram of this
    Will drive away distemper.
 To some shade,
    And fit you to your manhood.
 I thank thee.
                   Exeunt severally




SCENE V.
 Thus far; and so farewell.

  LUCIUS.
 Thanks, royal sir.

    My emperor hath wrote; I must from hence,
    And am right sorry that I must report ye
    My master's enemy.
 Our subjects, sir,
    Will not endure his yoke; and for ourself
    To show less sovereignty than they, must needs
    Appear unkinglike.
 I desire of you
    A conduct overland to Milford Haven.

    Madam, all joy befall your Grace, and you!
  CYMBELINE.
 Receive it friendly; but from this time forth  
    I wear it as your enemy.

  LUCIUS.
 Sir, the event
    Is yet to name the winner.
 Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords,
    Till he have cross'd the Severn.
 Happiness!
                                         Exeunt LUCIUS and LORDS
  QUEEN.
 He goes hence frowning; but it honours us
    That we have given him cause.

  CLOTEN.

    The pow'rs that he already hath in Gallia
    Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
    His war for Britain.

  QUEEN.
 'Tis not sleepy business,
    But must be look'd to speedily and strongly.

  CYMBELINE.
 Our expectation that it would be thus
    Hath made us forward.
 She looks us like
    A thing more made of malice than of duty;
    We have noted it.
 Call her before us, for
    We have been too slight in sufferance.
      Exit a MESSENGER
  QUEEN.
 Royal sir,
    Since the exile of Posthumus, most retir'd
    Hath her life been; the cure whereof, my lord,
    'Tis time must do.
 Where is she, sir? How
    Can her contempt be answer'd?
  MESSENGER.

  QUEEN.
 My lord, when last I went to visit her,
    She pray'd me to excuse her keeping close;
    Whereto constrain'd by her infirmity
    She should that duty leave unpaid to you
    Which daily she was bound to proffer.
 This
    She wish'd me to make known; but our great court
    Made me to blame in memory.

  CYMBELINE.
 Son, I say, follow the King.

  CLOTEN.
                             Exit CLOTEN
    Pisanio, thou that stand'st so for Posthumus!
    He hath a drug of mine.
 But for her,
    Where is she gone? Haply despair hath seiz'd her;  
    Or, wing'd with fervour of her love, she's flown
    To her desir'd Posthumus.
 Gone she is
    To death or to dishonour, and my end
    Can make good use of either.
 'Tis certain she is fled.
 He rages; none
    Dare come about him.
 May
    This night forestall him of the coming day!             Exit
  CLOTEN.
 From every one
    The best she hath, and she, of all compounded,
    Outsells them all.
 For when fools
    Shall-

                    Enter PISANIO

    Who is here? What, are you packing, sirrah?
    Come hither.
 Is she with Posthumus?
    From whose so many weights of baseness cannot
    A dram of worth be drawn.

  PISANIO.
 Alas, my lord,  
    How can she be with him? When was she miss'd?
    He is in Rome.

  CLOTEN.

    No farther halting! Satisfy me home
    What is become of her.
 All-worthy villain!
    Discover where thy mistress is at once,
    At the next word.

  PISANIO.
 Then, sir,
    This paper is the history of my knowledge
    Touching her flight.
                   [Presenting a letter]
  CLOTEN.
 Let's see't.
 I will pursue her
    Even to Augustus' throne.

  PISANIO.
 [Aside] Or this or perish.

    She's far enough; and what he learns by this
    May prove his travel, not her danger.
 Humh!  
  PISANIO.
 [Aside] I'll write to my lord she's dead.
 O Imogen,
    Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!
  CLOTEN.
 Sirrah, is this letter true?
  PISANIO.
 Sir, as I think.
 It is Posthumus' hand; I know't.
 Sirrah, if thou wouldst
    not be a villain, but do me true service, undergo those
    employments wherein I should have cause to use thee with a
    serious industry- that is, what villainy soe'er I bid thee do, to
    perform it directly and truly- I would think thee an honest man;
    thou shouldst neither want my means for thy relief nor my voice
    for thy preferment.
 Well, my good lord.

  CLOTEN.
 Wilt thou serve me? For since patiently and constantly thou
    hast stuck to the bare fortune of that beggar Posthumus, thou
    canst not, in the course of gratitude, but be a diligent follower
    of mine.
 Wilt thou serve me?
  PISANIO.

  CLOTEN.
 I have, my lord, at my lodging, the same suit he wore when  
    he took leave of my lady and mistress.

  CLOTEN.
 The first service thou dost me, fetch that suit hither.
 Let
    it be thy first service; go.
 I shall, my lord.
 Even there, thou villain Posthumus, will I
    kill thee.

    With that suit upon my back will I ravish her; first kill him,
    and in her eyes.
 There shall she see my valour, which will then
    be a torment to her contempt.
 He on the ground, my speech of
    insultment ended on his dead body, and when my lust hath dined-
    which, as I say, to vex her I will execute in the clothes that
    she so prais'd- to the court I'll knock her back, foot her home
    again.


                Re-enter PISANIO, with the clothes  

    Be those the garments?
  PISANIO.
 Ay, my noble lord.

  CLOTEN.
 How long is't since she went to Milford Haven?
  PISANIO.
 She can scarce be there yet.

  CLOTEN.
 Bring this apparel to my chamber; that is the second thing
    that I have commanded thee.
 The third is that thou wilt be a
    voluntary mute to my design.
 Be but duteous and true, preferment
    shall tender itself to thee.
            Exit
  PISANIO.
 To Milford go,
    And find not her whom thou pursuest.
 Flow, flow,
    You heavenly blessings, on her! This fool's speed
    Be cross'd with slowness! Labour be his meed!           Exit




SCENE VI.

    I have tir'd myself, and for two nights together
    Have made the ground my bed.
 I should be sick
    But that my resolution helps me.
 Milford,
    When from the mountain-top Pisanio show'd thee,
    Thou wast within a ken.
 Will poor folks lie,
    That have afflictions on them, knowing 'tis
    A punishment or trial? Yes; no wonder,
    When rich ones scarce tell true.
 My dear lord!
    Thou art one o' th' false ones.
 But what is this?  
    Here is a path to't; 'tis some savage hold.

    Plenty and peace breeds cowards; hardness ever
    Of hardiness is mother.

    Best draw my sword; and if mine enemy
    But fear the sword, like me, he'll scarcely look on't.
 You, Polydore, have prov'd best woodman and
    Are master of the feast.
 Cadwal and I
    Will play the cook and servant; 'tis our match.

    The sweat of industry would dry and die
    But for the end it works to.
 I am thoroughly weary.
 I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.

  GUIDERIUS.
 There is cold meat i' th' cave; we'll browse on that
    Whilst what we have kill'd be cook'd.

    But that it eats our victuals, I should think
    Here were a fairy.
 What's the matter, sir?
  BELARIUS.
 By Jupiter, an angel! or, if not,
    An earthly paragon! Behold divineness
    No elder than a boy!

                       Re-enter IMOGEN

  IMOGEN.

    Before I enter'd here I call'd, and thought
    To have begg'd or bought what I have took.
 Good troth,
    I have stol'n nought; nor would not though I had found  
    Gold strew'd i' th' floor.
 Money, youth?
  ARVIRAGUS.
 All gold and silver rather turn to dirt,
    As 'tis no better reckon'd but of those
    Who worship dirty gods.

  BELARIUS.
 To Milford Haven.

  BELARIUS.
 Fidele, sir.
 Well encounter'd!
    'Tis almost night; you shall have better cheer
    Ere you depart, and thanks to stay and eat it.

    Boys, bid him welcome.
 Were you a woman, youth,
    I should woo hard but be your groom.
 In honesty
    I bid for you as I'd buy.

  ARVIRAGUS.
 I'll make't my comfort
    He is a man.
 I'll love him as my brother;
    And such a welcome as I'd give to him
    After long absence, such is yours.

  IMOGEN.
 [Aside] Would it had been so that they
    Had been my father's sons! Then had my prize
    Been less, and so more equal ballasting
    To thee, Posthumus.

  BELARIUS.
 He wrings at some distress.
 Or I, whate'er it be,  
    What pain it cost, what danger! Gods!
  BELARIUS.
 [Aside] Great men,
    That had a court no bigger than this cave,
    That did attend themselves, and had the virtue
    Which their own conscience seal'd them, laying by
    That nothing-gift of differing multitudes,
    Could not out-peer these twain.
 Pardon me, gods!
    I'd change my sex to be companion with them,
    Since Leonatus' false.

  BELARIUS.
 It shall be so.

    Boys, we'll go dress our hunt.

    Discourse is heavy, fasting; when we have supp'd,
    We'll mannerly demand thee of thy story,
    So far as thou wilt speak it.

  GUIDERIUS.
 Pray draw near.
 The night to th' owl and morn to th' lark less welcome.

  IMOGEN.
 Thanks, sir.
                            Exeunt




SCENE VII.

Rome.
 This is the tenour of the Emperor's writ:
    That since the common men are now in action
    'Gainst the Pannonians and Dalmatians,
    And that the legions now in Gallia are
    Full weak to undertake our wars against
    The fall'n-off Britons, that we do incite
    The gentry to this business.
 Long live Caesar!
  TRIBUNE.
 Is Lucius general of the forces?
  SECOND SENATOR.

  TRIBUNE.
 Remaining now in Gallia?
  FIRST SENATOR.
 The words of your commission
    Will tie you to the numbers and the time  
    Of their dispatch.

  TRIBUNE.
                    Exeunt




ACT IV.

Wales.
 Therein I must play the workman.

    I dare speak it to myself, for it is not vain-glory for a man and
    his glass to confer in his own chamber- I mean, the lines of my
    body are as well drawn as his; no less young, more strong, not
    beneath him in fortunes, beyond him in the advantage of the time,
    above him in birth, alike conversant in general services, and
    more remarkable in single oppositions.
 What mortality is! Posthumus, thy
    head, which now is growing upon thy shoulders, shall within this
    hour be off; thy mistress enforced; thy garments cut to pieces
    before her face; and all this done, spurn her home to her father,
    who may, haply, be a little angry for my so rough usage; but my
    mother, having power of his testiness, shall turn all into my  
    commendations.
                                             Exit




SCENE II.
 Before the cave of BELARIUS

Enter, from the cave, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, ARVIRAGUS, and IMOGEN

  BELARIUS.
 [To IMOGEN] You are not well.
 Remain here in the cave;
    We'll come to you after hunting.

  ARVIRAGUS.
 [To IMOGEN] Brother, stay here.
 I am very sick.

  GUIDERIUS.

  IMOGEN.
 So sick I am not, yet I am not well;
    But not so citizen a wanton as
    To seem to die ere sick.
 So please you, leave me;
    Stick to your journal course.
 Pray you trust me here.

  GUIDERIUS.

    How much the quantity, the weight as much
    As I do love my father.
 What? how? how?
  ARVIRAGUS.
 If it be sin to say so, sir, I yoke me
    In my good brother's fault.
 I know not why
    I love this youth, and I have heard you say
    Love's reason's without reason.
'
  BELARIUS.

    Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace.

    I'm not their father; yet who this should be
    Doth miracle itself, lov'd before me.
-
    'Tis the ninth hour o' th' morn.
 Brother, farewell.
  
  IMOGEN.
 I wish ye sport.
 Your health.
 [To BELARIUS] So please you, sir.

  IMOGEN.
 [Aside] These are kind creatures.
 Gods, what lies I have
      heard!
    Our courtiers say all's savage but at court.

    Experience, O, thou disprov'st report!
    Th' imperious seas breed monsters; for the dish,
    Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish.

    I am sick still; heart-sick.
 Pisanio,
    I'll now taste of thy drug.
                  [Swallows some]
  GUIDERIUS.
 I could not stir him.

  ARVIRAGUS.
 Thus did he answer me; yet said hereafter
    I might know more.
 Go in and rest.

  ARVIRAGUS.
  
  IMOGEN.
 And shalt be ever.
         Exit IMOGEN into the cave
    This youth, howe'er distress'd, appears he hath had
    Good ancestors.
 But his neat cookery! He cut our roots in characters,
    And sauc'd our broths as Juno had been sick,
    And he her dieter.
 I do note
    That grief and patience, rooted in him both,
    Mingle their spurs together.
 Come, away! Who's there?

                      Enter CLOTEN

  CLOTEN.
 I cannot find those runagates; that villain
    Hath mock'd me.
 I am faint.
 Those runagates?
    Means he not us? I partly know him; 'tis
    Cloten, the son o' th' Queen.

    I saw him not these many years, and yet
    I know 'tis he.
 Hence!
  GUIDERIUS.
 He is but one; you and my brother search
    What companies are near.
 Pray you away;
    Let me alone with him.
         Exeunt BELARIUS and ARVIRAGUS
  CLOTEN.
 Soft! What are you
    That fly me thus? Some villain mountaineers?
    I have heard of such.
 What slave art thou?
  GUIDERIUS.

  CLOTEN.
 Thou art a robber,
    A law-breaker, a villain.
 Yield thee, thief.
 Say what thou art;
    Why I should yield to thee.

  CLOTEN.
 Thou villain base,
    Know'st me not by my clothes?
  GUIDERIUS.
 Hence, then, and thank
    The man that gave them thee.
  
  GUIDERIUS.
 What's thy name?
  CLOTEN.
 Cloten, thou villain.

  GUIDERIUS.
 To thy further fear,
    Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know
    I am son to th' Queen.

  GUIDERIUS.
 I'm sorry for't; not seeming
    So worthy as thy birth.

  CLOTEN.
 Art not afeard?
  GUIDERIUS.
 Those that I reverence, those I fear- the wise:
    At fools I laugh, not fear them.

  CLOTEN.
 Die the death.

    When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
    I'll follow those that even now fled hence,
    And on the gates of Lud's Town set your heads.
                  Exeunt, fighting

                Re-enter BELARIUS and ARVIRAGUS  

  BELARIUS.
 No company's abroad.

  BELARIUS.
 I cannot tell; long is it since I saw him,
    But time hath nothing blurr'd those lines of favour
    Which then he wore; the snatches in his voice,
    And burst of speaking, were as his.
 I am absolute
    'Twas very Cloten.

  ARVIRAGUS.

    I wish my brother make good time with him,
    You say he is so fell.
 Being scarce made up,
    I mean to man, he had not apprehension
    Or roaring terrors; for defect of judgment
    Is oft the cease of fear.


              Re-enter GUIDERIUS with CLOTEN'S head

    But, see, thy brother.
 This Cloten was a fool, an empty purse;  
    There was no money in't.
 What hast thou done?
  GUIDERIUS.
 I am perfect what: cut off one Cloten's head,
    Son to the Queen, after his own report;
    Who call'd me traitor, mountaineer, and swore
    With his own single hand he'd take us in,
    Displace our heads where- thank the gods!- they grow,
    And set them on Lud's Town.

  BELARIUS.
 We are all undone.
 Though his humour
    Was nothing but mutation- ay, and that
    From one bad thing to worse- not frenzy, not
    Absolute madness could so far have rav'd,
    To bring him here alone.
 Then on good ground we fear,
    If we do fear this body hath a tail
    More perilous than the head.
 Let ordinance
    Come as the gods foresay it.
 Howsoe'er,
    My brother hath done well.
 I had no mind
    To hunt this day; the boy Fidele's sickness  
    Did make my way long forth.
 I'll throw't into the creek
    Behind our rock, and let it to the sea
    And tell the fishes he's the Queen's son, Cloten.

    That's all I reck.
                                      Exit
  BELARIUS.
 I fear'twill be reveng'd.

  ARVIRAGUS.
 Would I had done't,
    So the revenge alone pursu'd me! Polydore,
    I love thee brotherly, but envy much
    Thou hast robb'd me of this deed.

  BELARIUS.
 Well, 'tis done.
 I prithee to our rock.

    You and Fidele play the cooks; I'll stay  
    Till hasty Polydore return, and bring him
    To dinner presently.
                          Exit
  BELARIUS.
 O thou goddess,
    Thou divine Nature, thou thyself thou blazon'st
    In these two princely boys! They are as gentle
    As zephyrs blowing below the violet,
    Not wagging his sweet head; and yet as rough,
    Their royal blood enchaf'd, as the rud'st wind
    That by the top doth take the mountain pine
    And make him stoop to th' vale.
 'Tis wonder
    That an invisible instinct should frame them
    To royalty unlearn'd, honour untaught,
    Civility not seen from other, valour
    That wildly grows in them, but yields a crop
    As if it had been sow'd.
 Yet still it's strange
    What Cloten's being here to us portends,  
    Or what his death will bring us.


                    Re-enter GUIDERIUS

  GUIDERIUS.
 Where's my brother?
    I have sent Cloten's clotpoll down the stream,
    In embassy to his mother; his body's hostage
    For his return.
 But what occasion
    Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark!
  GUIDERIUS.
 He went hence even now.
 What does he mean? Since death of my dear'st mother
    It did not speak before.
 All solemn things
    Should answer solemn accidents.
 O sweetest, fairest lily!
    My brother wears thee not the one half so well
    As when thou grew'st thyself.

  BELARIUS.
 O melancholy!
    Who ever yet could sound thy bottom? find
    The ooze to show what coast thy sluggish crare
    Might'st easiliest harbour in? Thou blessed thing!
    Jove knows what man thou mightst have made; but I,
    Thou diedst, a most rare boy, of melancholy.
 O' th' floor;
    His arms thus leagu'd.
 I thought he slept, and put
    My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
    Answer'd my steps too loud.

  GUIDERIUS.

    If he be gone he'll make his grave a bed;
    With female fairies will his tomb be haunted,
    And worms will not come to thee.
 Thou shalt not lack
    The flower that's like thy face, pale primrose; nor
    The azur'd hare-bell, like thy veins; no, nor
    The leaf of eglantine, whom not to slander,  
    Out-sweet'ned not thy breath.
 The ruddock would,
    With charitable bill- O bill, sore shaming
    Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie
    Without a monument!- bring thee all this;
    Yea, and furr'd moss besides, when flow'rs are none,
    To winter-ground thy corse-
  GUIDERIUS.
 Let us bury him,
    And not protract with admiration what
    Is now due debt.

  ARVIRAGUS.

  GUIDERIUS.
 I'll weep, and word it with thee;  
    For notes of sorrow out of tune are worse
    Than priests and fanes that lie.
 We'll speak it, then.

  BELARIUS.
 He was a queen's son, boys;
    And though he came our enemy, remember
    He was paid for that.
 Though mean and mighty rotting
    Together have one dust, yet reverence-
    That angel of the world- doth make distinction
    Of place 'tween high and low.

  GUIDERIUS.

    Thersites' body is as good as Ajax',
    When neither are alive.

  ARVIRAGUS.
 If you'll go fetch him,
    We'll say our song the whilst.
 Brother, begin.

                                                   Exit BELARIUS
  GUIDERIUS.
 Nay, Cadwal, we must lay his head to th' East;
    My father hath a reason for't.
  
  ARVIRAGUS.
 Come on, then, and remove him.
 Begin.

             Golden lads and girls all must,
             As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.


  ARVIRAGUS.
 Fear no more the frown o' th' great;
               Thou art past the tyrant's stroke.

             Care no more to clothe and eat;
               To thee the reed is as the oak.

             The sceptre, learning, physic, must
             All follow this and come to dust.
   Nor th' all-dreaded thunder-stone;
  GUIDERIUS.
 Fear not slander, censure rash;
  ARVIRAGUS.
   Thou hast finish'd joy and moan.


  GUIDERIUS.
 Nor no witchcraft charm thee!
  GUIDERIUS.
 Nothing ill come near thee!
  BOTH.
      Quiet consummation have,
             And renowned be thy grave!

         Re-enter BELARIUS with the body of CLOTEN

  GUIDERIUS.
 We have done our obsequies.
 Come, lay him down.

  BELARIUS.
 Here's a few flowers; but 'bout midnight, more.

    The herbs that have on them cold dew o' th' night
    Are strewings fit'st for graves.
  
    You were as flow'rs, now wither'd.
 Even so
    These herblets shall which we upon you strew.

    Their pleasures here are past, so is their pain.

                                           Exeunt all but IMOGEN
  IMOGEN.
 Which is the way?
    I thank you.

    But, soft! no bedfellow.
 I hope I dream;
    For so I thought I was a cave-keeper,
    And cook to honest creatures.
 Our very eyes
    Are sometimes, like our judgments, blind.
 Even when I wake it is
    Without me, as within me; not imagin'd, felt.

    A headless man? The garments of Posthumus?
    I know the shape of's leg; this is his hand,
    His foot Mercurial, his Martial thigh,
    The brawns of Hercules; but his Jovial face-
    Murder in heaven! How! 'Tis gone.
 To write and read
    Be henceforth treacherous! Damn'd Pisanio
    Hath with his forged letters- damn'd Pisanio-
    From this most bravest vessel of the world
    Struck the main-top.
 O Posthumus! alas,
    Where is thy head? Where's that? Ay me! where's that?
    Pisanio might have kill'd thee at the heart,
    And left this head on.

    This is Pisanio's deed, and Cloten.
 O!
    Give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood,
    That we the horrider may seem to those
    Which chance to find us.
 O, my lord, my lord!
                                    [Falls fainting on the body]

           Enter LUCIUS, CAPTAINS, and a SOOTHSAYER

  CAPTAIN.
 To them the legions garrison'd in Gallia,
    After your will, have cross'd the sea, attending
    You here at Milford Haven; with your ships,
    They are in readiness.

  LUCIUS.
 With the next benefit o' th' wind.

  LUCIUS.
 Now, sir,
    What have you dream'd of late of this war's purpose?
  SOOTHSAYER.

  LUCIUS.
 Soft, ho! what trunk is here
    Without his top? The ruin speaks that sometime
    It was a worthy building.
 How? a page?  
    Or dead or sleeping on him? But dead, rather;
    For nature doth abhor to make his bed
    With the defunct, or sleep upon the dead.

  CAPTAIN.
 He's alive, my lord.

  LUCIUS.
 Who is this
    Thou mak'st thy bloody pillow? Or who was he
    That, otherwise than noble nature did,
    Hath alter'd that good picture? What's thy interest
    In this sad wreck? How came't? Who is't? What art thou?
  IMOGEN.
 I am nothing; or if not,
    Nothing to be were better.
 This was my master,
    A very valiant Briton and a good,
    That here by mountaineers lies slain.
  
  LUCIUS.
 'Lack, good youth!
    Thou mov'st no less with thy complaining than
    Thy master in bleeding.
 Say his name, good friend.

  IMOGEN.
 Richard du Champ.
 [Aside] If I do lie, and do
    No harm by it, though the gods hear, I hope
    They'll pardon it.
- Say you, sir?
  LUCIUS.
 Fidele, sir.

  LUCIUS.

    Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say
    Thou shalt be so well master'd; but, be sure,
    No less belov'd.

  LUCIUS.
 Ay, good youth;
    And rather father thee than master thee.

    My friends,
    The boy hath taught us manly duties; let us
    Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can,
    And make him with our pikes and partisans
    A grave.
 Be cheerful; wipe thine eyes.

                                               Exit an attendant
    A fever with the absence of her son;
    A madness, of which her life's in danger.
 Heavens,
    How deeply you at once do touch me! Imogen,
    The great part of my comfort, gone; my queen
    Upon a desperate bed, and in a time
    When fearful wars point at me; her son gone,
    So needful for this present.
 It strikes me past
    The hope of comfort.
 But for thee, fellow,
    Who needs must know of her departure and
    Dost seem so ignorant, we'll enforce it from thee
    By a sharp torture.

  PISANIO.
 Sir, my life is yours;
    I humbly set it at your will; but for my mistress,
    I nothing know where she remains, why gone,
    Nor when she purposes return.
 Beseech your Highness,  
    Hold me your loyal servant.
 Good my liege,
    The day that she was missing he was here.

  CYMBELINE.
 The time is troublesome.

    [To PISANIO] We'll slip you for a season; but our jealousy
    Does yet depend.

  LORD.

  CYMBELINE.
 Now for the counsel of my son and queen!
    I am amaz'd with matter.

  LORD.
 Come more, for more you're ready.

  CYMBELINE.
 We fear not
    What can from Italy annoy us; but
    We grieve at chances here.
 I heard no letter from my master since
    I wrote him Imogen was slain.
 'Tis strange.

    Nor hear I from my mistress, who did promise
    To yield me often tidings.
 Neither know
    What is betid to Cloten, but remain
    Perplex'd in all.
 The heavens still must work.

    Wherein I am false I am honest; not true, to be true.

    These present wars shall find I love my country,
    Even to the note o' th' King, or I'll fall in them.
 Before the cave of BELARIUS

Enter BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS

  GUIDERIUS.
 The noise is round about us.

  BELARIUS.
 Let us from it.

  ARVIRAGUS.
 Nay, what hope
    Have we in hiding us? This way the Romans
    Must or for Britons slay us, or receive us
    For barbarous and unnatural revolts
    During their use, and slay us after.

  BELARIUS.
 Sons,
    We'll higher to the mountains; there secure us.
 Newness
    Of Cloten's death- we being not known, not muster'd
    Among the bands-may drive us to a render
    Where we have liv'd, and so extort from's that
    Which we have done, whose answer would be death,
    Drawn on with torture.
  
  GUIDERIUS.
 It is not likely
    That when they hear the Roman horses neigh,
    Behold their quarter'd fires, have both their eyes
    And ears so cloy'd importantly as now,
    That they will waste their time upon our note,
    To know from whence we are.

  BELARIUS.
 O, I am known
    Of many in the army.

    I and my brother are not known; yourself
    So out of thought, and thereto so o'ergrown,
    Cannot be questioned.
 What thing is't that I never
    Did see man die! scarce ever look'd on blood
    But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison!
    Never bestrid a horse, save one that had
    A rider like myself, who ne'er wore rowel
    Nor iron on his heel! I am asham'd
    To look upon the holy sun, to have
    The benefit of his blest beams, remaining
    So long a poor unknown.
 By heavens, I'll go!
    If you will bless me, sir, and give me leave,
    I'll take the better care; but if you will not,
    The hazard therefore due fall on me by
    The hands of Romans!
  ARVIRAGUS.
 Amen.
  
  BELARIUS.
 Have with you, boys!
    If in your country wars you chance to die,
    That is my bed too, lads, and there I'll lie.
           Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.

Britain.
 You married ones,
    If each of you should take this course, how many
    Must murder wives much better than themselves
    For wrying but a little! O Pisanio!
    Every good servant does not all commands;
    No bond but to do just ones.
 Gods! if you
    Should have ta'en vengeance on my faults, I never
    Had liv'd to put on this; so had you saved
    The noble Imogen to repent, and struck
    Me, wretch more worth your vengeance.
 You some permit
    To second ills with ills, each elder worse,
    And make them dread it, to the doer's thrift.
 Do your best wills,
    And make me blest to obey.
 I am brought hither  
    Among th' Italian gentry, and to fight
    Against my lady's kingdom.
 'Tis enough
    That, Britain, I have kill'd thy mistress; peace!
    I'll give no wound to thee.
 Therefore, good heavens,
    Hear patiently my purpose.
 I'll disrobe me
    Of these Italian weeds, and suit myself
    As does a Britain peasant.
 So I'll fight
    Against the part I come with; so I'll die
    For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life
    Is every breath a death.
 And thus unknown,
    Pitied nor hated, to the face of peril
    Myself I'll dedicate.
 Let me make men know
    More valour in me than my habits show.
              Exit




SCENE II.

Britain.

They march over and go out.
  Then enter again, in skirmish,
IACHIMO and POSTHUMUS.
  He vanquisheth and disarmeth IACHIMO,
and then leaves him

  IACHIMO.
 I have belied a lady,
    The Princess of this country, and the air on't
    Revengingly enfeebles me; or could this carl,
    A very drudge of nature's, have subdu'd me
    In my profession? Knighthoods and honours borne
    As I wear mine are titles but of scorn.
            Exit

    The battle continues; the BRITONS fly; CYMBELINE is taken.

    Then enter to his rescue BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS  

  BELARIUS.
 Stand, stand! We have th' advantage of the ground;
    The lane is guarded; nothing routs us but
    The villainy of our fears.

  GUIDERIUS and ARVIRAGUS.
 Stand, stand, and fight!

    Re-enter POSTHUMUS, and seconds the Britons; they rescue
    CYMBELINE, and exeunt.
 Away, boy, from the troops, and save thyself;
    For friends kill friends, and the disorder's such
    As war were hoodwink'd.

  IACHIMO.

  LUCIUS.
 It is a day turn'd strangely.
                               Exeunt




SCENE III.

  LORD.
 I did.

  POSTHUMUS.
 The King himself
    Of his wings destitute, the army broken,
    And but the backs of Britons seen, an flying,
    Through a strait lane- the enemy, full-hearted,
    Lolling the tongue with slaught'ring, having work
    More plentiful than tools to do't, struck down
    Some mortally, some slightly touch'd, some falling
    Merely through fear, that the strait pass was damm'd
    With dead men hurt behind, and cowards living
    To die with length'ned shame.

  LORD.
 Where was this lane?
  POSTHUMUS.
 Close by the battle, ditch'd, and wall'd with turf,  
    Which gave advantage to an ancient soldier-
    An honest one, I warrant, who deserv'd
    So long a breeding as his white beard came to,
    In doing this for's country.
 Athwart the lane
    He, with two striplings- lads more like to run
    The country base than to commit such slaughter;
    With faces fit for masks, or rather fairer
    Than those for preservation cas'd or shame-
    Made good the passage, cried to those that fled
    'Our Britain's harts die flying, not our men.

    To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards! Stand;
    Or we are Romans and will give you that,
    Like beasts, which you shun beastly, and may save
    But to look back in frown.
 Stand, stand!' These three,
    Three thousand confident, in act as many-
    For three performers are the file when all
    The rest do nothing- with this word 'Stand, stand!'
    Accommodated by the place, more charming
    With their own nobleness, which could have turn'd
    A distaff to a lance, gilded pale looks,  
    Part shame, part spirit renew'd; that some turn'd coward
    But by example- O, a sin in war
    Damn'd in the first beginners!- gan to look
    The way that they did and to grin like lions
    Upon the pikes o' th' hunters.
 Then began
    A stop i' th' chaser, a retire; anon
    A rout, confusion thick.
 Ten chas'd by one
    Are now each one the slaughterman of twenty.

    Those that would die or ere resist are grown
    The mortal bugs o' th' field.

  LORD.
 Will you rhyme upon't,
    And vent it for a mock'ry? Here is one:
    'Two boys, an old man (twice a boy), a lane,
    Preserv'd the Britons, was the Romans' bane.
 Nay, be not angry, sir.

  POSTHUMUS.
 'Lack, to what end?
    Who dares not stand his foe I'll be his friend;
    For if he'll do as he is made to do,
    I know he'll quickly fly my friendship too.

    You have put me into rhyme.
 Farewell; you're angry.
 Still going? This is a lord! O noble misery,
    To be i' th' field and ask 'What news?' of me!
    To-day how many would have given their honours
    To have sav'd their carcasses! took heel to do't,
    And yet died too! I, in mine own woe charm'd,
    Could not find death where I did hear him groan,
    Nor feel him where he struck.
 Fight I will no more,
    But yield me to the veriest hind that shall
    Once touch my shoulder.
 For me, my ransom's death;
    On either side I come to spend my breath,
    Which neither here I'll keep nor bear again,
    But end it by some means for Imogen.


            Enter two BRITISH CAPTAINS and soldiers

  FIRST CAPTAIN.
 Great Jupiter be prais'd! Lucius is taken.

    'Tis thought the old man and his sons were angels.

  SECOND CAPTAIN.
 There was a fourth man, in a silly habit,
    That gave th' affront with them.

  FIRST CAPTAIN.

  SECOND CAPTAIN.
 Lay hands on him; a dog!
    A leg of Rome shall not return to tell
    What crows have peck'd them here.
 He brags his service,
    As if he were of note.
 Bring him to th' King.


   Enter CYMBELINE, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, ARVIRAGUS, PISANIO, and Roman
   captives.
 The CAPTAINS present POSTHUMUS to CYMBELINE, who delivers
            him over to a gaoler.
 You shall not now be stol'n, you have locks upon you;
    So graze as you find pasture.

  SECOND GAOLER.
 Ay, or a stomach.
 Most welcome, bondage! for thou art a way,
    I think, to liberty.
 Yet am I better
    Than one that's sick o' th' gout, since he had rather
    Groan so in perpetuity than be cur'd
    By th' sure physician death, who is the key
    T' unbar these locks.

    I know you are more clement than vile men,
    Who of their broken debtors take a third,
    A sixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again
    On their abatement; that's not my desire.

    For Imogen's dear life take mine; and though
    'Tis not so dear, yet 'tis a life; you coin'd it.

    'Tween man and man they weigh not every stamp;
    Though light, take pieces for the figure's sake;
    You rather mine, being yours.
                      [Sleeps]

        Solemn music.
 Then, after other music, follows
           the two young LEONATI, brothers to POSTHUMUS,  
              with wounds, as they died in the wars.
 No more, thou thunder-master, show
              Thy spite on mortal flies.

            With Mars fall out, with Juno chide,
              That thy adulteries
                Rates and revenges.

            Hath my poor boy done aught but well,
              Whose face I never saw?
            I died whilst in the womb he stay'd
              Attending nature's law;
            Whose father then, as men report
              Thou orphans' father art,
            Thou shouldst have been, and shielded him
              From this earth-vexing smart.


  MOTHER.
   Lucina lent not me her aid,
              But took me in my throes,
            That from me was Posthumus ripp'd,  
              Came crying 'mongst his foes,
                A thing of pity.


  SICILIUS.


  FIRST BROTHER.
 When once he was mature for man,
              In Britain where was he
            That could stand up his parallel,
              Or fruitful object be
            In eye of Imogen, that best
              Could deem his dignity?

  MOTHER.
   With marriage wherefore was he mock'd,
              To be exil'd and thrown
            From Leonati seat and cast
            From her his dearest one,
              Sweet Imogen?  

  SICILIUS.
 Why did you suffer Iachimo,
              Slight thing of Italy,
            To taint his nobler heart and brain
              With needless jealousy,
            And to become the geck and scorn
              O' th' other's villainy?

  SECOND BROTHER.


  FIRST BROTHER.
 Like hardiment Posthumus hath
              To Cymbeline perform'd.

            Then, Jupiter, thou king of gods,
              Why hast thou thus adjourn'd
            The graces for his merits due,  
              Being all to dolours turn'd?

  SICILIUS.
 Thy crystal window ope; look out;
              No longer exercise
            Upon a valiant race thy harsh
              And potent injuries.


  MOTHER.
 Peep through thy marble mansion.
 Help!
              Or we poor ghosts will cry
            To th' shining synod of the rest
              Against thy deity.
 Help, Jupiter! or we appeal,
              And from thy justice fly.
 He throws a thunderbolt.
 The GHOSTS  
                     fall on their knees

  JUPITER.

    Be not with mortal accidents opprest:
    No care of yours it is; you know 'tis ours.

    Whom best I love I cross; to make my gift,
    The more delay'd, delighted.

    Our Jovial star reign'd at his birth, and in
    Our temple was he married.

    Mount, eagle, to my palace crystalline.
            [Ascends]
  SICILIUS.
 He came in thunder; his celestial breath
    Was sulpherous to smell; the holy eagle
    Stoop'd as to foot us.
 His ascension is
    More sweet than our blest fields.
 The marble pavement closes, he is enter'd
    His radiant roof.
 Away! and, to be blest,
    Let us with care perform his great behest.
   [GHOSTS vanish]

  POSTHUMUS.
 [Waking] Sleep, thou has been a grandsire and begot
    A father to me; and thou hast created
    A mother and two brothers.
 But, O scorn,
    Gone! They went hence so soon as they were born.

    And so I am awake.
 Poor wretches, that depend
    On greatness' favour, dream as I have done;  
    Wake and find nothing.
 But, alas, I swerve;
    Many dream not to find, neither deserve,
    And yet are steep'd in favours; so am I,
    That have this golden chance, and know not why.


    [Reads] 'When as a lion's whelp shall, to himself unknown,
    without seeking find, and be embrac'd by a piece of tender air;
    and when from a stately cedar shall be lopp'd branches which,
    being dead many years, shall after revive, be jointed to the old
    stock, and freshly grow; then shall Posthumus end his miseries,
    Britain be fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty.
'

    'Tis still a dream, or else such stuff as madmen
    Tongue, and brain not; either both or nothing,
    Or senseless speaking, or a speaking such  
    As sense cannot untie.
 Be what it is,
    The action of my life is like it, which
    I'll keep, if but for sympathy.
 Over-roasted rather; ready long ago.
 A heavy reckoning for you, sir.

    You come in faint for want of meat, depart reeling with too much
    drink; sorry that you have paid too much, and sorry that you are
    paid too much; purse and brain both empty; the brain the heavier
    for being too light, the purse too light, being drawn of
    heaviness.
 O, of this contradiction you shall now be quit.
 O, the  
    charity of a penny cord! It sums up thousands in a trice.
 You
    have no true debitor and creditor but it; of what's past, is, and
    to come, the discharge.
 Your neck, sir, is pen, book, and
    counters; so the acquittance follows.

  POSTHUMUS.
 Indeed, sir, he that sleeps feels not the toothache.
 But a
    man that were to sleep your sleep, and a hangman to help him to
    bed, I think he would change places with his officer; for look
    you, sir, you know not which way you shall go.

  POSTHUMUS.
 Yes indeed do I, fellow.

  GAOLER.

  POSTHUMUS.

  GAOLER.

  POSTHUMUS.
 Thou bring'st good news: I am call'd to be made free.
 Unless a man would marry a gallows and beget young gibbets,
    I never saw one so prone.
 O, there
    were desolation of gaolers and gallowses! I speak against my
    present profit, but my wish hath a preferment in't.
     Exit




SCENE V.

Britain.
 CYMBELINE'S tent

Enter CYMBELINE, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, ARVIRAGUS, PISANIO, LORDS,
OFFICERS, and attendants

  CYMBELINE.

    He shall be happy that can find him, if
    Our grace can make him so.
 He hath been search'd among the dead and living,
    But no trace of him.
 To my grief, I am
    The heir of his reward; [To BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS]  
      which I will add
    To you, the liver, heart, and brain, of Britain,
    By whom I grant she lives.
 'Tis now the time
    To ask of whence you are.

  BELARIUS.
 Sir,
    In Cambria are we born, and gentlemen;
    Further to boast were neither true nor modest,
    Unless I add we are honest.

  CYMBELINE.
 Bow your knees.
 Why so sadly
    Greet you our victory? You look like Romans,
    And not o' th' court of Britain.
 With horror, madly dying, like her life;
    Which, being cruel to the world, concluded
    Most cruel to herself.
 What she confess'd
    I will report, so please you; these her women
    Can trip me if I err, who with wet cheeks
    Were present when she finish'd.

  CYMBELINE.

  CORNELIUS.
 She alone knew this;
    And but she spoke it dying, I would not
    Believe her lips in opening it.
 Proceed.

  CORNELIUS.

  CYMBELINE.
 O most delicate fiend!
    Who is't can read a woman? Is there more?
  CORNELIUS.
 She did confess she had
    For you a mortal mineral, which, being took,
    Should by the minute feed on life, and ling'ring,
    By inches waste you.
 In which time she purpos'd,
    By watching, weeping, tendance, kissing, to
    O'ercome you with her show; and in time,
    When she had fitted you with her craft, to work
    Her son into th' adoption of the crown;
    But failing of her end by his strange absence,
    Grew shameless-desperate, open'd, in despite
    Of heaven and men, her purposes, repented
    The evils she hatch'd were not effected; so,
    Despairing, died.
 We did, so please your Highness.
 Mine eyes
    Were not in fault, for she was beautiful;
    Mine ears, that heard her flattery; nor my heart
    That thought her like her seeming.
 It had been vicious
    To have mistrusted her; yet, O my daughter!
    That it was folly in me thou mayst say,
    And prove it in thy feeling.
 Heaven mend all!

         Enter LUCIUS, IACHIMO, the SOOTHSAYER, and other
      Roman prisoners, guarded; POSTHUMUS behind, and IMOGEN

    Thou com'st not, Caius, now for tribute; that
    The Britons have raz'd out, though with the loss
    Of many a bold one, whose kinsmen have made suit
    That their good souls may be appeas'd with slaughter
    Of you their captives, which ourself have granted;
    So think of your estate.

  LUCIUS.
 But since the gods
    Will have it thus, that nothing but our lives
    May be call'd ransom, let it come.
 Sufficeth
    A Roman with a Roman's heart can suffer.

    Augustus lives to think on't; and so much
    For my peculiar care.
 This one thing only
    I will entreat: my boy, a Briton born,
    Let him be ransom'd.
 Save him, sir,
    And spare no blood beside.
 Boy,
    Thou hast look'd thyself into my grace,
    And art mine own.
 I know not why, wherefore  
    To say 'Live, boy.
 Live;
    And ask of Cymbeline what boon thou wilt,
    Fitting my bounty and thy state, I'll give it;
    Yea, though thou do demand a prisoner,
    The noblest ta'en.

  LUCIUS.

  IMOGEN.
 I see a thing
    Bitter to me as death; your life, good master,
    Must shuffle for itself.

  LUCIUS.
 What wouldst thou, boy?
    I love thee more and more; think more and more
    What's best to ask.
 Know'st him thou look'st on? Speak,
    Wilt have him live? Is he thy kin? thy friend?  
  IMOGEN.
 He is a Roman, no more kin to me
    Than I to your Highness; who, being born your vassal,
    Am something nearer.
 Wherefore ey'st him so?
  IMOGEN.
 I'll tell you, sir, in private, if you please
    To give me hearing.

  CYMBELINE.
 Ay, with all my heart,
    And lend my best attention.
 What's thy name?
  IMOGEN.
 Fidele, sir.

  CYMBELINE.
 Walk with me; speak freely.

                           [CYMBELINE and IMOGEN converse apart]
  BELARIUS.
 One sand another
    Not more resembles- that sweet rosy lad
    Who died and was Fidele.
 What think you?
  GUIDERIUS.

  BELARIUS.
 Peace, peace! see further.
 He eyes us not; forbear.
  
  GUIDERIUS.
 But we saw him dead.
 Be silent; let's see further.
 [Aside] It is my mistress.
               [CYMBELINE and IMOGEN advance]
  CYMBELINE.
 [To IACHIMO] Sir, step you forth;
    Give answer to this boy, and do it freely,
    Or, by our greatness and the grace of it,
    Which is our honour, bitter torture shall
    Winnow the truth from falsehood.

  IMOGEN.
 My boon is that this gentleman may render
    Of whom he had this ring.

  POSTHUMUS.
 [Aside] What's that to him?
  CYMBELINE.
 That diamond upon your finger, say
    How came it yours?
  IACHIMO.
 Thou'lt torture me to leave unspoken that
    Which to be spoke would torture thee.
 I am glad to be constrain'd to utter that  
    Which torments me to conceal.
 By villainy
    I got this ring; 'twas Leonatus' jewel,
    Whom thou didst banish; and- which more may grieve thee,
    As it doth me- a nobler sir ne'er liv'd
    'Twixt sky and ground.
 Wilt thou hear more, my lord?
  CYMBELINE.
 All that belongs to this.
 That paragon, thy daughter,
    For whom my heart drops blood and my false spirits
    Quail to remember- Give me leave, I faint.
 My daughter? What of her? Renew thy strength;
    I had rather thou shouldst live while nature will
    Than die ere I hear more.
 Strive, man, and speak.

    Come to the matter.

  IACHIMO.
 All too soon I shall,
    Unless thou wouldst grieve quickly.
  
  CYMBELINE.
 Away to Britain
    Post I in this design.
 It is I
    That all th' abhorred things o' th' earth amend  
    By being worse than they.
 I am Posthumus,
    That kill'd thy daughter; villain-like, I lie-
    That caus'd a lesser villain than myself,
    A sacrilegious thief, to do't.
 The temple
    Of virtue was she; yea, and she herself.

    Spit, and throw stones, cast mire upon me, set
    The dogs o' th' street to bay me.
 Peace, my lord.
 Hear, hear!
  POSTHUMUS.
 Shall's have a play of this? Thou scornful page,
    There lies thy part.
                [Strikes her.
 She falls]
  PISANIO.
 O gentlemen, help!
    Mine and your mistress! O, my lord Posthumus!
    You ne'er kill'd Imogen till now.
 Help, help!
    Mine honour'd lady!
  CYMBELINE.
 Wake, my mistress!
  CYMBELINE.

  PISANIO.
 Dangerous fellow, hence!
    Breathe not where princes are.

  CYMBELINE.
 The tune of Imogen!
  PISANIO.
 Lady,
    The gods throw stones of sulphur on me, if
    That box I gave you was not thought by me
    A precious thing! I had it from the Queen.
 New matter still?
  IMOGEN.

  CORNELIUS.
 'If Pisanio
    Have' said she 'given his mistress that confection
    Which I gave him for cordial, she is serv'd
    As I would serve a rat.
'  
  CYMBELINE.
 The Queen, sir, very oft importun'd me
    To temper poisons for her; still pretending
    The satisfaction of her knowledge only
    In killing creatures vile, as cats and dogs,
    Of no esteem.
 I, dreading that her purpose
    Was of more danger, did compound for her
    A certain stuff, which, being ta'en would cease
    The present pow'r of life, but in short time
    All offices of nature should again
    Do their due functions.
 Most like I did, for I was dead.

  BELARIUS.
 My boys,
    There was our error.

  GUIDERIUS.
 This is sure Fidele.
 Why did you throw your wedded lady from you?
    Think that you are upon a rock, and now
    Throw me again.
 Hang there like fruit, my soul,
    Till the tree die!  
  CYMBELINE.
 How now, my flesh? my child?
    What, mak'st thou me a dullard in this act?
    Wilt thou not speak to me?
  IMOGEN.
 [Kneeling] Your blessing, sir.
 My tears that fall
    Prove holy water on thee! Imogen,
    Thy mother's dead.

  IMOGEN.
 I am sorry for't, my lord.
 What became of him
    I further know not.

  GUIDERIUS.
 Let me end the story:
    I slew him there.

  CYMBELINE.
 Marry, the gods forfend!
    I would not thy good deeds should from my lips
    Pluck a hard sentence.

  CYMBELINE.
 He was a prince.

  GUIDERIUS.
 A most incivil one.
 The wrongs he did me
    Were nothing prince-like; for he did provoke me
    With language that would make me spurn the sea,
    If it could so roar to me.

  CYMBELINE.
 I am sorry for thee.
 That headless man
    I thought had been my lord.

  CYMBELINE.

  BELARIUS.
 [To the guard] Let his arms alone;
    They were not born for bondage.

  CYMBELINE.
 Why, old soldier,
    Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for
    By tasting of our wrath? How of descent
    As good as we?
  ARVIRAGUS.
 In that he spake too far.
  
  CYMBELINE.
 And thou shalt die for't.

  BELARIUS.
 My sons, I must
    For mine own part unfold a dangerous speech,
    Though haply well for you.
 Your danger's ours.
 And our good his.
 Have at it then by leave!
    Thou hadst, great King, a subject who
    Was call'd Belarius.

  BELARIUS.
 Not too hot.

  CYMBELINE.
 Nursing of my sons?
  BELARIUS.
 I am too blunt and saucy: here's my knee.

    Ere I arise I will prefer my sons;
    Then spare not the old father.

  CYMBELINE.
 How? my issue?
  BELARIUS.
 So sure as you your father's.
 I, old Morgan,
    Am that Belarius whom you sometime banish'd.

    Your pleasure was my mere offence, my punishment
    Itself, and all my treason; that I suffer'd
    Was all the harm I did.
 Their dear loss,
    The more of you 'twas felt, the more it shap'd
    Unto my end of stealing them.

    The benediction of these covering heavens
    Fall on their heads like dew! for they are worthy
    To inlay heaven with stars.

  CYMBELINE.

    The service that you three have done is more
    Unlike than this thou tell'st.
 I lost my children.

    If these be they, I know not how to wish
    A pair of worthier sons.
 Be pleas'd awhile.
 Guiderius had
    Upon his neck a mole, a sanguine star;
    It was a mark of wonder.

  BELARIUS.
 This is he,
    Who hath upon him still that natural stamp.

    It was wise nature's end in the donation,
    To be his evidence now.

  CYMBELINE.
 Blest pray you be,
    That, after this strange starting from your orbs,
    You may reign in them now! O Imogen,
    Thou hast lost by this a kingdom.
 Did you e'er meet?
  ARVIRAGUS.

  GUIDERIUS.

  CORNELIUS.
 By the Queen's dram she swallow'd.

  CYMBELINE.
 O rare instinct!
    When shall I hear all through? This fierce abridgment
    Hath to it circumstantial branches, which
    Distinction should be rich in.
 Where? how liv'd you?
    And when came you to serve our Roman captive?
    How parted with your brothers? how first met them?
    Why fled you from the court? and whither? These,
    And your three motives to the battle, with
    I know not how much more, should be demanded,
    And all the other by-dependences,
    From chance to chance; but nor the time nor place  
    Will serve our long interrogatories.
 Let's quit this ground,
    And smoke the temple with our sacrifices.

  IMOGEN.

  IMOGEN.
 My good master,
    I will yet do you service.

  LUCIUS.
 Happy be you!
  CYMBELINE.
 That I was he,
    Speak, Iachimo.

  IACHIMO.
 [Kneeling] I am down again;
    But now my heavy conscience sinks my knee,
    As then your force did.
 Kneel not to me.

    The pow'r that I have on you is to spare you;
    The malice towards you to forgive you.
 Live,
    And deal with others better.

  ARVIRAGUS.
 You holp us, sir,
    As you did mean indeed to be our brother;  
    Joy'd are we that you are.

  POSTHUMUS.
 Your servant, Princes.
 Good my lord of Rome,
    Call forth your soothsayer.
 As I slept, methought
    Great Jupiter, upon his eagle back'd,
    Appear'd to me, with other spritely shows
    Of mine own kindred.
 When I wak'd, I found
    This label on my bosom; whose containing
    Is so from sense in hardness that I can
    Make no collection of it.

  LUCIUS.
 Philarmonus!
  SOOTHSAYER.

  SOOTHSAYER.
 [Reads] 'When as a lion's whelp shall, to himself
    unknown, without seeking find, and be embrac'd by
    a piece of tender air; and when from a stately cedar shall
    be lopp'd branches which, being dead many years, shall
    after revive, be jointed to the old stock, and freshly grow;
    then shall Posthumus end his miseries, Britain be fortunate
    and flourish in peace and plenty.
'  
    Thou, Leonatus, art the lion's whelp;
    The fit and apt construction of thy name,
    Being Leo-natus, doth import so much.

    [To CYMBELINE] The piece of tender air, thy virtuous daughter,
    Which we call 'mollis aer,' and 'mollis aer'
    We term it 'mulier'; which 'mulier' I divine
    Is this most constant wife, who even now
    Answering the letter of the oracle,
    Unknown to you, unsought, were clipp'd about
    With this most tender air.
 This hath some seeming.

  SOOTHSAYER.
 The lofty cedar, royal Cymbeline,
    Personates thee; and thy lopp'd branches point
    Thy two sons forth, who, by Belarius stol'n,
    For many years thought dead, are now reviv'd,
    To the majestic cedar join'd, whose issue
    Promises Britain peace and plenty.
 And, Caius Lucius,
    Although the victor, we submit to Caesar  
    And to the Roman empire, promising
    To pay our wonted tribute, from the which
    We were dissuaded by our wicked queen,
    Whom heavens in justice, both on her and hers,
    Have laid most heavy hand.

  SOOTHSAYER.
 The vision
    Which I made known to Lucius ere the stroke
    Of yet this scarce-cold battle, at this instant
    Is full accomplish'd; for the Roman eagle,
    From south to west on wing soaring aloft,
    Lessen'd herself and in the beams o' th' sun
    So vanish'd; which foreshow'd our princely eagle,
    Th'imperial Caesar, Caesar, should again unite
    His favour with the radiant Cymbeline,
    Which shines here in the west.
 Laud we the gods;
    And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils
    From our bless'd altars.
 Publish we this peace
    To all our subjects.
 Set we forward; let  
    A Roman and a British ensign wave
    Friendly together.

    Set on there! Never was a war did cease,
    Ere bloody hands were wash'd, with such a peace.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1604


THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK


by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  Claudius, King of Denmark.

  Polonius, Lord Chamberlain.

  Horatio, friend to Hamlet.

  Voltemand, courtier.

  Cornelius, courtier.

  Guildenstern, courtier.

  Osric, courtier.

  Marcellus, officer.

  Bernardo, officer.

  Two Clowns, gravediggers.

  Fortinbras, Prince of Norway.
  
  A Norwegian Captain.

  English Ambassadors.

  Ophelia, daughter to Polonius.


  Ghost of Hamlet's Father.


  Lords, ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, Attendants.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>



SCENE.
- Elsinore.

Elsinore.
 A platform before the Castle.


Enter two Sentinels-[first,] Francisco, [who paces up and down
at his post; then] Bernardo, [who approaches him].
 Who's there.
?
  Fran.
 Nay, answer me.
 Stand and unfold yourself.

  Ber.
 Long live the King!
  Fran.
 Bernardo?
  Ber.

  Ber.
 'Tis now struck twelve.
 Get thee to bed, Francisco.

  Fran.
 'Tis bitter cold,
    And I am sick at heart.

  Ber.
 Not a mouse stirring.

  Ber.

    If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
    The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
  

  Fran.
 I think I hear them.
 Stand, ho! Who is there?
  Hor.
 And liegemen to the Dane.

  Mar.
 O, farewell, honest soldier.

    Give you good night.

  Mar.
 Holla, Bernardo!
  Ber.

  Ber.
 Welcome, Horatio.

  Mar.
 What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
  Ber.

  Mar.
 Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
    And will not let belief take hold of him
    Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.

    Therefore I have entreated him along,  
    With us to watch the minutes of this night,
    That, if again this apparition come,
    He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
 Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
 Sit down awhile,
    And let us once again assail your ears,
    That are so fortified against our story,
    What we two nights have seen.

  Hor.
 Well, sit we down,
    And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.
 Last night of all,
    When yond same star that's westward from the pole
    Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
    Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
    The bell then beating one-

                        Enter Ghost.
 Peace! break thee off! Look where it comes again!
  Ber.
 In the same figure, like the King that's dead.
  
  Mar.

  Ber.
 Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.

  Hor.
 Most like.
 It harrows me with fear and wonder.

  Ber.
 It would be spoke to.

  Mar.
 Question it, Horatio.
 What art thou that usurp'st this time of night
    Together with that fair and warlike form
    In which the majesty of buried Denmark
    Did sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak!
  Mar.
 It is offended.

  Ber.
 Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!
                                                     Exit Ghost.
 'Tis gone and will not answer.
 How now, Horatio? You tremble and look pale.

    Is not this something more than fantasy?
    What think you on't?
  Hor.
 Before my God, I might not this believe
    Without the sensible and true avouch
    Of mine own eyes.

    Such was the very armour he had on
    When he th' ambitious Norway combated.

    So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,
    He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.

    'Tis strange.
 Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
    With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.

  Hor.
 Good now, sit down, and tell me he that knows,
    Why this same strict and most observant watch
    So nightly toils the subject of the land,
    And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
    And foreign mart for implements of war;
    Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
    Does not divide the Sunday from the week.

    At least, the whisper goes so.
 Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
    Of unimproved mettle hot and full,  
    Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
    Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
    For food and diet, to some enterprise
    That hath a stomach in't; which is no other,
    As it doth well appear unto our state,
    But to recover of us, by strong hand
    And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
    So by his father lost; and this, I take it,
    Is the main motive of our preparations,
    The source of this our watch, and the chief head
    Of this post-haste and romage in the land.

  Ber.
 I think it be no other but e'en so.

  Hor.
 A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.

    In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
    A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
    The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
    Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;  
    As stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
    Disasters in the sun; and the moist star
    Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands
    Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.


                      Enter Ghost again.


    But soft! behold! Lo, where it comes again!
    I'll cross it, though it blast me.

    If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
    Speak to me.

    Speak of it! Stay, and speak!- Stop it, Marcellus!
  Mar.

  Ber.
 'Tis here!
  Hor.

    We do it wrong, being so majestical,
    To offer it the show of violence;
    For it is as the air, invulnerable,
    And our vain blows malicious mockery.

  Ber.
 It was about to speak, when the cock crew.
 And then it started, like a guilty thing  
    Upon a fearful summons.
 I have heard
    The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
    Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
    Awake the god of day; and at his warning,
    Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
    Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
    To his confine; and of the truth herein
    This present object made probation.

  Mar.

    Some say that ever, 'gainst that season comes
    Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
    The bird of dawning singeth all night long;
    And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
    The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
    No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
    So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
 So have I heard and do in part believe it.

    Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
    As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
    Let's do't, I pray; and I this morning know
    Where we shall find him most conveniently.





Scene II.

Elsinore.
 A room of state in the Castle.


  King.
 For all, our thanks.

    Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,
    Holding a weak supposal of our worth,
    Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
    Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
    Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
    He hath not fail'd to pester us with message
    Importing the surrender of those lands
    Lost by his father, with all bands of law,
    To our most valiant brother.

    Thus much the business is: we have here writ
    To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
    Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
    Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
    His further gait herein, in that the levies,
    The lists, and full proportions are all made
    Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
    You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
    For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,  
    Giving to you no further personal power
    To business with the King, more than the scope
    Of these dilated articles allow.
            [Gives a paper.

  Cor.

  King.
 Heartily farewell.
 What is't, Laertes?
    You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
    And lose your voice.
 What wouldst thou beg, Laertes,
    That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
    The head is not more native to the heart,
    The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
    Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.

  King.
 Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
  Pol.
 He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
    By laboursome petition, and at last
    Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent.

  King.
 Take thy fair hour, Laertes.
 Time be thine,
    And thy best graces spend it at thy will!
    But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son-
  Ham.
 [aside] A little more than kin, and less than kind!
  King.
 I am too much i' th' sun.
  
  Ham.
 Ay, madam, it is common.

  Queen.
 If it be,
    Why seems it so particular with thee?
  Ham.
 Seems, madam, Nay, it is.
 I know not 'seems.
'
    'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
    Nor customary suits of solemn black,
    Nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,
    No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
    Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
    Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
    'That can denote me truly.
 'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,
    To give these mourning duties to your father;
    But you must know, your father lost a father;
    That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
    In filial obligation for some term
    To do obsequious sorrow.
 But to persever  
    In obstinate condolement is a course
    Of impious stubbornness.
 'Tis unmanly grief;
    It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
    A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
    An understanding simple and unschool'd;
    For what we know must be, and is as common
    As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
    Why should we in our peevish opposition
    Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
    A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
    To reason most absurd, whose common theme
    Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
    From the first corse till he that died to-day,
    'This must be so.
' We pray you throw to earth
    This unprevailing woe, and think of us
    As of a father; for let the world take note
    You are the most immediate to our throne,
    And with no less nobility of love
    Than that which dearest father bears his son
    Do I impart toward you.
 For your intent  
    In going back to school in Wittenberg,
    It is most retrograde to our desire;
    And we beseech you, bend you to remain
    Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
    Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

  Queen.

  King.

    Be as ourself in Denmark.
 Madam, come.

    This gentle and unforc'd accord of Hamlet
    Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
    No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day
    But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
    And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
    Respeaking earthly thunder.

                                Flourish.
 Exeunt all but Hamlet.

  Ham.
 That it should come to this!
    But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two.

    So excellent a king, that was to this
    Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
    That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
    Visit her face too roughly.
 Heaven and earth!
    Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
    As if increase of appetite had grown
    By what it fed on; and yet, within a month-
    Let me not think on't! Frailty, thy name is woman!-
    A little month, or ere those shoes were old
    With which she followed my poor father's body
    Like Niobe, all tears- why she, even she
    (O God! a beast that wants discourse of reason
    Would have mourn'd longer) married with my uncle;  
    My father's brother, but no more like my father
    Than I to Hercules.
 O, most wicked speed, to post
    With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
    It is not, nor it cannot come to good.

    But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue!

          Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Bernardo.


  Hor.
 Hail to your lordship!
  Ham.

  Hor.

  Ham.

    And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?
    Marcellus?
  Mar.
 I am very glad to see you.
-  
    But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
  Hor.
 A truant disposition, good my lord.

  Ham.
 I know you are no truant.

    But what is your affair in Elsinore?
    We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

  Hor.

  Ham.

    I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

  Ham.
 Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak'd meats
    Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
 O, where, my lord?
  Ham.
 In my mind's eye, Horatio.

  Hor.
 He was a goodly king.
  
  Ham.
 He was a man, take him for all in all.

    I shall not look upon his like again.

  Ham.
 My lord, the King your father.

  Ham.
 The King my father?
  Hor.
 Season your admiration for a while
    With an attent ear, till I may deliver
    Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
    This marvel to you.

  Ham.
 For God's love let me hear!
  Hor.
 A figure like your father,
    Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
    Appears before them and with solemn march
    Goes slow and stately by them.
 Thrice he walk'd
    By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
    Within his truncheon's length; whilst they distill'd  
    Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
    Stand dumb and speak not to him.
 I knew your father.
 But where was this?
  Mar.
 My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.
 Did you not speak to it?
  Hor.
 Yet once methought
    It lifted up it head and did address
    Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
    But even then the morning cock crew loud,
    And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
    And vanish'd from our sight.
 'Tis very strange.
 Indeed, indeed, sirs.
 and Ber.
] We do, my lord.

  Ham.
 Arm'd, say you?
  Both.
 From top to toe?
  Both.
 My lord, from head to foot.
 Then saw you not his face?
  Hor.
 O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver up.
 A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
 Pale or red?
  Hor.
 And fix'd his eyes upon you?
  Hor.

  Ham.
 I would I had been there.

  Hor.

  Ham.
 Very like, very like.
 Stay'd it long?  
  Hor.
 While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
 Not when I saw't.

  Ham.
 His beard was grizzled- no?
  Hor.
 It was, as I have seen it in his life,
    A sable silver'd.

  Ham.

    Perchance 'twill walk again.

  Hor.
 If it assume my noble father's person,
    I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
    And bid me hold my peace.
 I pray you all,
    If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
    Let it be tenable in your silence still;
    And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
    Give it an understanding but no tongue.

    I will requite your loves.
 So, fare you well.

  All.
 Your loves, as mine to you.

                                        Exeunt [all but Hamlet].

    My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well.

    I doubt some foul play.
 Foul deeds will rise,
    Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.

Elsinore.
 A room in the house of Polonius.


  Laer.
 My necessaries are embark'd.
 Farewell.

    And, sister, as the winds give benefit
    And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
    But let me hear from you.

  Oph.
 Do you doubt that?
  Laer.

  Oph.
 No more but so?
  Laer.

    For nature crescent does not grow alone
    In thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes,
    The inward service of the mind and soul
    Grows wide withal.
 Perhaps he loves you now,  
    And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
    The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
    His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;
    For he himself is subject to his birth.

    The chariest maid is prodigal enough
    If she unmask her beauty to the moon.

    Virtue itself scopes not calumnious strokes.

    Be wary then; best safety lies in fear.

  Oph.
 But, good my brother,
    Do not as some ungracious pastors do,
    Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
    Whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,
    Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
    And recks not his own rede.

  Laer.
 O, fear me not!

                       Enter Polonius.
  

    I stay too long.
 But here my father comes.

    A double blessing is a double grace;
    Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
 Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
    The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
    And you are stay'd for.
 There- my blessing with thee!
    And these few precepts in thy memory
    Look thou character.
 Give thy thoughts no tongue,
    Nor any unproportion'd thought his act.

    Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar:
    Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
    Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;
    But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
    Of each new-hatch'd, unfledg'd comrade.
 Beware
    Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,
    Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.

    Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,  
    But not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
    For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
    And they in France of the best rank and station
    Are most select and generous, chief in that.

    This above all- to thine own self be true,
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    Thou canst not then be false to any man.

    Farewell.
 My blessing season this in thee!
  Laer.
 Go, your servants tend.

  Laer.

  Oph.
 Farewell.
                                          Exit.

  Pol.

    If it be so- as so 'tis put on me,
    And that in way of caution- I must tell you
    You do not understand yourself so clearly
    As it behooves my daughter and your honour.

    What is between you? Give me up the truth.
 He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
    Of his affection to me.

  Pol.
 Affection? Pooh! You speak like a green girl,
    Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.

    Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
  Oph.
 Marry, I will teach you! Think yourself a baby
    That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
    Which are not sterling.
 Tender yourself more dearly,
    Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
    Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.
  
  Oph.

  Pol.
 Ay, fashion you may call it.
 Go to, go to!
  Oph.

  Pol.
 Ay, springes to catch woodcocks! I do know,
    When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
    Lends the tongue vows.
 These blazes, daughter,
    Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
    Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
    You must not take for fire.

    Set your entreatments at a higher rate
    Than a command to parley.
 In few, Ophelia,
    Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
    Not of that dye which their investments show,
    But mere implorators of unholy suits,  
    Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
    The better to beguile.
 This is for all:
    I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
    Have you so slander any moment leisure
    As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.

    Look to't, I charge you.
 Come your ways.
 I shall obey, my lord.

                                                         Exeunt.


Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.

  Hor.
 It is a nipping and an eager air.
 I think it lacks of twelve.

  Mar.
 No, it is struck.

                   A flourish of trumpets, and two pieces go off.

    What does this mean, my lord?
  Ham.
 The King doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,
    Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels,
    And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
    The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
    The triumph of his pledge.

  Hor.
 Ay, marry, is't;
    But to my mind, though I am native here  
    And to the manner born, it is a custom
    More honour'd in the breach than the observance.

    This heavy-headed revel east and west
    Makes us traduc'd and tax'd of other nations;
    They clip us drunkards and with swinish phrase
    Soil our addition; and indeed it takes
    From our achievements, though perform'd at height,
    The pith and marrow of our attribute.

    So oft it chances in particular men
    That, for some vicious mole of nature in them,
    As in their birth,- wherein they are not guilty,
    Since nature cannot choose his origin,-
    By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
    Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
    Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
    The form of plausive manners, that these men
    Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
    Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,
    Their virtues else- be they as pure as grace,
    As infinite as man may undergo-  
    Shall in the general censure take corruption
    From that particular fault.


  Hor.
 I'll call thee Hamlet,
    King, father, royal Dane.
 O, answer me?
    Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
    Why thy canoniz'd bones, hearsed in death,
    Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre
    Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,
    Hath op'd his ponderous and marble jaws
    To cast thee up again.
 What may this mean  
    That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
    Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
    Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
    So horridly to shake our disposition
    With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
    Say, why is this? wherefore? What should we do?
                                           Ghost beckons Hamlet.

  Mar.
 Look with what courteous action
    It waves you to a more removed ground.

    But do not go with it!
  Hor.
 Then will I follow it.

  Hor.
 What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
    Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
    That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
    And there assume some other, horrible form
    Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
    And draw you into madness? Think of it.

  Ham.
 It waves me still.
 I'll follow thee.

  Mar.
 Hold off your hands!
  Hor.
 You shall not go.

  Ham.

                                                [Ghost beckons.
]  
    Still am I call'd.

                                        Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet.
 He waxes desperate with imagination.

  Mar.
 Let's follow.
 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.
 To what issue wail this come?
  Mar.
 Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
 Heaven will direct it.





Scene V.

Elsinore.
 The Castle.
 Another part of the fortifications.
 Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak! I'll go no further.
 Mark me.

  Ham.
 I will.
 My hour is almost come,
    When I to sulph'rous and tormenting flames
    Must render up myself.

  Ham.
 Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
    To what I shall unfold.

  Ham.
 Speak.
 So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

  Ham.
 Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift
    As meditation or the thoughts of love,
    May sweep to my revenge.

  Ghost.
 Now, Hamlet, hear.

    'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
    A serpent stung me.
 But know, thou noble youth,
    The serpent that did sting thy father's life
    Now wears his crown.

    But soft! methinks I scent the morning air.

    Brief let me be.
 Sleeping within my orchard,
    My custom always of the afternoon,
    Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
    With juice of cursed hebona in a vial,
    And in the porches of my ears did pour
    The leperous distilment; whose effect
    Holds such an enmity with blood of man
    That swift as quicksilverr it courses through
    The natural gates and alleys of the body,
    And with a sudden vigour it doth posset
    And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
    The thin and wholesome blood.
 So did it mine;
    And a most instant tetter bark'd about,  
    Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
    All my smooth body.

  Ham.
 If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.

    Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
    A couch for luxury and damned incest.

    But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,
    Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
    Against thy mother aught.
 Leave her to heaven,
    And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
    To prick and sting her.
 Fare thee well at once.
 Remember thee?
    Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
    In this distracted globe.
 Remember thee?
    Yea, from the table of my memory
    I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
    All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past
    That youth and observation copied there,
    And thy commandment all alone shall live
    Within the book and volume of my brain,
    Unmix'd with baser matter.
]
    So, uncle, there you are.

  Hor.


  Mar.
 Heaven secure him!
  Ham.
 So be it!
  Mar.
 Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.

  Mar.
 How is't, my noble lord?
  Hor.
 What news, my lord?
  Mar.

  Ham.

  Ham.
 How say you then? Would heart of man once think it?
    But you'll be secret?
  Both.
 Ay, by heaven, my lord.
  
  Ham.
 There's neer a villain dwelling in all Denmark
    But he's an arrant knave.

  Hor.

  Ham.
 I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
    Yes, faith, heartily.

  Ham.
 Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
    And much offence too.
 Touching this vision here,
    It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you.

    For your desire to know what is between us,
    O'ermaster't as you may.
 And now, good friends,  
    As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
    Give me one poor request.
 What is't, my lord? We will.
 My lord, we will not.

  Ham.
 Nay, but swear't.
 In faith,
    My lord, not I.

  Mar.
 Nor I, my lord- in faith.

  Ham.
 Upon my sword.

  Mar.
 We have sworn, my lord, already.

  Ham.
 Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
 Swear.
 Aha boy, say'st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?
    Come on! You hear this fellow in the cellarage.
 Propose the oath, my lord.
  
  Ham.

    Swear by my sword.

  Ghost.
 [beneath] Swear.

  Ham.

    Come hither, gentlemen,
    And lay your hands again upon my sword.
 [beneath] Swear by his sword.

  Ham.
 Well said, old mole! Canst work i' th' earth so fast?
    A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
"
  Hor.
 And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.

  Ghost.
 Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! So, gentlemen,
    With all my love I do commend me to you;
    And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
    May do t' express his love and friending to you,
    God willing, shall not lack.
 Let us go in together;
    And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
 O cursed spite
    That ever I was born to set it right!
    Nay, come, let's go together.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 Scene I.
 A room in the house of Polonius.


Enter Polonius and Reynaldo.


  Pol.
 Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

  Rey.

  Rey.
 My lord, I did intend it.

  Pol.
 Marry, well said, very well said.
' Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
  Rey.
 Ay, very well, my lord.
  
  Pol.
 'And in part him, but,' you may say, 'not well.

    But if't be he I mean, he's very wild
    Addicted so and so'; and there put on him
    What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank
    As may dishonour him- take heed of that;
    But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
    As are companions noted and most known
    To youth and liberty.
 As gaming, my lord.

  Pol.
 Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
    Drabbing.
 You may go so far.
 My lord, that would dishonour him.
 Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.

    You must not put another scandal on him,
    That he is open to incontinency.

    That's not my meaning.
  
  Rey.
 Wherefore should you do this?
  Rey.
 Ay, my lord,
    I would know that.

  Pol.

    You laying these slight sullies on my son
    As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,
    Mark you,
    Your party in converse, him you would sound,
    Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
    The youth you breathe of guilty, be assur'd
    He closes with you in this consequence:
    'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman'-
    According to the phrase or the addition
    Of man and country-
  Rey.
 And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- What was I about to say?
    By the mass, I was about to say something! Where did I leave?
  Rey.
 At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,' and  
    gentleman.

    See you now-
    Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;
    And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
    With windlasses and with assays of bias,
    By indirections find directions out.

  Pol.
 Observe his inclination in yourself.

  Pol.
 And let him ply his music.
 Well, my lord.

  Pol.
 Farewell!
                                                  Exit Reynaldo.


                       Enter Ophelia.


    How now, Ophelia? What's the matter?
  Oph.
 O my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
  Pol.
 Mad for thy love?  
  Oph.
 My lord, I do not know,
    But truly I do fear it.
 What said he?
  Oph.
 He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
    Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
    And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
    He falls to such perusal of my face
    As he would draw it.

    At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
    And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
    He rais'd a sigh so piteous and profound
    As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
    And end his being.

  Pol.
 Come, go with me.

    This is the very ecstasy of love,
    Whose violent property fordoes itself  
    And leads the will to desperate undertakings
    As oft as any passion under heaven
    That does afflict our natures.

    What, have you given him any hard words of late?
  Oph.
 No, my good lord; but, as you did command,
    I did repel his letters and denied
    His access to me.
 That hath made him mad.
 Come, go we to the King.

    Come.

                                                         Exeunt.

Elsinore.
 A room in the Castle.


Flourish.
 [Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, cum aliis.


  King.
 Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

    Moreover that we much did long to see you,
    The need we have to use you did provoke
    Our hasty sending.
 Something have you heard
    Of Hamlet's transformation.
 So I call it,
    Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
    Resembles that it was.
 I entreat you both
    That, being of so young clays brought up with him,
    And since so neighbour'd to his youth and haviour,
    That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
    Some little time; so by your companies
    To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
    So much as from occasion you may glean,  
    Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
    That, open'd, lies within our remedy.

  Queen.
 If it will please you
    To show us so much gentry and good will
    As to expend your time with us awhile
    For the supply and profit of our hope,
    Your visitation shall receive such thanks
    As fits a king's remembrance.

  Ros.
 Both your Majesties
    Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
    Put your dread pleasures more into command
    Than to entreaty.

  Guil.
 But we both obey,
    And here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
    To lay our service freely at your feet,
    To be commanded.
 Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
  
    And I beseech you instantly to visit
    My too much changed son.
 Heavens make our presence and our practices
    Pleasant and helpful to him!
  Queen.


                         Enter Polonius.

  King.
 O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
 Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.

    My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.

  King.

  Queen.

  King.


    Welcome, my good friends.
]
    That it might please you to give quiet pass
    Through your dominions for this enterprise,
    On such regards of safety and allowance
    As therein are set down.

  King.
 It likes us well;
    And at our more consider'd time we'll read,  
    Answer, and think upon this business.

    Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour.

    Go to your rest; at night we'll feast together.
 This business is well ended.

    My liege, and madam, to expostulate
    What majesty should be, what duty is,
    Why day is day, night is night, and time is time.

    Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
 Your noble son is mad.

    Mad call I it; for, to define true madness,
    What is't but to be nothing else but mad?
    But let that go.
 More matter, with less art.

  Pol.

    That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity;
    And pity 'tis 'tis true.
  
    Mad let us grant him then.

    Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.

    Perpend.

                                             [Reads] the letter.

    'To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified
      Ophelia,'-

    That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is a vile
      phrase.

    But you shall hear.
 Thus:
                                                        [Reads.
'
  Queen.
 Came this from Hamlet to her?
  Pol.
 Adieu.
'

    This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me;
    And more above, hath his solicitings,
    As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
    All given to mine ear.

  King.
 What do you think of me?
  King.
 As of a man faithful and honourable.

  Pol.
 I would fain prove so.
' And then I prescripts gave her,
    That she should lock herself from his resort,
    Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.

    Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
    And he, repulsed, a short tale to make,
    Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
    Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
    Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
    Into the madness wherein now he raves,
    And all we mourn for.
  
  King.
 Do you think 'tis this?
  Queen.
 it may be, very like.

  Pol.
 Hath there been such a time- I would fain know that-
    That I have Positively said ''Tis so,'
    When it prov'd otherwise.
 Not that I know.

    If circumstances lead me, I will find
    Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
    Within the centre.

  King.
 At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.

    Be you and I behind an arras then.

  King.
 We will try it.


                 Enter Hamlet, reading on a book.


  Queen.
 Away, I do beseech you, both away
    I'll board him presently.

    How does my good Lord Hamlet?
  Ham.
 Well, God-a-mercy.
 Do you know me, my lord?
  Ham.
 You are a fishmonger.

  Pol.
 Not I, my lord.

  Ham.

  Pol.
 Honest, my lord?
  Ham.
 Ay, sir.

  Pol.
 That's very true, my lord.
 For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god  
    kissing carrion- Have you a daughter?
  Pol.
 I have, my lord.
 Friend, look to't.
 Yet
    he knew me not at first.
 I'll speak to him again.
 Words, words, words.
 What is the matter, my lord?
  Ham.
 I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.

  Ham.
 All which,
    sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it
    not honesty to have it thus set down; for you yourself, sir,
    should be old as I am if, like a crab, you could go backward.
  
  Pol.
-
   Will You walk out of the air, my lord?
  Ham.
 Indeed, that is out o' th' air.
 [Aside] How pregnant sometimes
    his replies are! a happiness that often madness hits on, which
    reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of.
 You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more
    willingly part withal- except my life, except my life, except my
    life,

                    Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.


  Pol.
 Fare you well, my lord.

  Ham.
 These tedious old fools!
  Pol.

  Ros.
 [to Polonius] God save you, sir!
                                                Exit [Polonius].
 My honour'd lord!
  Ros.
 My most dear lord!
  Ham.
 My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah,
    Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?
  Ros.
 As the indifferent children of the earth.
 Happy in that we are not over-happy.

  Ham.
 Neither, my lord.
 Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her
    favours?
  Guil.
 Faith, her privates we.
 In the secret parts of Fortune? O! most true! she is a
    strumpet.
 What news ?
  Ros.
 None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.

  Ham.
 Then is doomsday near! But your news is not true.
 Let me
    question more in particular.
 What have you, my good friends,
    deserved at the hands of Fortune that she sends you to prison
    hither?
  Guil.
 Prison, my lord?  
  Ham.
 Then is the world one.
 A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
    dungeons, Denmark being one o' th' worst.

  Ham.
 Why, then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing either good
    or bad but thinking makes it so.
 To me it is a prison.

  Ros.
 Why, then your ambition makes it one.

  Ham.
 O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a
    king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.
 A dream itself is but a shadow.
 Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that
    it is but a shadow's shadow.

  Ham.
  
  Ham.
 No such matter! I will not sort you with the rest of my
    servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most
    dreadfully attended.
 But in the beaten way of friendship, what
    make you at Elsinore?
  Ros.
 To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.

  Ham.
 Come, come! Nay, speak.

  Guil.
 What should we say, my lord?
  Ham.
 You were sent for; and
    there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties
    have not craft enough to colour.

  Ros.
 To what end, my lord?
  Ham.
 That you must teach me.
 [aside] Nay then, I have an eye of you.
 I will tell you why.
 So shall my anticipation prevent your
    discovery, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no
    feather.
 What a
    piece of work is a man! how noble in reason! how infinite in
    faculties! in form and moving how express and admirable! in
    action how like an angel! in apprehension how like a god! the
    beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! And yet to me what
    is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me- no, nor woman
    neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.
 My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.
  
  Ham.
 Why did you laugh then, when I said 'Man delights not me'?
  Ros.
 To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten
    entertainment the players shall receive from you.
 We coted them
    on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.

  Ham.
 He that plays the king shall be welcome- his Majesty shall
    have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and
    target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall
    end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose
    lungs are tickle o' th' sere; and the lady shall say her mind
    freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort.
 What players are
    they?
  Ros.
 Even those you were wont to take such delight in, the
    tragedians of the city.
 How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in
    reputation and profit, was better both ways.
 I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
    innovation.

  Ham.
 These are now
    the fashion, and so berattle the common stages (so they call
    them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and
    dare scarce come thither.
 What, are they children? Who maintains 'em? How are they
    escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can
    sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow
    themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means
    are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim
    against their own succession.

  Ros.
 Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation
    holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy.
 There was, for a
    while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player
    went to cuffs in the question.

  Ham.

  Ham.
 Ay, that they do, my lord- Hercules and his load too.

  Ham.
 It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of Denmark, and
    those that would make mows at him while my father lived give
    twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in
    little.
 'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if
    philosophy could find it out.


                     Flourish for the Players.
 Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
 Let me comply
    with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players (which I
    tell you must show fairly outwards) should more appear like
    entertainment than yours.
 You are welcome.
 But my uncle-father
    and aunt-mother are deceiv'd.

  Guil.
 In what, my dear lord?
  Ham.
 When the wind is southerly I
    know a hawk from a handsaw.
 Well be with you, gentlemen!
  Ham.
 Happily he's the second time come to them; for they say an old
    man is twice a child.

  Ham.
 I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players.
-
   You say right, sir; a Monday morning; twas so indeed.

  Ham.
 My lord, I have news to tell you.
 The actors are come hither, my lord.

  Ham.
 Buzz, buzz!
  Pol.
 Then came each actor on his ass-
  Pol.
 The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
    history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
    tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral; scene  
    individable, or poem unlimited.
 Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
    Plautus too light.
 O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
  Pol.
 What treasure had he, my lord?
  Ham.
 Why,

         'One fair daughter, and no more,
           The which he loved passing well.
'

  Pol.
 [aside] Still on my daughter.
 Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?
  Pol.
 If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I
    love passing well.

  Ham.
 Nay, that follows not.

  Pol.
 What follows then, my lord?
  Ham.
 Why,

           'As by lot, God wot,'

 and then, you know,
  
           'It came to pass, as most like it was.
'

    The first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look
    where my abridgment comes.


                     Enter four or five Players.


    You are welcome, masters; welcome, all.
- I am glad to see thee
    well.
- Welcome, good friends.
- O, my old friend? Why, thy face is
    valanc'd since I saw thee last.
- Masters, you are
    all welcome.
 We'll e'en to't like French falconers, fly at
    anything we see.
 We'll have a speech straight.
 Come, give us a
    taste of your quality.
 Come, a passionate speech.

  1.
 I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted;
    or if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleas'd  
    not the million, 'twas caviary to the general; but it was (as I
    receiv'd it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in
    the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes,
    set down with as much modesty as cunning.
 I remember one said
    there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury,
    nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of
    affectation; but call'd it an honest method, as wholesome as
    sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine.
 One speech in't
    I chiefly lov'd.
 'Twas AEneas' tale to Dido, and thereabout of it
    especially where he speaks of Priam's slaughter.
 If it live in
    your memory, begin at this line- let me see, let me see:

         'The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast-'

    'Tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:

         'The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
         Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
         When he lay couched in the ominous horse,
         Hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd  
         With heraldry more dismal.
 Head to foot
         Now is be total gules, horridly trick'd
         With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
         Bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
         That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
         To their lord's murther.
'

    So, proceed you.
 Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
     discretion.
 Play.
 'Anon he finds him,
      Striking too short at Greeks.
 Then senseless Ilium,
      Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
      Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
      Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear.

      So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,
      And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
      Did nothing.

      But, as we often see, against some storm,
      A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
      The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
      As hush as death- anon the dreadful thunder
      Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
      Aroused vengeance sets him new awork;
      And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
      On Mars's armour, forg'd for proof eterne,
      With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
      Now falls on Priam.
 This is too long.

  Ham.
- Prithee say on.

    He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps.
 Say on; come to
    Hecuba.


  1.
 Play.
 'But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen-'

  Ham.
 'The mobled queen'?
  Pol.


  1.
 'Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
      With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head
      Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
      About her lank and all o'erteemed loins,
      A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up-  
      Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd
      'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd.

      But if the gods themselves did see her then,
      When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
      In Mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
      The instant burst of clamour that she made
      (Unless things mortal move them not at all)
      Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
      And passion in the gods.
'

  Pol.
 Prithee no more!
  Ham.
 'Tis well.
 I'll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.
-
    Good my lord, will you see the players well bestow'd? Do you
    hear? Let them be well us'd; for they are the abstract and brief
    chronicles of the time.
 After your death you were better have a
    bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.

  Pol.
 My lord, I will use them according to their desert.
 The less they deserve, the more merit is in
    your bounty.
 Take them in.
 Come, sirs.

  Ham.
 Follow him, friends.
 We'll hear a play to-morrow.

                 Exeunt Polonius and Players [except the First].

    Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play 'The Murther of
    Gonzago'?
  1.
 Ay, my lord.
 We'll ha't to-morrow night.
 You could, for a need, study a
    speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which I would set down and
    insert in't, could you not?
  1.
 Play.
 Ay, my lord.
 Very well.
 You are welcome to
    Elsinore.

  Ros.
 Good my lord!
  Ham.
  
    O what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
    Is it not monstrous that this player here,
    But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
    Could force his soul so to his own conceit
    That, from her working, all his visage wann'd,
    Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
    A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
    With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing!
    For Hecuba!
    What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
    That he should weep for her? What would he do,
    Had he the motive and the cue for passion
    That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
    And cleave the general ear with horrid speech;
    Make mad the guilty and appal the free,
    Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed
    The very faculties of eyes and ears.

    Yet I,
    A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
    Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,  
    And can say nothing! No, not for a king,
    Upon whose property and most dear life
    A damn'd defeat was made.
 Am I a coward?
    Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?
    Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
    Tweaks me by th' nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
    As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this, ha?
    'Swounds, I should take it! for it cannot be
    But I am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall
    To make oppression bitter, or ere this
    I should have fatted all the region kites
    With this slave's offal.
 Bloody bawdy villain!
    Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
    O, vengeance!
    Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
    That I, the son of a dear father murther'd,
    Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
    Must (like a whore) unpack my heart with words
    And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
    A scullion!  
    Fie upon't! foh! About, my brain! Hum, I have heard
    That guilty creatures, sitting at a play,
    Have by the very cunning of the scene
    Been struck so to the soul that presently
    They have proclaim'd their malefactions;
    For murther, though it have no tongue, will speak
    With most miraculous organ, I'll have these Players
    Play something like the murther of my father
    Before mine uncle.
 If he but blench,
    I know my course.
 The spirit that I have seen
    May be a devil; and the devil hath power
    T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps
    Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
    As he is very potent with such spirits,
    Abuses me to damn me.
 I'll have grounds
    More relative than this.
         Exit.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT III.

Elsinore.
 A room in the Castle.


Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and Lords.


  King.
 He does confess he feels himself distracted,
    But from what cause he will by no means speak.

  Guil.

  Queen.
 But with much forcing of his disposition.
 Niggard of question, but of our demands
    Most free in his reply.

  Queen.
 Did you assay him  
    To any pastime?
  Ros.
 Madam, it so fell out that certain players
    We o'erraught on the way.
 Of these we told him,
    And there did seem in him a kind of joy
    To hear of it.

  Pol.

  Ros.
 We shall, my lord.

  King.
  
    Her father and myself (lawful espials)
    Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
    We may of their encounter frankly judge
    And gather by him, as he is behav'd,
    If't be th' affliction of his love, or no,
    That thus he suffers for.

  Queen.
 So shall I hope your virtues
    Will bring him to his wonted way again,
    To both your honours.

  Oph.

                                                   [Exit Queen.
 Ophelia, walk you here.
- We are oft to blame in this,
    'Tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage
    And pious action we do sugar o'er  
    The Devil himself.

  King.
 [aside] O, 'tis too true!
    How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
    The harlot's cheek, beautied with plast'ring art,
    Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
    Than is my deed to my most painted word.
 I hear him coming.
 Let's withdraw, my lord.

                                      Exeunt King and Polonius].


                           Enter Hamlet.
 To be, or not to be- that is the question:
    Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
    The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune
    Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
    And by opposing end them.
 To die- to sleep.
 I humbly thank you; well, well, well.

  Oph.
 My lord, I have remembrances of yours
    That I have longed long to re-deliver.

  Ham.
 No, not I!
    I never gave you aught.

  Oph.
  
    There, my lord.
 Ha, ha! Are you honest?
  Oph.
 My lord?
  Ham.
 Are you fair?
  Oph.
 That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no
    discourse to your beauty.
 Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
  Ham.
 This was sometime a paradox,
    but now the time gives it proof.
 You should not have believ'd me; for virtue cannot so
    inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it.

  Oph.
 I was the more deceived.
 Get thee to a nunnery! Why wouldst thou be a breeder of
    sinners? I am myself indifferent honest, but yet I could accuse
    me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me.
  
    I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my
    beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give
    them shape, or time to act them in.
 What should such fellows as I
    do, crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves all;
    believe none of us.
 Go thy ways to a nunnery.
 Where's your
    father?
  Oph.
 At home, my lord.

  Ham.
 O, help him, you sweet heavens!
  Ham.
 To a nunnery, go; and quickly too.

    Farewell.
 God hath
    given you one face, and you make yourselves another.
 You jig, you
    amble, and you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make your  
    wantonness your ignorance.
 I say, we will have no moe marriages.
 Those that are
    married already- all but one- shall live; the rest shall keep as
    they are.
                            Exit.

  Oph.
 O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
    The courtier's, scholar's, soldier's, eye, tongue, sword,
    Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
    The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
    Th' observ'd of all observers- quite, quite down!
    And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
    That suck'd the honey of his music vows,
    Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
    Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;
    That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth
    Blasted with ecstasy.
 Love? his affections do not that way tend;  
    Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,
    Was not like madness.
 What think you on't?
  Pol.
 It shall do well.
 But yet do I believe
    The origin and commencement of his grief
    Sprung from neglected love.

    We heard it all.
 Let her be round with him;
    And I'll be plac'd so please you, in the ear
    Of all their conference.
 If she find him not,
    To England send him; or confine him where
    Your wisdom best shall think.

  King.
 It shall be so.

    Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.
         Exeunt.
 hall in the Castle.
 Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounc'd it to you,
    trippingly on the tongue.
 But if you mouth it, as many of our
    players do, I had as live the town crier spoke my lines.
 Nor do
    not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all
    gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say)
    whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a
    temperance that may give it smoothness.
 Pray you avoid it.

  Player.
 I warrant your honour.
 Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your
    tutor.
 Suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with
    this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
    nature: for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing,  
    whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as
    'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show Virtue her own feature,
    scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his
    form and pressure.
 O, there be players that I
    have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to
    speak it profanely), that, neither having the accent of
    Christians, nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so
    strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of Nature's
    journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated
    humanity so abominably.
 I hope we have reform'd that indifferently with us, sir.
 O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns
    speak no more than is set down for them.

                                                 Exeunt Players.


    How now, my lord? Will the King hear this piece of work?
  Pol.
 And the Queen too, and that presently.

  Ham.
 Bid the players make haste, [Exit Polonius.
                       Exeunt they two.

  Ham.


  Hor.
 Here, sweet lord, at your service.

  Ham.

  Hor.
 O, my dear lord!
  Ham.
 Dost thou hear?
    Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
    And could of men distinguish, her election
    Hath scald thee for herself.
 For thou hast been
    As one, in suff'ring all, that suffers nothing;
    A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
    Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blest are those
    Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled
    That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
    To sound what stop she please.
 Something too much of this I
    There is a play to-night before the King.

    One scene of it comes near the circumstance,
    Which I have told thee, of my father's death.
  
    I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
    Even with the very comment of thy soul
    Observe my uncle.
 Give him heedful note;
    For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
    And after we will both our judgments join
    In censure of his seeming.

  Hor.
 Well, my lord.

    If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
    And scape detecting, I will pay the theft.


    Sound a flourish.
 [Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
      Guildenstern, and other Lords attendant, with the Guard
                       carrying torches.
 They are coming to the play.
  
    Get you a place.
 How fares our cousin Hamlet?
  Ham.
 Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish.
 I eat the air,
    promise-cramm'd.
 You cannot feed capons so.
 That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
 What did you enact?
  Pol.
 I did enact Julius Caesar; I was kill'd i' th' Capitol; Brutus
    kill'd me.
 Be
    the players ready.

  Ros.
 Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
 No, good mother.
]  
  Oph.
 No, my lord.

  Ham.
 I mean, my head upon your lap?
  Oph.
 Ay, my lord.
 Do you think I meant country matters?
  Oph.
 I think nothing, my lord.

  Ham.

  Oph.
 Nothing.

  Oph.
 You are merry, my lord.

  Ham.
 Who, I?
  Oph.
 Ay, my lord.
 Nay 'tis twice two months, my lord.

  Ham.
 So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a
    suit of sables.
 O heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten
    yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life
    half a year.
 The dumb show enters.


    Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen embracing
    him and he her.
 She kneels, and makes show of protestation
    unto him.
 He takes her up, and declines his head upon her
    neck.
 He lays him down upon a bank of flowers.
 She, seeing
    him asleep, leaves him.
 Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his
    crown, kisses it, pours poison in the sleeper's ears, and
    leaves him.
 The Poisoner with some three or four Mutes,
    comes in again, seem to condole with her.
 The Poisoner wooes the Queen with gifts; she
    seems harsh and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts
    his love.
 What means this, my lord?
  Ham.
 Marry, this is miching malhecho; it means mischief.
  
  Oph.
 The players cannot keep counsel;
    they'll tell all.

  Oph.
 Ay, or any show that you'll show him.
 Be not you asham'd to
    show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.

  Oph.
 You are naught, you are naught! I'll mark the play.


    Pro.
]

  Ham.
 Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
  Oph.
 'Tis brief, my lord.
  

    King.
 Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
      Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
      And thirty dozed moons with borrowed sheen
      About the world have times twelve thirties been,
      Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands,
      Unite comutual in most sacred bands.

    Queen.

      That I distrust you.
 Yet, though I distrust,
      Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must;
      For women's fear and love holds quantity,
      In neither aught, or in extremity.

      Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
      Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

    King.
 Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;  
      My operant powers their functions leave to do.

      And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
      Honour'd, belov'd, and haply one as kind
      For husband shalt thou-
    Queen.
 O, confound the rest!
      Such love must needs be treason in my breast.

      When second husband let me be accurst!
      None wed the second but who killed the first.


  Ham.
 [aside] Wormwood, wormwood!

    Queen.
 The instances that second marriage move
      Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.

    King.
 I do believe you think what now you speak;
      But what we do determine oft we break.

      Purpose is but the slave to memory,
      Of violent birth, but poor validity;
      Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,  
      But fill unshaken when they mellow be.

      Most necessary 'tis that we forget
      To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.

      Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
      Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.

      The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,
      The poor advanc'd makes friends of enemies;
      And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
      For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
      And who in want a hollow friend doth try,
      Directly seasons him his enemy.

      So think thou wilt no second husband wed;
      But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
 Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
      Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
      To desperation turn my trust and hope,
      An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope,
      Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
      Meet what I would have well, and it destroy,
      Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
      If, once a widow, ever I be wife!

  Ham.
 Sweet, leave me here awhile.

      My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
      The tedious day with sleep.

    Queen.
 Sleep rock thy brain,  
                                                    [He] sleeps.

      And never come mischance between us twain!
Exit.


  Ham.
 Madam, how like you this play?
  Queen.
 O, but she'll keep her word.
 Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in't?
  Ham.
 No, no! They do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th'
    world.

  King.
' Marry, how? Tropically.
 This play is the
    image of a murther done in Vienna.
 Gonzago is the duke's name;
    his wife, Baptista.
 You shall see anon.
 'Tis a knavish piece of
    work; but what o' that? Your Majesty, and we that have free
    souls, it touches us not.
 Let the gall'd jade winch; our withers
    are unwrung.

  
    This is one Lucianus, nephew to the King.

  Oph.
 I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see
    the puppets dallying.

  Oph.
 It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.

  Oph.
 So you must take your husbands.
- Begin, murtherer.


    Luc.
 Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;
      Confederate season, else no creature seeing;
      Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
      With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
      Thy natural magic and dire property
      On wholesome life usurp immediately.

                                   Pours the poison in his ears.


  Ham.
 He poisons him i' th' garden for's estate.

  Oph.
 How fares my lord?
  Pol.

  King.

  Ham.

    Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my
    fortunes turn Turk with me-with two Provincial roses on my raz'd
    shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
  Hor.
 Half a share.

  Ham.
   A whole one I!
         For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
           This realm dismantled was  
         Of Jove himself; and now reigns here
           A very, very- pajock.
 You might have rhym'd.

  Ham.
 O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand
    pound! Didst perceive?
  Hor.
 Very well, my lord.
 Upon the talk of the poisoning?
  Hor.
 I did very well note him.
   Aha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders!
         For if the King like not the comedy,
         Why then, belike he likes it not, perdy.


  Guil.
 Sir, a whole history.

  Guil.
 The King, sir-
  Ham.
 Is in his retirement, marvellous distemper'd.
 With drink, sir?
  Guil.
 No, my lord; rather with choler.
 Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start
    not so wildly from my affair.
 The Queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit
    hath sent me to you.

  Ham.

  Guil.
 Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed.
 Sir, I cannot.
 What, my lord?
  Ham.
 Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseas'd.
 Therefore no more, but to the matter! My mother, you  
    say-
  Ros.
 Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into
    amazement and admiration.

  Ham.
 O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no
    sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.
 She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.
 My lord, you once did love me.

  Ham.
 Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely
    bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to
    your friend.

  Ham.
 Sir, I lack advancement.

  Ros.
 How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself
    for your succession in Denmark?
  Ham.


                     Enter the Players with recorders.
  

    O, the recorders! Let me see one.
 O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
 Will you play upon this pipe?
  Guil.
 My lord, I cannot.

  Ham.
 I pray you.

  Guil.
 I do beseech you.

  Guil.

  Ham.
 It is as easy as lying.
 Govern these ventages with your
    fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will
    discourse most eloquent music.

  Guil.

  Ham.


    God bless you, sir!
  Pol.

  Ham.
 Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
  Pol.
 By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
 Methinks it is like a weasel.

  Pol.
 It is back'd like a weasel.
 Or like a whale.

  Pol.

  Ham.
- They fool me to the
    top of my bent.

  Ham.
 'By-and-by' is easily said.
- Leave me, friends.
 Now could I drink hot blood
    And do such bitter business as the day
    Would quake to look on.

    My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites-
    How in my words somever she be shent,
    To give them seals never, my soul, consent!             Exit.





Scene III.

A room in the Castle.


Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.


  King.

  Guil.
 We will ourselves provide.

    Most holy and religious fear it is
    To keep those many many bodies safe
    That live and feed upon your Majesty.
 The single and peculiar life is bound
    With all the strength and armour of the mind
    To keep itself from noyance; but much more
    That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
    The lives of many.
 Never alone
    Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

  King.


  Pol.
 My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
 I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
    And, as you said, and wisely was it said,
    'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,  
    Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
    The speech, of vantage.
 Fare you well, my liege.
 Thanks, dear my lord.

    O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
    It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
    A brother's murther! Pray can I not,
    Though inclination be as sharp as will.

    My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
    And, like a man to double business bound,
    I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
    And both neglect.
 What if this cursed hand
    Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
    Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
    To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
    But to confront the visage of offence?
    And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
    To be forestalled ere we come to fall,  
    Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look up;
    My fault is past.

    There is no shuffling; there the action lies
    In his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,
    Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
    To give in evidence.
 What then? What rests?
    Try what repentance can.
  
    Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
    Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
    All may be well.
                                  He kneels.


                         Enter Hamlet.


  Ham.
 And so he goes to heaven,
    And so am I reveng'd.
 That would be scann'd.

    Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.

    This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.

  King.

    Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
             Exit.





Scene IV.


Enter Queen and Polonius.
 He will come straight.
 Look you lay home to him.

    Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
    And that your Grace hath screen'd and stood between
    Much heat and him.
 I'll silence me even here.

    Pray you be round with him.
 (within) Mother, mother, mother!
  Queen.
 I'll warrant you; fear me not.
 Withdraw; I hear him coming.
]

                          Enter Hamlet.


  Ham.
 Now, mother, what's the matter?
  Queen.

  Ham.
 Mother, you have my father much offended.

  Queen.

  Ham.
 Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

  Queen.
 What's the matter now?
  Queen.
 Have you forgot me?
  Ham.
 No, by the rood, not so!
    You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
    And (would it were not so!) you are my mother.
 Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.

  Ham.
 [behind] What, ho! help, help, help!
  Ham.

  Pol.
 [behind] O, I am slain!
  Queen.
 O me, what hast thou done?
  Ham.
 Nay, I know not.
  
  Queen.
]
    Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
    I took thee for thy better.

    Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
 Peace! sit you down
    And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
    If it be made of penetrable stuff;
    If damned custom have not braz'd it so
    That it is proof and bulwark against sense.

  Queen.
 What have I done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
    In noise so rude against me?
  Ham.
 Such an act
    That blurs the grace and blush of modesty;
    Calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose
    From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
    And sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
    As false as dicers' oaths.
 Ay me, what act,
    That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
  Ham.
 Look here upon th's picture, and on this,
    The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.

    See what a grace was seated on this brow;
    Hyperion's curls; the front of Jove himself;
    An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;
    A station like the herald Mercury
    New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:
    A combination and a form indeed
    Where every god did seem to set his seal
    To give the world assurance of a man.

    This was your husband.
 Look you now what follows.
 Have you eyes?  
    Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
    And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes
    You cannot call it love; for at your age
    The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
    And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
    Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
    Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
    Is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,
    Nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd
    But it reserv'd some quantity of choice
    To serve in such a difference.

    O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
    If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
    To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
    And melt in her own fire.

    No more, sweet Hamlet!
  Ham.


  Ham.
 A king of shreds and patches!-
    Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
    You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?
  Queen.
 Alas, he's mad!
  Ham.
 Do not forget.

    Speak to her, Hamlet.
 How is it with you, lady?
  Queen.
 Alas, how is't with you,  
    That you do bend your eye on vacancy,
    And with th' encorporal air do hold discourse?
    Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
    And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
    Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
    Start up and stand an end.
 O gentle son,
    Upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
    Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
  Ham.
- Do not look upon me,
    Lest with this piteous action you convert
    My stern effects.
 Then what I have to do
    Will want true colour- tears perchance for blood.

  Queen.
 To whom do you speak this?
  Ham.
 Do you see nothing there?
  Queen.
 Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
 No, nothing but ourselves.

  Ham.
 Why, look you there! Look how it steals away!  
    My father, in his habit as he liv'd!
    Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
                                                     Exit Ghost.

  Queen.

    This bodiless creation ecstasy
    Is very cunning in.
 Mother, for love of grace,
    Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
    That not your trespass but my madness speaks.

    It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
    Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
    Infects unseen.
 Confess yourself to heaven;
    Repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
    And do not spread the compost on the weeds
    To make them ranker.
 Forgive me this my virtue;  
    For in the fatness of these pursy times
    Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg-
    Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

  Queen.
 O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.

  Ham.
 O, throw away the worser part of it,
    And live the purer with the other half,
    Good night- but go not to my uncle's bed.
 Refrain to-night,
    And that shall lend a kind of easiness
    To the next abstinence; the next more easy;
    For use almost can change the stamp of nature,
    And either [master] the devil, or throw him out
    With wondrous potency.
 Once more, good night;
    And when you are desirous to be blest,
    I'll blessing beg of you.
- For this same lord,  
    I do repent; but heaven hath pleas'd it so,
    To punish me with this, and this with me,
    That I must be their scourge and minister.

    I will bestow him, and will answer well
    The death I gave him.
 So again, good night.

    I must be cruel, only to be kind;
    Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.

    One word more, good lady.
 Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:
    Let the bloat King tempt you again to bed;
    Pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;
    And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
    Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
    Make you to ravel all this matter out,
    That I essentially am not in madness,
    But mad in craft.

  Ham.
 I must to England; you know that?
  Queen.

  Ham.
 O, 'tis most sweet
    When in one line two crafts directly meet.

    I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.
-
    Mother, good night.
- Indeed, this counsellor
    Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
    Who was in life a foolish peating knave.

                  [Exit the Queen.
 Then] Exit Hamlet, tugging in
                                                       Polonius.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT IV.
 Scene I.
 A room in the Castle.


Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
 These profound heaves
    You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.

    Where is your son?
  Queen.
 Bestow this place on us a little while.

                          [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
 Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
    Which is the mightier.
 In his lawless fit
    Behind the arras hearing something stir,
    Whips out his rapier, cries 'A rat, a rat!'
    And in this brainish apprehension kills
    The unseen good old man.
  
    Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?
    It will be laid to us, whose providence
    Should have kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt
    This mad young man.
 But so much was our love
    We would not understand what was most fit,
    But, like the owner of a foul disease,
    To keep it from divulging, let it feed
    Even on the pith of life.
 Where is he gone?
  Queen.
 O Gertrude, come away!
    The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
    But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
    We must with all our majesty and skill
    Both countenance and excuse.
 Ho, Guildenstern!

             Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

    Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
    And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him.

    Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body
    Into the chapel.
 I pray you haste in this.

                          Exeunt [Rosencrantz and Guildenstern].

    Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
    And let them know both what we mean to do
    And what's untimely done.

                                                         Exeunt.





Scene II.

Elsinore.
 But soft! What noise? Who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.
 What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
  Ham.
 Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.

  Ros.

  Ros.
 Believe what?
  Ham.
 That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own.
 Besides, to be
    demanded of a sponge, what replication should be made by the son
    of a king?
  Ros.
 Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
  Ham.
 Ay, sir; that soaks up the King's countenance, his rewards,  
    his authorities.
 He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;
    first mouth'd, to be last Swallowed.
 I understand you not, my lord.
 A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.

  Ros.

  Ham.
 The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body.

    The King is a thing-
  Guil.
 A thing, my lord?
  Ham.
 Hide fox, and all after.

                                                         Exeunt.





Scene III.

Elsinore.
 A room in the Castle.


Enter King.


  King.
 I have sent to seek him and to find the body.

    How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
    Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
 Diseases desperate grown
    By desperate appliance are reliev'd,
    Or not at all.


                    Enter Rosencrantz.
 Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.

  King.
 Bring him before us.

  Ros.
 Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.


        Enter Hamlet and Guildenstern [with Attendants].


  King.
 At supper.
 At supper? Where?
  Ham.
 A certain
    convocation of politic worms are e'en at him.

  King.
 A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat
    of the fish that hath fed of that worm.

  King.
 What dost thou mean by this?  
  Ham.
 Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through
    the guts of a beggar.
 Where is Polonius?
  Ham.
 If your messenger find him not
    there, seek him i' th' other place yourself.
 But indeed, if you
    find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
    the stair, into the lobby.
 Go seek him there.
 [To Attendants.
]
  Ham.
 He will stay till you come.

  Ham.
 For England?
  King.

  Ham.
  
  King.

  King.
 Thy loving father, Hamlet.
 Come, for England!
Exit.

    Delay it not; I'll have him hence to-night.

    Away! for everything is seal'd and done
    That else leans on th' affair.
 Pray you make haste.
 Do it, England;  
    For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
    And thou must cure me.
             Exit.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>



Scene IV.

Near Elsinore.


Enter Fortinbras with his Army over the stage.


  For.

    Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
    Craves the conveyance of a promis'd march
    Over his kingdom.
 You know the rendezvous.

    if that his Majesty would aught with us,
    We shall express our duty in his eye;
    And let him know so.
 Go softly on.


       Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, [Guildenstern,] and others.


  Ham.
 Good sir, whose powers are these?
  Capt.
 They are of Norway, sir.

  Ham.
 How purpos'd, sir, I pray you?
  Capt.
  
  Ham.
 The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
 Truly to speak, and with no addition,
    We go to gain a little patch of ground
    That hath in it no profit but the name.
 Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
    Will not debate the question of this straw.

    This is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace,
    That inward breaks, and shows no cause without
    Why the man dies.
 Go a little before.
]
    How all occasions do inform against me
    And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,
    If his chief good and market of his time
    Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.

    Witness this army of such mass and charge,
    Led by a delicate and tender prince,
    Whose spirit, with divine ambition puff'd,
    Makes mouths at the invisible event,  
    Exposing what is mortal and unsure
    To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
    Even for an eggshell.
 Rightly to be great
    Is not to stir without great argument,
    But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
    When honour's at the stake.
 How stand I then,
    That have a father klll'd, a mother stain'd,
    Excitements of my reason and my blood,
    And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
    The imminent death of twenty thousand men
    That for a fantasy and trick of fame
    Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
    Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
    Which is not tomb enough and continent
    To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
    My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!            Exit.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



Scene V.
 A room in the Castle.


  Queen.
 I will not speak with her.
 She is importunate, indeed distract.

    Her mood will needs be pitied.

  Queen.
 What would she have?
  Gent.
 Her speech is nothing,
    Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
    The hearers to collection; they aim at it,
    And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
    Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,
    Indeed would make one think there might be thought,
    Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.

  Hor.
 'Twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew
    Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
]
    [Aside] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is)
    Each toy seems Prologue to some great amiss.

    So full of artless jealousy is guilt
    It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.


  Oph.
 Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
  Queen.
 How now, Ophelia?
  Oph.
 (sings)
         How should I your true-love know
           From another one?
         By his cockle bat and' staff
           And his sandal shoon.


  Queen.


    (Sings) He is dead and gone, lady,  
              He is dead and gone;
            At his head a grass-green turf,
              At his heels a stone.
 Pray you mark.


    (Sings) White his shroud as the mountain snow-

                    Enter King.
 Alas, look here, my lord!
  Oph.
 How do you, pretty lady?
  Oph.
 Well, God dild you! They say the owl was a baker's daughter.
 God be at
    your table!
  King.
 Conceit upon her father.
 Pray let's have no words of this; but when they ask, you what
    it means, say you this:

    (Sings) To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,
              All in the morning bedtime,
            And I a maid at your window,
              To be your Valentine.


            Then up he rose and donn'd his clo'es
              And dupp'd the chamber door,
            Let in the maid, that out a maid
              Never departed more.


  King.
 Pretty Ophelia!
  Oph.
 Indeed, la, without an oath, I'll make an end on't!

    [Sings] By Gis and by Saint Charity,  
              Alack, and fie for shame!
            Young men will do't if they come to't
              By Cock, they are to blame.
'

    He answers:

            'So would I 'a' done, by yonder sun,
              An thou hadst not come to my bed.
 How long hath she been thus?
  Oph.
 I hope all will be well.

    My brother shall know of it; and so I thank you for your good
    counsel.
 Come, my coach! Good night, ladies.
 Good night, sweet
    ladies.
                         Exit
  King.

                                                 [Exit Horatio.
]  
    O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
    All from her father's death.
 O Gertrude, Gertrude,
    When sorrows come, they come not single spies.

    But in battalions! First, her father slain;
    Next, Your son gone, and he most violent author
    Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
    Thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers
    For good Polonius' death, and we have done but greenly
    In hugger-mugger to inter him; Poor Ophelia
    Divided from herself and her fair-judgment,
    Without the which we are Pictures or mere beasts;
    Last, and as such containing as all these,
    Her brother is in secret come from France;
    And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
    Feeds on his wonder, keep, himself in clouds,
    With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
    Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,
    Will nothing stick Our person to arraign
    In ear and ear.
                  A noise within.

  Queen.
 Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.


                     Enter a Messenger.


    What is the matter?
  Mess.
 Save Yourself, my lord:
    The ocean, overpeering of his list,
    Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste
    Than Young Laertes, in a riotous head,
    O'erbears Your offices.
 The rabble call him lord;
    And, as the world were now but to begin,
    Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
    The ratifiers and props of every word,
    They cry 'Choose we! Laertes shall be king!'
    Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
    'Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!'
                                                 A noise within.

  Queen.
 How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!  
    O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
  King.
 The doors are broke.


                    Enter Laertes with others.
 Where is this king?- Sirs, staid you all without.

  All.
 I pray you give me leave.

  All.
 Keep the door.
      [Exeunt his Followers.
]
    O thou vile king,
    Give me my father!
  Queen.

  Laer.

  King.
 What is the cause, Laertes,
    That thy rebellion looks so giantlike?
    Let him go, Gertrude.
  
    There's such divinity doth hedge a king
    That treason can but peep to what it would,
    Acts little of his will.

    Speak, man.

  Laer.
 Dead.

  Queen.
 But not by him!
  King.

  Laer.
 To this point I stand,
    That both the world, I give to negligence,
    Let come what comes; only I'll be reveng'd
    Most throughly for my father.

  King.
  
  King.
 Good Laertes,
    If you desire to know the certainty
    Of your dear father's death, is't writ in Your revenge
    That swoopstake you will draw both friend and foe,
    Winner and loser?
  Laer.
 To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
    And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
    Repast them with my blood.
 Why, now You speak
    Like a good child and a true gentleman.
  

    O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
    Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
    By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight
    Till our scale turn the beam.
 O rose of May!
    Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
    O heavens! is't possible a young maid's wits
    Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
    Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
    It sends some precious instance of itself
    After the thing it loves.
 (sings)
         They bore him barefac'd on the bier
           (Hey non nony, nony, hey nony)
         And in his grave rain'd many a tear.


    Fare you well, my dove!
  Laer.
 Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,
    It could not move thus.
  
  Oph.
' O,
    how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his
    master's daughter.
 This nothing's more than matter.

  Oph.
 There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.
 And there is pansies, that's for thoughts.

  Laer.
 A document in madness! Thoughts and remembrance fitted.

  Oph.
 There's fennel for you, and columbines.

    O, you must wear your rue with a difference! There's a daisy.
 I
    would give you some violets, but they wither'd all when my father
    died.


    [Sings] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.


  Laer.
 Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
    She turns to favour and to prettiness.
 (sings)
         And will he not come again?
         And will he not come again?
           No, no, he is dead;  
           Go to thy deathbed;
         He never will come again.

           He is gone, he is gone,
           And we cast away moan.

         God 'a'mercy on his soul!

    And of all Christian souls, I pray God.
 God b' wi', you.

Exit.

  Laer.
 Do you see this, O God?
  King.
 Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
    Or you deny me right.
 Go but apart,
    Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
    And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.

  Laer.
 Let this be so.

  King.
 So you shall;
    And where th' offence is let the great axe fall.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



Scene VI.
 Another room in the Castle.
 What are they that would speak with me?
  Servant.
 Seafaring men, sir.
 They say they have letters for you.
 Let them come in.

                                               [Exit Attendant.
]
    I do not know from what part of the world
    I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.


                          Enter Sailors.

  Sailor.
 'A shall, sir, an't please him.
 There's a letter for you,
    sir,- it comes from th' ambassador that was bound for England- if
    your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is.

  Hor.
 They have
    letters for him.
 They have dealt with me like thieves
    of mercy; but they knew what they did: I am to do a good turn for
    them.
 Let the King have the letters I have sent, and repair thou
    to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death.
 I have words
    to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
    light for the bore of the matter.
 These good fellows will bring
    thee where I am.
 Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course
    for England.
 Of them I have much to tell thee.

                            'He that thou knowest thine, HAMLET.
'

    Come, I will give you way for these your letters,
    And do't the speedier that you may direct me
    To him from whom you brought them.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>



Scene VII.

Elsinore.


Enter King and Laertes.


  King.

  Laer.
 The Queen his mother
    Lives almost by his looks; and for myself,-
    My virtue or my plague, be it either which,-
    She's so conjunctive to my life and soul
    That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,  
    I could not but by her.
 The other motive
    Why to a public count I might not go
    Is the great love the general gender bear him,
    Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
    Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
    Convert his gives to graces; so that my arrows,
    Too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,
    Would have reverted to my bow again,
    And not where I had aim'd them.
 And so have I a noble father lost;
    A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
    Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
    Stood challenger on mount of all the age
    For her perfections.
 But my revenge will come.

  King.
 Break not your sleeps for that.
 You must not think
    That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
    That we can let our beard be shook with danger,
    And think it pastime.

    I lov'd your father, and we love ourself,
    And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine-  

                 Enter a Messenger with letters.


    How now? What news?
  Mess.
 Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:
    This to your Majesty; this to the Queen.

  King.
 From Hamlet? Who brought them?
  Mess.
 Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not.
 Laertes, you shall hear them.

                                                 Exit Messenger.
'
    What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
    Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?  
  Laer.
 Know you the hand?
  King.
 'Naked!'
    And in a postscript here, he says 'alone.
'
    Can you advise me?
  Laer.
 I am lost in it, my lord.
 If it be so, Laertes
    (As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
    Will you be rul'd by me?
  Laer.
 To thine own peace.
 If he be now return'd
    As checking at his voyage, and that he means
    No more to undertake it, I will work him
    To exploit now ripe in my device,
    Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
    And for his death no wind
    But even his mother shall uncharge the practice  
    And call it accident.

  Laer.
 My lord, I will be rul'd;
    The rather, if you could devise it so
    That I might be the organ.

  King.

    You have been talk'd of since your travel much,
    And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
    Wherein they say you shine, Your sun of parts
    Did not together pluck such envy from him
    As did that one; and that, in my regard,
    Of the unworthiest siege.
 What part is that, my lord?
  King.
 A very riband in the cap of youth-
    Yet needfull too; for youth no less becomes
    The light and careless livery that it wears
    Thin settled age his sables and his weeds,
    Importing health and graveness.
 Two months since
    Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
 A Norman was't?
  King.
 A Norman.

  Laer.
 Upon my life, Lamound.

  King.
 I know him well.
 He is the broach indeed
    And gem of all the nation.

  King.
 He made confession of you;
    And gave you such a masterly report
    For art and exercise in your defence,
    And for your rapier most especially,
    That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
    If one could match you.
 The scrimers of their nation
    He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
    If you oppos'd them.
 Sir, this report of his  
    Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
    That he could nothing do but wish and beg
    Your sudden coming o'er to play with you.

    Now, out of this-
  Laer.
 Laertes, was your father dear to you?
    Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
    A face without a heart,'
  Laer.
 Why ask you this?
  King.
 Not that I think you did not love your father;
    But that I know love is begun by time,
    And that I see, in passages of proof,
    Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.

    There lives within the very flame of love
    A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;
    And nothing is at a like goodness still;
    For goodness, growing to a plurisy,
    Dies in his own too-much.
 That we would do,
    We should do when we would; for this 'would' changes,
    And hath abatements and delays as many  
    As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
    And then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,
    That hurts by easing.
 But to the quick o' th' ulcer!
    Hamlet comes back.
 What would you undertake
    To show yourself your father's son in deed
    More than in words?
  Laer.
 No place indeed should murther sanctuarize;
    Revenge should have no bounds.

    We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
    And set a double varnish on the fame
    The Frenchman gave you; bring you in fine together
    And wager on your heads.
 He, being remiss,
    Most generous, and free from all contriving,
    Will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,
    Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
    A sword unbated, and, in a pass of practice,
    Requite him for your father.
 I will do't!
    And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
 I'll touch my point
    With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
    It may be death.

  King.
 Let's further think of this,
    Weigh what convenience both of time and means
    May fit us to our shape.
 Therefore this project
    Should have a back or second, that might hold
    If this did blast in proof.

    We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings-
    I ha't!
    When in your motion you are hot and dry-  
    As make your bouts more violent to that end-
    And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepar'd him
    A chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
    If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
    Our purpose may hold there.


    How now, sweet queen?
  Queen.
 One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
    So fast they follow.

  Laer.

    There with fantastic garlands did she come
    Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
    That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
    But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.

    There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
    Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,  
    When down her weedy trophies and herself
    Fell in the weeping brook.

  Laer.
 Alas, then she is drown'd?
  Queen.

  Laer.
 Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
    And therefore I forbid my tears; but yet
    It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
    Let shame say what it will.
 When these are gone,
    The woman will be out.
 Adieu, my lord.

  King.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
 Scene I.


Enter two Clowns, [with spades and pickaxes].


  Clown.
 I tell thee she is; therefore make her grave straight.

    The crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian burial.

  Clown.

  Clown.
 It must be se offendendo; it cannot be else.
 For here lies
    the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act; and an
    act hath three branches-it is to act, to do, and to perform;
    argal, she drown'd herself wittingly.

  Other.
 Give me leave.
 Here stands the
    man; good.
 If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is,
    will he nill he, he goes- mark you that.
 But if the water come to
    him and drown him, he drowns not himself.
 Argal, he that is not
    guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.
 Ay, marry, is't- crowner's quest law.

  Other.
 Will you ha' the truth an't? If this had not been a
    gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o' Christian burial.

  Clown.
 Why, there thou say'st! And the more pity that great folk
    should have count'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves
    more than their even-Christen.
 They
    hold up Adam's profession.

  Other.
 Was he a gentleman?
  Clown.
 'A was the first that ever bore arms.

  Clown.
 What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the Scripture?
    The Scripture says Adam digg'd.
 Could he dig without arms? I'll
    put another question to thee.
 What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the
    shipwright, or the carpenter?
  Other.
 The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand  
    tenants.

  Clown.

    But how does it well? It does well to those that do ill.
 Now,
    thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the
    church.
 Argal, the gallows may do well to thee.
 Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

  Other.
 Marry, now I can tell!
  Clown.
 To't.
 Mass, I cannot tell.


  Clown.
 Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will
    not mend his pace with beating; and when you are ask'd this
    question next, say 'a grave-maker.

                                            [Exit Second Clown.
]  

                       [Clown digs and] sings.


  Ham.
 Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at
    grave-making?
  Hor.

  Ham.
 'Tis e'en so.
 The hand of little employment hath the daintier
    sense.

  Clown.
]
  
  Ham.
 That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once.
 How the
    knave jowls it to the ground,as if 'twere Cain's jawbone, that
    did the first murther! This might be the pate of a Politician,
    which this ass now o'erreaches; one that would circumvent God,
    might it not?
  Hor.

  Ham.
 Or of a courtier, which could say 'Good morrow, sweet lord!
    How dost thou, good lord?' This might be my Lord Such-a-one, that
    prais'd my Lord Such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it- might
    it not?
  Hor.
 Ay, my lord.
 Why, e'en so! and now my Lady Worm's, chapless, and knock'd
    about the mazzard with a sexton's spade.
 Here's fine revolution,
    and we had the trick to see't.

  Clown.
 There's another.
 Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?
    Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures,
    and his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock
    him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him
    of his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be in's time a
    great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his
    fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries.
 Is this the fine of
    his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
    pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more of
    his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth
    of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will
    scarcely lie in this box; and must th' inheritor himself have no
    more, ha?
  Hor.
 Ay, my lord, And of calveskins too.

  Ham.
 They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that.
 Mine, sir.


    [Sings] O, a pit of clay for to be made
              For such a guest is meet.
 I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in't.

  Ham.
 'Tis for
    the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.

  Ham.
 What man dost thou dig it for?
  Clown.
 For no man, sir.
 For none neither.

  Ham.
 One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.

  Ham.
 Of all the days i' th' year, I came to't that day that our
    last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.
 Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that.
 It was the
    very day that young Hamlet was born- he that is mad, and sent
    into England.

  Ham.
 Ay, marry, why was be sent into England?
  Clown.
 'A shall recover his wits there;
    or, if 'a do not, 'tis no great matter there.

  Ham.
 'Twill not he seen in him there.

  Ham.
 How came he mad?
  Clown.
 Very strangely, they say.

  Ham.

  Ham.
 Upon what ground?
  Clown.
 Why, here in Denmark.

  Ham.
 Faith, if 'a be not rotten before 'a die (as we have many
    pocky corses now-a-days that will scarce hold the laying in, I
    will last you some eight year or nine year.

  Ham.
 Why, sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade that 'a will
    keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of
    your whoreson dead body.
 Here's a skull now.
 This skull hath lien
    you i' th' earth three-and-twenty years.

  Ham.
 A whoreson, mad fellow's it was.
 Whose do you think it was?
  Ham.

  Clown.
 A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! 'A pour'd a flagon of
    Rhenish on my head once.
 This same skull, sir, was Yorick's
    skull, the King's jester.

  Ham.
 This?
  Clown.
 E'en that.
 Let me see.
 [Takes the skull.
] Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him,  
    Horatio.
 A fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy.
 Where be your gibes
    now? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment that
    were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your
    own grinning? Quite chap- fall'n? Now get you to my lady's
    chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this
    favour she must come.
 Make her laugh at that.
 Prithee, Horatio,
    tell me one thing.
 What's that, my lord?
  Ham.
 E'en so.
 E'en so, my lord.

  Ham.
 To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not
    imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander till he find it
    stopping a bunghole?
  Hor.
 No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty
    enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus: Alexander died,
    Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is
    earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam (whereto he
    was converted) might they not stop a beer barrel?
    Imperious Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
    Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.

    O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
    Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
    But soft! but soft! aside! Here comes the King-

    Enter [priests with] a coffin [in funeral procession], King,
             Queen, Laertes, with Lords attendant.
]

    The Queen, the courtiers.
 Who is this they follow?
    And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
    The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
    Fordo it own life.

    Couch we awhile, and mark.

                                         [Retires with Horatio.
]  
  Laer.
 What ceremony else?
  Ham.
 That is Laertes,
    A very noble youth.
 Her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd
    As we have warranty.
 For charitable prayers,
    Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.

  Laer.
 Must there no more be done?
  Priest.
 No more be done.

  Laer.

                                             [Scatters flowers.

  Laer.

                                             Leaps in the grave.

  Ham.
                    [Leaps in after Laertes.

  Laer.
 The devil take thy soul!
                                            [Grapples with him].

  Ham.
 Thou pray'st not well.
 Hold off thy hand!
  King.
 Pluck thein asunder.

  Queen.
 Hamlet, Hamlet!
  All.
 Good my lord, be quiet.

             [The Attendants part them, and they come out of the
                                                         grave.
]
  Ham.

  Queen.
 What wilt thou do for her?
  King.
 For love of God, forbear him!
  Ham.

    Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself?
    Woo't drink up esill? eat a crocodile?
    I'll do't.

    And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
    Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
    Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
    Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,
    I'll rant as well as thou.

  Queen.

  Ham.
 Hear you, sir!
    What is the reason that you use me thus?
    I lov'd you ever.
 But it is no matter.

Exit.

  King.

                                                   Exit Horatio.

    [To Laertes] Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech.
-
    Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.

Elsinore.


  Ham.
 So much for this, sir; now shall you see the other.

    You do remember all the circumstance?
  Hor.
 Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
    That would not let me sleep.
 That is most certain.

  Ham.
 Is't possible?
  Ham.
 Here's the commission; read it at more leisure.

    But wilt thou bear me how I did proceed?
  Hor.

  Ham.
 Being thus benetted round with villanies,
    Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
    They had begun the play.

    I once did hold it, as our statists do,
    A baseness to write fair, and labour'd much
    How to forget that learning; but, sir, now  
    It did me yeoman's service.
 Wilt thou know
    Th' effect of what I wrote?
  Hor.
 An earnest conjuration from the King,
    As England was his faithful tributary,
    As love between them like the palm might flourish,
    As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
    And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
    And many such-like as's of great charge,
    That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
    Without debatement further, more or less,
    He should the bearers put to sudden death,
    Not shriving time allow'd.
 Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.

    I had my father's signet in my purse,
    which was the model of that Danish seal;
    Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
    Subscrib'd it, gave't th' impression, plac'd it safely,
    The changeling never known.
 Now, the next day  
    Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
    Thou know'st already.
 So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't.

  Ham.
 Why, man, they did make love to this employment!
    They are not near my conscience; their defeat
    Does by their own insinuation grow.

  Hor.
 It must be shortly known to him from England
    What is the issue of the business there.
  
  Ham.
 It will be short; the interim is mine,
    And a man's life is no more than to say 'one.
'
    But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
    That to Laertes I forgot myself,
    For by the image of my cause I see
    The portraiture of his.
 I'll court his favours.

    But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
    Into a tow'ring passion.

  Hor.
 Peace! Who comes here?

                 Enter young Osric, a courtier.


  Osr.
 Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.

  Ham.
 [aside to Hamlet] No, my good lord.

  Ham.
 [aside to Horatio] Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a
    vice to know him.
 He hath much land, and fertile.
 Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart
    a thing to you from his Majesty.

  Ham.
 Put your
    bonnet to his right use.

  Osr.

  Ham.

  Osr.

  Osr.
 Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere- I cannot
    tell how.
 But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that
    he has laid a great wager on your head.
 Sir, here is
    newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,
    full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and
    great showing.
 Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
    or calendar of gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of
    what part a gentleman would see.
 Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, I  
    know, to divide him inventorially would dozy th' arithmetic of
    memory, and yet but yaw neither in respect of his quick sail.
 Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
 The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more
    rawer breath
  Osr.
 Sir?
  Hor [aside to Hamlet] Is't not possible to understand in another
    tongue? You will do't, sir, really.

  Ham.
 What imports the nomination of this gentleman
  Osr.
 [aside] His purse is empty already.
 Of him, sir.

  Osr.
 I know you are not ignorant-
  Ham.
 I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it would not
    much approve me.
 You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is-
  Ham.

  Osr.
 I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him
    by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
 What's his weapon?
  Osr.
 Rapier and dagger.
 The King, sir, hath wager'd with him six Barbary horses;
    against the which he has impon'd, as I take it, six French
    rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
    so.
 Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
    very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
    very liberal conceit.

  Ham.
 What call you the carriages?
  Hor.
 [aside to Hamlet] I knew you must be edified by the margent
    ere you had done.
 The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

  Ham.
 The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could
    carry cannon by our sides.
 I would it might be hangers till then.
  
    But on! Six Barbary horses against six French swords, their
    assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the French
    bet against the Danish.

  Ham.
 How if I answer no?
  Osr.
 I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
 Sir, I will walk here in the hall.
 If it please his Majesty,
    it is the breathing time of day with me.
 Let the foils be
    brought, the gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose,
    I will win for him if I can; if not, I will gain nothing but my
    shame and the odd hits.

  Osr.
 To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.

  Osr.
 I commend my duty to your lordship.

  Ham.
 Yours, yours.
 [Exit Osric.
 Thus has he,
    and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes
    on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter-
    a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and
    through the most fann'd and winnowed opinions; and do but blow
    them to their trial-the bubbles are out,

                            Enter a Lord.
 I am constant to my purposes; they follow the King's pleasure.

    If his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided
    I be so able as now.

  Lord.
 The King and Queen and all are coming down.

  Ham.
 In happy time.

  Lord.
 The Queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to
    Laertes before you fall to play.
  
  Ham.
 She well instructs me.

                                                    [Exit Lord.

  Ham.
 I do not think so.
 Since he went into France I have been in
    continual practice.
 But thou wouldst not
    think how ill all's here about my heart.
 But it is no matter.

  Hor.
 Nay, good my lord -
  Ham.
 It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as
    would perhaps trouble a woman.
 I will forestall their
    repair hither and say you are not fit.
  

  King.

                    [The King puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.
]
  Ham.
 Give me your pardon, sir.

    Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Never Hamlet.

    If Hamlet from himself be taken away,
    And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
    Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.

    Who does it, then? His madness.

  Laer.
 But in my terms of honour
    I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement
    Till by some elder masters of known honour
    I have a voice and precedent of peace
    To keep my name ungor'd.
 I embrace it freely,
    And will this brother's wager frankly play.
 Come, one for me.

  Ham.
 I'll be your foil, Laertes.

  Laer.
 You mock me, sir.
 No, by this bad.

    Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
 This is too heavy; let me see another.
 This likes me well.
 These foils have all a length?
                                                Prepare to play.

  Osr.
 Ay, my good lord.

  King.
 Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.

    If Hamlet give the first or second hit,
    Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
    Let all the battlements their ordnance fire;
    The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
    And in the cup an union shall he throw
    Richer than that which four successive kings
    In Denmark's crown have worn.
 Give me the cups;
    And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
    The trumpet to the cannoneer without,  
    The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
    'Now the King drinks to Hamlet.
' Come, begin.

    And you the judges, bear a wary eye.

  Ham.
                                They play.

  Ham.
 One.

  Ham.
 A hit, a very palpable hit.

    Give him the cup.

  Ham.
 I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile.

    Come.
 (They play.
) Another hit.
 Our son shall win.

  Queen.

    Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.

  Ham.
 I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.
          Drinks.

  King.
 [aside] It is the poison'd cup; it is too late.
 I dare not drink yet, madam; by-and-by.

  Queen.

  Laer.

  King.

  Ham.
 Come for the third, Laertes! You but dally.

    pray You Pass with your best violence;
    I am afeard You make a wanton of me.

  Laer.
 Say you so? Come on.
 Nothing neither way.

  Laer.
 Have at you now!
                [Laertes wounds Hamlet; then] in scuffling, they
                    change rapiers, [and Hamlet wounds Laertes].

  King.
 Part them! They are incens'd.
  
  Osr.
 They bleed on both sides.
 How is it, my lord?
  Osr.
 How is't, Laertes?
  Laer.
 Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.

  Ham.
 How does the Queen?
  King.
 She sounds to see them bleed.
 No, no! the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet!
    The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.
                 [Dies.

    Treachery! Seek it out.

                                                [Laertes falls.
]
  Laer.
 Hamlet, thou art slain;
    No medicine in the world can do thee good.

    In thee there is not half an hour of life.
 The foul practice
    Hath turn'd itself on me.
 Thy mother's poison'd.
 The King, the King's to blame.
  
  Ham.
 The point envenom'd too?
    Then, venom, to thy work.
 O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
 Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
    Drink off this potion! Is thy union here?
    Follow my mother.
                                 King dies.
 He is justly serv'd.

    It is a poison temper'd by himself.

    Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
    Nor thine on me!                                       Dies.
 Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
 Wretched queen, adieu!
    You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
    That are but mutes or audience to this act,
    Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
    Is strict in his arrest) O, I could tell you-
    But let it be.
 Horatio, I am dead;
    Thou liv'st; report me and my cause aright  
    To the unsatisfied.

  Hor.
 Never believe it.

    Here's yet some liquor left.

  Ham.

  Ham.
 He has my dying voice.
             Dies.
 Now cracks a noble heart.
]
    Why does the drum come hither?

    Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassadors, with Drum,
                  Colours, and Attendants.
 Where is this sight?
  Hor.
 What is it you will see?
    If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.

  Fort.
 This quarry cries on havoc.

  Ambassador.
 The sight is dismal;
    And our affairs from England come too late.
  
    The ears are senseless that should give us bearing
    To tell him his commandment is fulfill'd
    That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
 Not from his mouth,
    Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
 So shall You hear
    Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts;
    Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters;
    Of deaths put on by cunning and forc'd cause;
    And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
    Fall'n on th' inventors' heads.
 All this can I
    Truly deliver.
 Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
    And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.

    But let this same be presently perform'd,
    Even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance
    On plots and errors happen.

  Fort.
 Let four captains
    Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage;
    For he was likely, had he been put on,
    To have prov'd most royally; and for his passage
    The soldiers' music and the rites of war
    Speak loudly for him.

    Take up the bodies.
 Such a sight as this
    Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.

    Go, bid the soldiers shoot.

            Exeunt marching; after the which a peal of ordnance
                                                   are shot off.
  


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>





1598

THE FIRST PART OF KING HENRY THE FOURTH


by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  King Henry the Fourth.

  Henry, Prince of Wales, son to the King.

  Prince John of Lancaster, son to the King.

  Sir Walter Blunt.

  Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland.

  Henry Percy, surnamed Hotspur, his son.

  Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March.

  Archibald, Earl of Douglas.

  Owen Glendower.

  Sir John Falstaff.

  Bardolph.

  Lady Mortimer, daughter to Glendower, and wife to Mortimer.

  Mistress Quickly, hostess of the Boar's Head in Eastcheap.


  Lords, Officers, Sheriff, Vintner, Chamberlain, Drawers, two
    Carriers, Travellers, and Attendants.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



SCENE.



ACT I.

London.
 The Palace.


Enter the King, Lord John of Lancaster, Earl of Westmoreland,
[Sir Walter Blunt,] with others.

    No more shall trenching war channel her fields,
    Nor Bruise her flow'rets with the armed hoofs
    Of hostile paces.
  
    The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
    No more shall cut his master.
 Therefore, friends,
    As far as to the sepulchre of Christ-
    Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
    We are impressed and engag'd to fight-
    Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
    Whose arms were moulded in their mother's womb
    To chase these pagans in those holy fields
    Over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet
    Which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd
    For our advantage on the bitter cross.

    Therefore we meet not now.

  West.
 My liege, this haste was hot in question
    And many limits of the charge set down
    But yesternight; when all athwart there came  
    A post from Wales, loaden with heavy news;
    Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer,
    Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
    Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
    Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
    A thousand of his people butchered;
    Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
    Such beastly shameless transformation,
    By those Welshwomen done as may not be
    Without much shame retold or spoken of.

  King.
 It seems then that the tidings of this broil
    Brake off our business for the Holy Land.

  West.

    The Earl of Douglas is discomfited;
    Ten thousand bold Scots, two-and-twenty knights,
    Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see
    On Holmedon's plains.
 In faith,  
    It is a conquest for a prince to boast of.
 Yea, there thou mak'st me sad, and mak'st me sin
    In envy that my Lord Northumberland
    Should be the father to so blest a son-
    A son who is the theme of honour's tongue,
    Amongst a grove the very straightest plant;
    Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride;
    Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
    See riot and dishonour stain the brow
    Of my young Harry.
 O that it could be prov'd
    That some night-tripping fairy had exchang'd
    In cradle clothes our children where they lay,
    And call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet!
    Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.
 What think you, coz,
    Of this young Percy's pride? The prisoners
    Which he in this adventure hath surpris'd
    To his own use he keeps, and sends me word
    I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.

  King.
 But I have sent for him to answer this;
    And for this cause awhile we must neglect
    Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.

    Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we
    Will hold at Windsor.
 So inform the lords;
    But come yourself with speed to us again;
    For more is to be said and to be done
    Than out of anger can be uttered.
 I will my liege.





Scene II.

London.
 An apartment of the Prince's.


  Fal.
 What a devil hast thou to do with the time
    of the day, Unless hours were cups of sack, and minutes capons,
    and clocks the tongues of bawds, and dials the signs of leaping
    houses, and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench in
    flame-coloured taffeta, I see no reason why thou shouldst be so
    superfluous to demand the time of the day.

  Prince.
 Well, how then? Come, roundly, roundly.

  Fal.
 Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not us that
    are squires of the night's body be called thieves of the day's
    beauty.
 Let us be Diana's Foresters, Gentlemen of the Shade,
    Minions of the Moon; and let men say we be men of good
    government, being governed as the sea is, by our noble and chaste
    mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.

  Prince.

  Fal.
 By the Lord, thou say'st true, lad- and is not my hostess of
    the tavern a most sweet wench?
  Prince.
 Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?
  Fal.

  Prince.
 No; I'll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there.

  Prince.
 Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch; and
    where it would not, I have used my credit.

  Fal.
 Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave judge.

  Prince.
 Thou judgest false already.
 I mean, thou shalt have the
    hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman.

  Fal.
 Well, Hal, well; and in some sort it jumps with my humour as
    well as waiting in the court, I can tell you.
 For obtaining of suits?  
  Fal.
 Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman hath no lean
    wardrobe.
 'Sblood, I am as melancholy as a gib-cat or a lugg'd
    bear.

  Prince.

  Prince.
 What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy of Moor
    Ditch?
  Fal.
 Thou hast the most unsavoury similes, and art indeed the most
    comparative, rascalliest, sweet young prince.
 But, Hal, I prithee
    trouble me no more with vanity.
 I would to God thou and I knew
    where a commodity of good names were to be bought.
 An old lord of
    the Council rated me the other day in the street about you, sir,
    but I mark'd him not; and yet he talked very wisely, but I
    regarded him not; and yet he talk'd wisely, and in the street
    too.

  Prince.
 Thou didst well; for wisdom cries out in the streets, and
    no man regards it.

  Fal.
 Thou hast done much harm upon me, Hal- God
    forgive thee for it! Before I knew thee, Hal, I knew nothing; and  
    now am I, if a man should speak truly, little better than one of
    the wicked.
 I must give over this life, and I will give it over!
    By the Lord, an I do not, I am a villain! I'll be damn'd for
    never a king's son in Christendom.

  Prince.
 I see a good amendment of life in thee- from praying to
    purse-taking.
 Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation, Hal.
 'Tis no sin for a man to
    labour in his vocation.
 O, if men
    were to be saved by merit, what hole in hell were hot enough for
    him? This is the most omnipotent villain that ever cried 'Stand!'
    to a true man.

  Prince.

  Poins.
 Good morrow, sweet Hal.
 What says Monsieur Remorse? What  
    says Sir John Sack and Sugar? Jack, how agrees the devil and thee
    about thy soul, that thou soldest him on Good Friday last for a
    cup of Madeira and a cold capon's leg?
  Prince.
 He will give
    the devil his due.

  Poins.
 Then art thou damn'd for keeping thy word with the devil.

  Prince.

  Poins.
 I
    have vizards for you all; you have horses for yourselves.

    Gadshill lies to-night in Rochester.
 I have bespoke supper
    to-morrow night in Eastcheap.
 We may do it as secure as sleep.
 If
    you will go, I will stuff your purses full of crowns; if you will
    not, tarry at home and be hang'd!
  Fal.
 You will, chops?
  Fal.
 Hal, wilt thou make one?  
  Prince.
 Who, I rob? I a thief? Not I, by my faith.

  Fal.

  Fal.
 Well, come what will, I'll tarry at home.
 By the Lord, I'll be a traitor then, when thou art king.

  Prince.
 I care not.

  Poins.
 Sir John, I prithee, leave the Prince and me alone.
 Farewell; you shall find me in Eastcheap.
 Now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us to-morrow.
 I
    have a jest to execute that I cannot manage alone.
 Falstaff,  
    Bardolph, Peto, and Gadshill shall rob those men that we have
    already waylaid; yourself and I will not be there; and when they
    have the booty, if you and I do not rob them, cut this head off
    from my shoulders.

  Prince.
 Why, we will set forth before or after them and appoint them
    a place of meeting, wherein it is at our pleasure to fail; and
    then will they adventure upon the exploit themselves; which they
    shall have no sooner achieved, but we'll set upon them.

  Prince.
 Yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by our horses, by
    our habits, and by every other appointment, to be ourselves.
 Tut! our horses they shall not see- I'll tie them in the
    wood; our wizards we will change after we leave them; and,
    sirrah, I have cases of buckram for the nonce, to immask our
    noted outward garments.

  Prince.
 Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.

  Prince.
 Well, I'll go with thee.
 Provide us all things necessary
    and meet me to-night in Eastcheap.
 Farewell.
                                Exit.

    So, when this loose behaviour I throw off  
    And pay the debt I never promised,
    By how much better than my word I am,
    By so much shall I falsify men's hopes;
    And, like bright metal on a sullen ground,
    My reformation, glitt'ring o'er my fault,
    Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
    Than that which hath no foil to set it off.

    I'll so offend to make offence a skill,
    Redeeming time when men think least I will.
            Exit.





Scene III.


Enter the King, Northumberland, Worcester, Hotspur, Sir Walter Blunt,
with others.


  King.

  Wor.
 Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves
    The scourge of greatness to be us'd on it-
    And that same greatness too which our own hands
    Have holp to make so portly.

    You were about to speak.

  North.
 Yea, my good lord.

    Those prisoners in your Highness' name demanded
    Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
    Were, as he says, not with such strength denied
    As is delivered to your Majesty.

    Either envy, therefore, or misprision
    Is guilty of this fault, and not my son.
 My liege, I did deny no prisoners.

    He was perfumed like a milliner,
    And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held
    A pouncet box, which ever and anon
    He gave his nose, and took't away again;
    Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
    Took it in snuff; and still he smil'd and talk'd;
    And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
    He call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
    To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse
    Betwixt the wind and his nobility.

    I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
    To be so pest'red with a popingay,
    Out of my grief and my impatience
    Answer'd neglectingly, I know not what-
    He should, or he should not; for he made me mad
    To see him shine so brisk, and smell so sweet,  
    And talk so like a waiting gentlewoman
    Of guns and drums and wounds- God save the mark!-
    And telling me the sovereignest thing on earth
    Was parmacity for an inward bruise;
    And that it was great pity, so it was,
    This villanous saltpetre should be digg'd
    Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
    Which many a good tall fellow had destroy'd
    So cowardly; and but for these vile 'guns,
    He would himself have been a soldier.

    This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,
    I answered indirectly, as I said,
    And I beseech you, let not his report
    Come current for an accusation
    Betwixt my love and your high majesty.

  Blunt.
 The circumstance considered, good my lord,
    Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said
    To such a person, and in such a place,
    At such a time, with all the rest retold,
    May reasonably die, and never rise  
    To do him wrong, or any way impeach
    What then he said, so he unsay it now.
 Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners,
    But with proviso and exception,
    That we at our own charge shall ransom straight
    His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer;
    Who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray'd
    The lives of those that he did lead to fight
    Against that great magician, damn'd Glendower,
    Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March
    Hath lately married.
 Shall our coffers, then,
    Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?
    Shall we buy treason? and indent with fears
    When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
    No, on the barren mountains let him starve!
    For I shall never hold that man my friend
    Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
    To ransom home revolted Mortimer.
 To prove that true
    Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds,
    Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took
    When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank,
    In single opposition hand to hand,
    He did confound the best part of an hour
    In changing hardiment with great Glendower.

    Never did base and rotten policy
    Colour her working with such deadly wounds;
    Nor never could the noble Mortimer
    Receive so many, and all willingly.

    Then let not him be slandered with revolt.

  King.
 Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him!
    He never did encounter with Glendower.
  
    I tell thee
    He durst as well have met the devil alone
    As Owen Glendower for an enemy.

    Art thou not asham'd? But, sirrah, henceforth
    Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer.

    Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
    Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
    As will displease you.

                                 Exeunt King, [Blunt, and Train]
  Hot.
 I will after straight
    And tell him so; for I will else my heart,
    Albeit I make a hazard of my head.

  North.
 What, drunk with choler? Stay, and pause awhile.

  
  Hot.
 Speak of Mortimer?
    Zounds, I will speak of him, and let my soul
    Want mercy if I do not join with him!
    Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins,
    And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,
    But I will lift the downtrod Mortimer
    As high in the air as this unthankful king,
    As this ingrate and cank'red Bolingbroke.

  North.
 Brother, the King hath made your nephew mad.

  Wor.
 He will (forsooth) have all my prisoners;
    And when I urg'd the ransom once again
    Of my wive's brother, then his cheek look'd pale,
    And on my face he turn'd an eye of death,
    Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.

  Wor.
 He was; I heard the proclamation.

    And then it was when the unhappy King
    (Whose wrongs in us God pardon!) did set forth  
    Upon his Irish expedition;
    From whence he intercepted did return
    To be depos'd, and shortly murdered.

  Wor.
 And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth
    Live scandaliz'd and foully spoken of.

  Hot.
 Did King Richard then
    Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
    Heir to the crown?
  North.
 He did; myself did hear it.

  Hot.
 Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king,
    That wish'd him on the barren mountains starve.

    But shall it be that you, that set the crown
    Upon the head of this forgetful man,
    And for his sake wear the detested blot
    Of murtherous subornation- shall it be
    That you a world of curses undergo,
    Being the agents or base second means,
    The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?
    O, pardon me that I descend so low
    To show the line and the predicament  
    Wherein you range under this subtile king!
    Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
    Or fill up chronicles in time to come,
    That men of your nobility and power
    Did gage them both in an unjust behalf
    (As both of you, God pardon it! have done)
    To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,
    And plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke?
    And shall it in more shame be further spoken
    That you are fool'd, discarded, and shook off
    By him for whom these shames ye underwent?
    No! yet time serves wherein you may redeem
    Your banish'd honours and restore yourselves
    Into the good thoughts of the world again;
    Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt
    Of this proud king, who studies day and night
    To answer all the debt he owes to you
    Even with the bloody payment of your deaths.

    Therefore I say-
  Wor.
 Peace, cousin, say no more;  
    And now, I will unclasp a secret book,
    And to your quick-conceiving discontents
    I'll read you matter deep and dangerous,
    As full of peril and adventurous spirit
    As to o'erwalk a current roaring loud
    On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.

  Hot.
 If he fall in, good night, or sink or swim!
    Send danger from the east unto the west,
    So honour cross it from the north to south,
    And let them grapple.
 O, the blood more stirs
    To rouse a lion than to start a hare!
  North.
 Imagination of some great exploit
    Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.

  Hot.
 By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap
    To pluck bright honour from the pale-fac'd moon,
    Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
    Where fadom line could never touch the ground,
    And pluck up drowned honour by the locks,
    So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
    Without corrival all her dignities;  
    But out upon this half-fac'd fellowship!
  Wor.
 He apprehends a world of figures here,
    But not the form of what he should attend.

    Good cousin, give me audience for a while.

  Hot.

  Wor.
 I'll keep them all.
 You start away.

    Those prisoners you shall keep.

  Hot.
 Nay, I will! That is flat!
    He said he would not ransom Mortimer,
    Forbade my tongue to speak of Mortimer,
    But I will find him when he lies asleep,
    And in his ear I'll holloa 'Mortimer.

  Wor.

  Hot.
 I will talk to you
    When you are better temper'd to attend.

  North.
 Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool
    Art thou to break into this woman's mood,
    Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!
  Hot.
 Why, look you, I am whipp'd and scourg'd with rods,
    Nettled, and stung with pismires when I hear
    Of this vile politician, Bolingbroke.

  Hot.

    Why, what a candy deal of courtesy
    This fawning greyhound then did proffer me!
    Look, 'when his infant fortune came to age,'
    And 'gentle Harry Percy,' and 'kind cousin'-
    O, the devil take such cozeners!- God forgive me!
    Good uncle, tell your tale, for I have done.

  Wor.
 Nay, if you have not, to it again.

  Hot.
 I have done, i' faith.

  Wor.
 Then once more to your Scottish prisoners.
 True; who bears hard
    His brother's death at Bristow, the Lord Scroop.

  Hot.
 I smell it.
 Before the game is afoot thou still let'st slip.

  Hot.

    And then the power of Scotland and of York
    To join with Mortimer, ha?
  Wor.
 In faith, it is exceedingly well aim'd.

  Wor.
 And 'tis no little reason bids us speed,
    To save our heads by raising of a head;
    For, bear ourselves as even as we can,
    The King will always think him in our debt,
    And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,
    Till he hath found a time to pay us home.

    And see already how he doth begin
    To make us strangers to his looks of love.

  Hot.
 He does, he does! We'll be reveng'd on him.

  Wor.
 Cousin, farewell.
 We shall thrive, I trust.

  Hot.
 O, let the hours be short  
    Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport!    Exeunt.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.
 Scene I.


Enter a Carrier with a lantern in his hand.


  1.
 Car.
 Heigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, I'll be hang'd.

    Charles' wain is over the new chimney, and yet our horse not
    pack'd.
 Car.
 I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle, put a few flocks in the
    point.


                        Enter another Carrier.
 Car.
 Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that is the
    next way to give poor jades the bots.
 This house is turned upside
    down since Robin Ostler died.

  1.
 Car.
 Poor fellow never joyed since the price of oats rose.
 It
    was the death of him.
 Car.
 I think this be the most villanous house in all London road
    for fleas.

  1.
 Car.

  2.
 Car.
 Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we leak in
    your chimney, and your chamber-lye breeds fleas like a loach.

  1.
 Car.
 What, ostler! come away and be hang'd! come away!
  2.
 Car.

  1.
 Car.
 God's body! the turkeys in my pannier are quite starved.

    What, ostler! A plague on thee! hast thou never an eye in thy
    head? Canst not hear? An 'twere not as good deed as drink to
    break the pate on thee, I am a very villain.
 Come, and be hang'd!
    Hast no faith in thee?

                           Enter Gadshill.


  Gads.
 Good morrow, carriers.
 What's o'clock?
  1.
 Car.
  
  Gads.
 Ay, when? canst tell? Lend me thy lantern, quoth he? Marry,
    I'll see thee hang'd first!
  Gads.
 Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?
  2.
 Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant thee.

    Come, neighbour Mugs, we'll call up the gentlemen.

                                              Exeunt [Carriers].

  Gads.
 What, ho! chamberlain!

                            Enter Chamberlain.


  Cham.
 At hand, quoth pickpurse.

  Gads.

  Cham.
 Good morrow, Master Gadshill.
 It holds current that I told
    you yesternight.

  Gads.
 Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas' clerks, I'll
    give thee this neck.

  Gads.

    I am joined with no foot land-rakers, no long-staff sixpenny
    strikers, none of these mad mustachio purple-hued maltworms; but
    with nobility, and tranquillity, burgomasters and great oneyers,
    such as can hold in, such as will strike sooner than speak, and
    speak sooner than drink, and drink sooner than pray; and yet,
    zounds, I lie; for they pray continually to their saint, the  
    commonwealth, or rather, not pray to her, but prey on her, for
    they ride up and down on her and make her their boots.

  Cham.
 She will, she will! Justice hath liquor'd her.
 We have the receipt of fernseed, we walk
    invisible.

  Cham.
 Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false thief.

                                                         Exeunt.

The highway near Gadshill.


Enter Prince and Poins.
 Come, shelter, shelter! I have remov'd Falstaff's horse, and
    he frets like a gumm'd velvet.

  Prince.
                        [They step aside.
]

                             Enter Falstaff.
 I comes forward I Peace, ye fat-kidney'd rascal! What a
    brawling dost thou keep!
  Fal.
 Where's Poins, Hal?
  Prince.
 He is walk'd up to the top of the hill.
 The rascal hath
    removed my horse and tied him I know not where.

    Well, I doubt not but to die a fair death for all this, if I
    scape hanging for killing that rogue.
 I have drunk medicines.
 Poins! Hal! A plague upon you both!
    Bardolph! Peto! I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further.
 An
    'twere not as good a deed as drink to turn true man and to leave
    these rogues, I am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with a
    tooth.
 A plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to
    another! (They whistle.
) Whew! A plague upon you all! Give me my
    horse, you rogues! give me my horse and be hang'd!
  Prince.

  Fal.
 I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse, good king's  
    son.

  Prince.
 An I have not ballads made on you
    all, and sung to filthy tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison.

    When a jest is so forward- and afoot too- I hate it.


  Gads.
 So I do, against my will.

    Bardolph, what news?
  Bar.
 Case ye, case ye! On with your vizards! There's money of the
    King's coming down the hill; 'tis going to the King's exchequer.
 You lie, ye rogue! 'Tis going to the King's tavern.
 Sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane; Ned
    Poins and I will walk lower.
 If they scape from your encounter,  
    then they light on us.
 How many be there of them?
  Gads.
 Some eight or ten.

  Fal.
 What, a coward, Sir John Paunch?
  Fal.
 Indeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather; but yet no
    coward, Hal.

  Prince.
 Well, we leave that to the proof.

  Poins.
 Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge.
 When thou
    need'st him, there thou shalt find him.
 Farewell and stand fast.

  Fal.
 Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hang'd.

  Prince.
 [aside to Prince] Here, hard by.
]
  Fal.
 Now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I.


                         Enter the Travellers.
 Come, neighbour.
  
    The boy shall lead our horses down the hill;
    We'll walk afoot awhile and ease our legs.

  Thieves.
 Strike! down with them! cut the villains' throats! Ah,
    whoreson caterpillars! bacon-fed knaves! they hate us youth.
 Down
    with them! fleece them!
  Traveller.
 O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever!
  Fal.
 Hang ye, gorbellied knaves, are ye undone? No, ye fat chuffs;
    I would your store were here! On, bacons on! What, ye knaves!
    young men must live.
 Exeunt.


  Prince.
 Now could thou and I
    rob the thieves and go merrily to London, it would be argument
    for a week, laughter for a month, and a good jest for ever.
 Stand close! I hear them coming.
  
                                             [They stand aside.
]

                       Enter the Thieves again.
 Come, my masters, let us share, and then to horse before day.

    An the Prince and Poins be not two arrant cowards, there's no
    equity stirring.
 There's no more valour in that Poins than in a
    wild duck.


        [As they are sharing, the Prince and Poins set upon
        them.
 THey all run away, and Falstaff, after a blow or
        two, runs awasy too, leaving the booty behind them.
]

  Prince.
 Your money!
  Poins.
 Got with much ease.

    Each takes his fellow for an officer.
  
    Away, good Ned.

    Were't not for laughing, I should pity him.

  Poins.
 How the rogue roar'd!                           Exeunt.

Warkworth Castle.
' He could be
    contented- why is he not then? In respect of the love he bears
    our house! He shows in this he loves his own barn better than he
    loves our house.
 Let me see some more.
 'The purpose you undertake
    is dangerous'- Why, that's certain! 'Tis dangerous to take a
    cold, to sleep, to drink; but I tell you, my lord fool, out of
    this nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety.
 'The purpose
    you undertake is dangerous, the friends you have named uncertain,
    the time itself unsorted, and your whole plot too light for the
    counterpoise of so great an opposition.
 What a frosty-spirited rogue is this! Why, my
    Lord of York commends the plot and the general course of the  
    action.
 Zounds, an I were now by this rascal, I could brain him
    with his lady's fan.


                         Enter his Lady.


    How now, Kate? I must leave you within these two hours.
 O my good lord, why are you thus alone?
    For what offence have I this fortnight been
    A banish'd woman from my Harry's bed,
    Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from thee  
    Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep?
    Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth,
    And start so often when thou sit'st alone?
    Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks
    And given my treasures and my rights of thee
    To thick-ey'd musing and curs'd melancholy?
    In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch'd,
    And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars,
    Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,
    Cry 'Courage! to the field!' And thou hast talk'd
    Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tent,
    Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,
    Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin,
    Of prisoners' ransom, and of soldiers slain,
    And all the currents of a heady fight.

  Hot.
]

    Is Gilliams with the packet gone?
  Serv.
 He is, my lord, an hour ago.

  Hot.
 That roan shall be my throne.

    Well, I will back him straight.
]
  Lady.
 But hear you, my lord.

  Hot.
 What say'st thou, my lady?  
  Lady.
 So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.
 Come, come, you paraquito, answer me
    Directly unto this question that I ask.

    I'll break thy little finger, Harry,
    An if thou wilt not tell my all things true.
 Away.

    We must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns,
    And pass them current too.
 Gods me, my horse!  
    What say'st thou, Kate? What wouldst thou have with me?
  Lady.
 Do you not love me? do you not indeed?
    Well, do not then; for since you love me not,
    I will not love myself.
 Do you not love me?
    Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.
 Come, wilt thou see me ride?
    And when I am a-horseback, I will swear
    I love thee infinitely.
 But hark you.

    Whither I must, I must; and to conclude,
    This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.

    I know you wise; but yet no farther wise
    Than Harry Percy's wife; constant you are,
    But yet a woman; and for secrecy,
    No lady closer, for I well believe
    Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know,
    And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.

  Lady.
 But hark you, Kate:  
    Whither I go, thither shall you go too;
    To-day will I set forth, to-morrow you.

    Will this content you, Kate,?
  Lady.
 It must of force.





Scene IV.
 The Boar's Head Tavern.


  Prince.
 Ned, prithee come out of that fat-room and lend me thy hand
    to laugh a little.
 With three or four loggerheads amongst three or
    fourscore hogsheads.
 I have sounded the very bass-string of
    humility.
 Sirrah, I am sworn brother to a leash of drawers and
    can call them all by their christen names, as Tom, Dick, and
    Francis.
 They take it already upon their salvation that, though
    I be but Prince of Wales, yet I am the king of courtesy; and tell
    me flatly I am no proud Jack like Falstaff, but a Corinthian, a
    lad of mettle, a good boy (by the Lord, so they call me!), and
    when I am King of England I shall command all the good lads
    Eastcheap.
 They call drinking deep, dying scarlet; and when
    you breathe in your watering, they cry 'hem!' and bid you play it
    off.
 I tell thee, Ned, thou hast lost much honour that thou
    wert not with me in this action.
 But, sweet Ned- to sweeten which  
    name of Ned, I give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapp'd even
    now into my hand by an under-skinker, one that never spake other
    English in his life than 'Eight shillings and sixpence,' and 'You
    are welcome,' with this shrill addition, 'Anon, anon, sir! Score
    a pint of bastard in the Half-moon,' or so- but, Ned, to drive
    away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee do thou stand in some
    by-room while I question my puny drawer to what end be gave me
    the sugar; and do thou never leave calling 'Francis!' that his
    tale to me may be nothing but 'Anon!' Step aside, and I'll show
    thee a precedent.

  Poins.
 Francis!
  Prince.

  Poins.


  Fran.
- Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralph.

  Prince.
 Come hither, Francis.
 My lord?
  Prince.
 Anon, anon, sir.

  Prince.
 Five year! by'r Lady, a long lease for the clinking of
    Pewter.
 But, Francis, darest thou be so valiant as to play the
    coward with thy indenture and show it a fair pair of heels and
    run from it?
  Fran.
 [within] Francis!
  Fran.
 Anon, sir.

  Prince.
 Nay, but hark you, Francis.
 For the sugar thou gavest me-
    'twas a pennyworth, wast not?
  Fran.
 O Lord! I would it had been two!
  Prince.
 I will give thee for it a thousand pound.
 Anon, anon.

  Prince.
 My lord?
  Prince.
 Wilt thou rob this leathern-jerkin, crystal-button,
    not-pated, agate-ring, puke-stocking, caddis-garter,
    smooth-tongue, Spanish-pouch-
  Fran.
 O Lord, sir, who do you mean?
  Prince.
 Why then, your brown bastard is your only drink; for look
    you, Francis, your white canvas doublet will sully.
 [within] Francis!
  Prince.
 [Exit Francis.
] My lord, old Sir John, with
    half-a-dozen more, are at the door.
 Shall I let them in?
  Prince.
]
    Poins!
  Poins.
 [within] Anon, anon, sir.
 Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at the
    door.
 As merry as crickets, my lad.
 But hark ye; what cunning
    match have you made with this jest of the drawer? Come, what's
    the issue?
  Prince.

  
                         [Enter Francis.
]

    What's o'clock, Francis?
  Fran.
 Anon, anon, sir.
]
  Prince.
 That ever this fellow should have fewer words than a
    parrot, and yet the son of a woman! His industry is upstairs and
    downstairs, his eloquence the parcel of a reckoning.
 I am not yet
    of Percy's mind, the Hotspur of the North; he that kills me some
    six or seven dozen of Scots at a breakfast, washes his hands, and
    says to his wife, 'Fie upon this quiet life! I want work.
' 'O my
    sweet Harry,' says she, 'how many hast thou  kill'd to-day?'
    'Give my roan horse a drench,' says he, and answers 'Some
    fourteen,' an hour after, 'a trifle, a trifle.
' I prithee call in
    Falstaff.
 I'll play Percy, and that damn'd brawn shall play Dame
    Mortimer his wife.
 'Rivo!' says the drunkard.

  
  Poins.
 A plague of
    all cowards! Give me a cup of sack, rogue.
 Is there no virtue
    extant?
                                                    He drinketh.

  Prince.
 Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter?
    Pitiful-hearted butter, that melted at the sweet tale of the sun!
    If thou didst, then behold that compound.

  Fal.
 You rogue, here's lime in this sack too! There is nothing but
    roguery to be found in villanous man.
 Yet a coward is worse than
    a cup of sack with lime in it- a villanous coward! Go thy ways,
    old Jack, die when thou wilt; if manhood, good manhood, be not
    forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a shotten herring.
 God help the while! A bad world, I
    say.
 I would I were a weaver; I could sing psalms or anything.
 How now, woolsack? What mutter you?  
  Fal.
 You Prince
    of Wales?
  Prince.
 Why, you whoreson round man, what's the matter?
  Fal.
 Zounds, ye fat paunch, an ye call me coward, by the
    Lord, I'll stab thee.
 You are straight enough in the shoulders; you care
    not who sees Your back.
 Call you that backing of your friends? A
    plague upon such backing! Give me them that will face me.
 I am a rogue if I drunk to-day.

  Prince.
 (He drinketh.

  Prince.
 What's the matter? There be four of us here have ta'en a  
    thousand pound this day morning.
 Where is it, Jack? Where is it?
  Fal.
 A hundred upon poor four of
    us!
  Prince.
 I am a rogue if I were not at half-sword with a dozen of them
    two hours together.
 I have scap'd by miracle.
 I am eight times
    thrust through the doublet, four through the hose; my buckler cut
    through and through; my sword hack'd like a handsaw- ecce signum!
    I never dealt better since I was a man.
 All would not do.
 A
    plague of all cowards! Let them speak, If they speak more or less
    than truth, they are villains and the sons of darkness.

  Prince.
 Speak, sirs.
 Sixteen at least, my lord.
 And bound them.

  Peto.
 You rogue, they were bound, every man of them, or I am a Jew
    else- an Ebrew Jew.

  Gads.
 As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men sea upon us-  
  Fal.
 And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.

  Prince.

  Prince.

  Fal.
 I have pepper'd two of them.
 Two
    I am sure I have paid, two rogues in buckram suits.
 Here I lay, and thus I bore my point.

  Prince.
 What, four? Thou saidst but two even now.

  Fal.
 Four, Hal.
 I told thee four.
 Ay, ay, he said four.

  Fal.
 Ay, four, in buckram suits.
  
  Fal.

  Prince.
 [aside to Poins] Prithee let him alone.
 We shall have more
    anon.

  Fal.
 Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.

  Fal.
 Do so, for it is worth the list'ning to.
 These nine in buckram
    that I told thee of-
  Prince.

  Fal.
 Their points being broken-
  Poins.
 Began to give me ground; but I followed me close, came in,
    foot and hand, and with a thought seven of the eleven I paid.

  Prince.
 O monstrous! Eleven buckram men grown out of two!
  Fal.
 But, as the devil would have it, three misbegotten knaves in
    Kendal green came at my back and let drive at me; for it was so
    dark, Hal, that thou couldst not see thy hand.

  Prince.
 What, art thou mad? art thou mad? Is not the truth the truth?  
  Prince.
 Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal green when
    it was so dark thou couldst not see thy hand? Come, tell us your
    reason.

  Fal.
 I'll be no longer guilty, of this sin; this sanguine
    coward, this bed-presser, this horseback-breaker, this huge hill
    of flesh-
  Fal.
 Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again; and when thou
    hast tired thyself in base comparisons, hear me speak but this.
 Mark, Jack.

  Prince.
 Then did we two set on you four and, with a word, outfac'd
    you from your prize, and have it; yea, and can show it you here
    in the house.
 And, Falstaff, you carried your guts away as
    nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roar'd for mercy, and still
    run and roar'd, as ever I heard bullcalf.
 What a slave art thou
    to hack thy sword as thou hast done, and then say it was in
    fight! What trick, what device, what starting hole canst thou now
    find out to hide thee from this open and apparent shame?
  Poins.
 Come, let's hear, Jack.
 By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye.
 Why, hear
    you, my masters.
 Was it for me to kill the heir apparent? Should
    I turn upon the true prince? Why, thou knowest I am as valiant as
    Hercules; but beware instinct.
 The lion will not touch the true
    prince.
 Instinct is a great matter.
 I shall think the better of myself, and thee, during my
    life- I for a valiant lion, and thou for a true prince.
 But, by
    the Lord, lads, I am glad you have the money.
 Gallants, lads, boys,
    hearts of gold, all the titles of good fellowship come to you!
    What, shall we be merry? Shall we have a play extempore?  
  Prince.

  Fal.
 Ah, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me!

                             Enter Hostess.


  Host.
 How now, my lady the hostess? What say'st thou to me?
  Host.
 Marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court at door
    would speak with you.
 He says he comes from your father.

  Prince.
 An old man.

  Fal.
 Prithee do, Jack.

  Fal.
 Faith, and I'll send him packing.

Exit.

  Prince.
 Now, sirs.
 You are lions too, you ran away upon instinct,  
    you will not touch the true prince; no- fie!
  Bard.

  Prince.
 Tell me now in earnest, how came Falstaff's sword so
    hack'd?
  Peto.
 I did that I did not this seven year
    before- I blush'd to hear his monstrous devices.

  Prince.
 What instinct hadst thou for it?
  Bard.
 My lord, do you see these meteors? Do you behold these
    exhalations?
  Prince.

  Bard.
 What think you they portend?
  Prince.
 No, if rightly taken, halter.


                         Enter Falstaff.


    Here comes lean Jack; here comes bare-bone.
 How now, my sweet
    creature of bombast? How long is't ago, Jack, since thou sawest
    thine own knee?
  Fal.
 A plague of sighing and grief! It blows a
    man up like a bladder.
 There's villanous news abroad.
 Here was
    Sir John Bracy from your father.
 You must to the court in the
    morning.
 O, Glendower.

  Fal.
 He that rides at high speed and with his pistol kills a
    sparrow flying.

  Fal.

  Prince.
 So did he never the sparrow.

  Fal.
 Well, that rascal hath good metal in him; he will not run.
 Why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him so for
    running!
  Fal.

  Prince.

  Fal.
 Worcester is stol'n away
    to-night; thy father's beard is turn'd white with the news; you
    may buy land now as cheap as stinking mack'rel.

  Prince.
 Why then, it is like, if there come a hot June, and this
    civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheads as they buy
    hobnails, by the hundreds.
 By the mass, lad, thou sayest true; it is like we shall have
    good trading that way.
 But tell me, Hal, art not thou horrible
    afeard? Thou being heir apparent, could the world pick thee out  
    three such enemies again as that fiend Douglas, that spirit
    Percy, and that devil Glendower? Art thou not horribly afraid?
    Doth not thy blood thrill at it?
  Prince.
 Not a whit, i' faith.
 I lack some of thy instinct.

  Fal.
 If thou love file, practise an answer.

  Prince.
 Do thou stand for my father and examine me upon the
    particulars of my life.

  Fal.
 Shall I? Content.

  Prince.
 Well, an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee, now shalt
    thou be moved.
 Give me a cup of sack to make my eyes look red,
    that it may be thought I have wept; for I must speak in passion,
    and I will do it in King Cambyses' vein.
 Stand aside, nobility.
 O Jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!  
  Fal.

  Host.
 For God's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen!
    For tears do stop the floodgates of her eyes.

  Host.
 Peace, good pintpot.
- Harry, I do
    not only marvel where thou spendest thy time, but also how thou
    art accompanied.
 If then thou be son to me, here lies the point: why,
    being son to me, art thou so pointed at? Shall the blessed sun of
    heaven prove a micher and eat blackberries? A question not to be
    ask'd.
 There is a thing, Harry, which thou hast
    often heard of, and it is known to many in our land by the name
    of pitch.
 This pitch, as ancient writers do report, doth defile;  
    so doth the company thou keepest.
 For, Harry, now I do not speak
    to thee in drink, but in tears; not in pleasure, but in passion;
    not in words only, but in woes also: and yet there is a virtuous
    man whom I have often noted in thy company, but I know not  his
    name.
 If then the tree may be known by the fruit, as the fruit
    by the tree, then, peremptorily I speak it, there is virtue in
    that Falstaff.
 Him keep with, the rest banish.
 And tell me now,
    thou naughty varlet, tell me where hast thou been this month?
  Prince.
 Depose me? If thou dost it half so gravely, so majestically,
    both in word and matter, hang me up by the heels for a
    rabbit-sucker or a poulter's hare.
  
  Prince.
 Well, here I am set.

  Fal.
 And here I stand.
 Judge, my masters.

  Prince.
 Now, Harry, whence come you?
  Fal.

  Prince.
 'Sblood, my lord, they are false! Nay, I'll tickle ye for a
    young prince, i' faith.

    Thou art violently carried away from grace.
 There is a devil
    haunts thee in the likeness of an old fat man; a tun of man is
    thy companion.
 Why dost thou converse with that trunk of humours,
    that bolting hutch of beastliness, that swoll'n parcel of
    dropsies, that huge bombard of sack, that stuff'd cloakbag of
    guts, that roasted Manningtree ox with the pudding in his belly,
    that reverend vice, that grey iniquity, that father ruffian, that
    vanity in years? Wherein is he good, but to taste sack and drink
    it? wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve a capon and eat it?
    wherein cunning, but in craft? wherein crafty, but in villany?
    wherein villanous, but in all things? wherein worthy, but in
    nothing?  
  Fal.
 Whom means your
    Grace?
  Prince.

  Fal.
 My lord, the man I know.
 But to say I know more harm in him than in myself were to say
    more than I know.
 If to be fat be to be hated,
    then Pharaoh's lean kine are to be loved.
 No, my good lord.
 Banish plump Jack, and banish all the world!
  Prince.
 I do, I will.
                      [A knocking heard.
]
                        [Exeunt Hostess, Francis, and Bardolph.
]  

                     Enter Bardolph, running.


  Bard.

  Fal.
 I have much to say in the
    behalf of that Falstaff.


                       Enter the Hostess.


  Host.
 O Jesu, my lord, my lord!
  Prince.
 They are come
    to search the house.
 Shall I let them in?
  Fal.
 Thou art essentially mad without seeming so.

  Prince.
 If I become not a cart as well as another man, a  
    plague on my bringing up! I hope I shall as soon be strangled
    with a halter as another.

  Prince.
 Go hide thee behind the arras.

    Now, my masters, for a true face and good conscience.

  Fal.
 Both which I have had; but their date is out, and therefore
    I'll hide me.
                                          Exit.

  Prince.
]

                    Enter Sheriff and the Carrier.


    Now, Master Sheriff, what is your will with me?
  Sher.
 First, pardon me, my lord.
 A hue and cry
    Hath followed certain men unto this house.
 What men?
  Sher.
 One of them is well known, my gracious lord-
    A gross fat man.

  Carrier.

  Prince.
 The man, I do assure you, is not here,
    For I myself at this time have employ'd him.
  
    And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee
    That I will by to-morrow dinner time
    Send him to answer thee, or any man,
    For anything he shall be charg'd withal;
    And so let me entreat you leave the house.

  Prince.
 It may be so.

  Sher.

  Prince.
 Indeed, my lord, I think it be two o'clock.

  Prince.
 This oily rascal is known as well as Paul's.

  Peto.
 Hark how hard he fetches breath.
 Search his pockets.

            He searcheth his pockets and findeth certain papers.

    What hast thou found?  
  Peto.

  Prince.
 Let's see whit they be.
 Read them.


  Peto.
 [reads] 'Item.
 A capon.
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
  ii s.
 ii d.
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .

                 Item, Sack two gallons .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 v s.
  ii s.
 vi d.

                 Item, Bread.
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
          ob.
'

  Prince.
 O monstrous! but one halfpennyworth of bread to this
    intolerable deal of sack! What there is else, keep close; we'll
    read it at more advantage.
 There let him sleep till day.
 We must all to the wars.
 I'll procure this fat rogue a charge of
    foot; and I know, his death will be a march of twelve score.
 The
    money shall be paid back again with advantage.

  Peto.
 Good morrow, good my lord.

                                                         Exeunt.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 Scene I.

Bangor.


  Mort.
 A plague upon it!
    I have forgot the map.
 No, here it is.

    Sit, cousin Percy; sit, good cousin Hotspur,
    For by that name as oft as Lancaster
    Doth speak of you, his cheek looks pale, and with
    A rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.

  Hot.
 And you in hell, as oft as he hears
    Owen Glendower spoke of.

  Glend.
 Why, so it would have done at the same season, if your
    mother's cat had but kitten'd, though yourself had never been
    born.

  Glend.

  Hot.
 And I say the earth was not of my mind,
    If you suppose as fearing you it shook.

  Glend.
 The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble.
 O, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
    And not in fear of your nativity.

    Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth
    In strange eruptions; oft the teeming earth
    Is with a kind of colic pinch'd and vex'd
    By the imprisoning of unruly wind
    Within her womb, which, for enlargement striving,
    Shakes the old beldame earth and topples down
    Steeples and mossgrown towers.
 At your birth
    Our grandam earth, having this distemp'rature,
    In passion shook.
 Give me leave
    To tell you once again that at my birth
    The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
    The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
    Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.

    Where is he living, clipp'd in with the sea
    That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,
    Which calls me pupil or hath read to me?
    And bring him out that is but woman's son
    Can trace me in the tedious ways of art
    And hold me pace in deep experiments.

  Hot.
 I'll to dinner.

  Mort.

  Glend.
 I can call spirits from the vasty deep.

  Hot.
 Why, so can I, or so can any man;
    But will they come when you do call for them?
  Glend.
  
  Hot.
 Tell truth and shame the devil.

    O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!
  Mort.
 Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.
 Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head
    Against my power; thrice from the banks of Wye
    And sandy-bottom'd Severn have I sent him
    Bootless home and weather-beaten back.
 Come, here's the map.

    England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,
    By south and east is to my part assign'd;
    All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,
    And all the fertile land within that bound,  
    To Owen Glendower; and, dear coz, to you
    The remnant northward lying off from Trent.

    My father Glendower is not ready yet,
    Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days.
] Within that space you may have drawn together
    Your tenants, friends, and neighbouring gentlemen.
 Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here,
    In quantity equals not one of yours.
  
    See how this river comes me cranking in
    And cuts me from the best of all my land
    A huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out.

    I'll have the current ill this place damm'd up,
    And here the smug and sliver Trent shall run
    In a new channel fair and evenly.

    It shall not wind with such a deep indent
    To rob me of so rich a bottom here.
 Yea, but
    Mark how he bears his course, and runs me up
    With like advantage on the other side,
    Gelding the opposed continent as much
    As on the other side it takes from you.
 Yea, but a little charge will trench him here
    And on this north side win this cape of land;
    And then he runs straight and even.

  Hot.
 A little charge will do it.

  Glend.
 I will not have it alt'red.
 Will not you?  
  Glend.
 No, nor you shall not.

  Hot.
 Who shall say me nay?
  Glend.
 No, that will I.
 Let me not understand you then; speak it in Welsh.

  Hot.

    I had rather hear a brazen canstick turn'd
    Or a dry wheel grate on the axletree,
    And that would set my teeth nothing on edge,
    Nothing so much as mincing poetry.

    'Tis like the forc'd gait of a shuffling nag,
  Glend.
 Come, you shall have Trent turn'd.
  
  Hot.
 I do not care.
 I'll give thrice so much land
    To any well-deserving friend;
    But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,
    I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair
    Are the indentures drawn? Shall we be gone?
  Glend.
 The moon shines fair; you may away by night.

    I am afraid my daughter will run mad,
    So much she doteth on her Mortimer.

  Mort.
 I cannot choose.
 I tell you what-
    He held me last night at least nine hours  
    In reckoning up the several devils' names
    That were his lackeys.
 I cried 'hum,' and 'Well, go to!'
    But mark'd him not a word.
 O, he is as tedious
    As a tired horse, a railing wife;
    Worse than a smoky house.

    I warrant you that man is not alive
    Might so have tempted him as you have done
    Without the taste of danger and reproof.

    But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
 In faith, my lord, you are too wilful-blame,
    And since your coming hither have done enough
    To put him quite besides his patience.

    You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault.

    Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood-
    And that's the dearest grace it renders you-
    Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,
    Defect of manners, want of government,
    Pride, haughtiness, opinion, and disdain;
    The least of which haunting a nobleman
    Loseth men's hearts, and leaves behind a stain
    Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
    Beguiling them of commendation.

  Hot.
 Well, I am school'd.
 Good manners be your speed!
    Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.


            Enter Glendower with the Ladies.


  Mort.
  
  Glend.
 My daughter weeps; she will not part with you;
    She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.

  Mort.

               Glendower speaks to her in Welsh, and she answers
                                                him in the same.
 She is desperate here.
 A peevish self-will'd harlotry,
    One that no persuasion can do good upon.

                                       The Lady speaks in Welsh.

  Mort.
 I understand thy looks.
 That pretty Welsh
    Which thou pourest down from these swelling heavens
    I am too perfect in; and, but for shame,
    In such a Barley should I answer thee.

                                        The Lady again in Welsh.
 Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.

                                 The Lady speaks again in Welsh.

  Mort.
 O, I am ignorance itself in this!
  Glend.
 She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down
    And rest your gentle head upon her lap,
    And she will sing the song that pleaseth you
    And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep,
    Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
    Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep
    As is the difference betwixt day and night
    The hour before the heavenly-harness'd team
    Begins his golden progress in the East.
 With all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing.

    By that time will our book, I think, be drawn.

  Glend.
 Do so,
    And those musicians that shall play to you
    Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,
    And straight they shall be here.
 Sit, and attend.

  Hot.
 Come, quick,  
    quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.

    By'r Lady, he is a good musician.
 Then should you be nothing but musical; for you are
    altogether govern'd by humours.

  Hot.
 I had rather hear Lady, my brach, howl in Irish.

  Hot.
 Neither! 'Tis a woman's fault.

  Lady P.
 Now God help thee!
  Hot.

  Lady P.

    Come, Kate, I'll have your song too.

  Hot.
 Not yours, in good sooth? Heart! you swear like a
    comfit-maker's wife.
 'Not you, in good sooth!' and 'as true as I
    live!' and 'as God shall mend me!' and 'as sure as day!'
    And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths
    As if thou ne'er walk'st further than Finsbury.
 Come, sing.

  Lady P.

  Hot.
                                  Exit.

  Glend.
 Come, come, Lord Mortimer.

    By this our book is drawn; we'll but seal,
    And then to horse immediately.





Scene II.
 The Palace.


Enter the King, Prince of Wales, and others.
 The Prince of Wales and I
    Must have some private conference; but be near at hand,
    For we shall presently have need of you.

                                                   Exeunt Lords.
 Tell me else,
    Could such inordinate and low desires,
    Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,
    Such barren pleasures, rude society,
    As thou art match'd withal and grafted to,
    Accompany the greatness of thy blood  
    And hold their level with thy princely heart?
  Prince.

    Had I so lavish of my presence been,
    So common-hackney'd in the eyes of men,
    So stale and cheap to vulgar company,
    Opinion, that did help me to the crown,
    Had still kept loyal to possession
    And left me in reputeless banishment,
    A fellow of no mark nor likelihood.

    Thus did I keep my person fresh and new,
    My presence, like a robe pontifical,  
    Ne'er seen but wond'red at; and so my state,
    Seldom but sumptuous, show'd like a feast
    And won by rareness such solemnity.
 Not an eye
    But is aweary of thy common sight,
    Save mine, which hath desir'd to see thee more;
    Which now doth that I would not have it do-
    Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.

  Prince.
 I shall hereafter, my thrice-gracious lord,
    Be more myself.

  King.
 For all the world,
    As thou art to this hour, was Richard then
    When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh;  
    And even as I was then is Percy now.

    Now, by my sceptre, and my soul to boot,
    He hath more worthy interest to the state
    Than thou, the shadow of succession;
    For of no right, nor colour like to right,
    He doth fill fields with harness in the realm,
    Turns head against the lion's armed jaws,
    And, Being no more in debt to years than thou,
    Leads ancient lords and reverend Bishops on
    To bloody battles and to bruising arms.

    What never-dying honour hath he got
    Against renowmed Douglas! whose high deeds,
    Whose hot incursions and great name in arms
    Holds from all soldiers chief majority
    And military title capital
    Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ.

    And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland,
    The Archbishop's Grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer
    Capitulate against us and are up.

    But wherefore do I tell these news to thee
    Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes,
    Which art my nearest and dearest enemy'
    Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear,
    Base inclination, and the start of spleen,
    To fight against me under Percy's pay,
    To dog his heels and curtsy at his frowns,
    To show how much thou art degenerate.
 You shall not find it so.

    And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights,
    That this same child of honour and renown,
    This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight,
    And your unthought of Harry chance to meet.

    For every honour sitting on his helm,
    Would they were multitudes, and on my head
    My shames redoubled! For the time will come
    That I shall make this Northern youth exchange
    His glorious deeds for my indignities.

    Percy is but my factor, good my lord,
    To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf;
    And I will call hall to so strict account
    That he shall render every glory up,
    Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,
    Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.

    This in the name of God I promise here;
    The which if he be pleas'd I shall perform,
    I do beseech your Majesty may salve  
    The long-grown wounds of my intemperance.

  King.
 A hundred thousand rebels die in this!
    Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.


                        Enter Blunt.

  Blunt.
 So hath the business that I come to speak of.

  King.
 The Earl of Westmoreland set forth to-day;
    With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster;
    For this advertisement is five days old.
  
    On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward;
    On Thursday we ourselves will march.

    Our hands are full of business.
            Exeunt.

Eastcheap.
 The Boar's Head Tavern.


  Fal.
 Bardolph, am I not fall'n away vilely since this last action?
    Do I not bate? Do I not dwindle? Why, my skin hangs about me like
    an old lady's loose gown! I am withered like an old apple John.

    I shall be out of heart shortly, and then I shall have no
    strength to repent.
 An I have not forgotten what the inside of a
    church is made of, I am a peppercorn, a brewer's horse.
 The
    inside of a church! Company, villanous company, hath been the
    spoil of me.
 Sir John, you are so fretful you cannot live long.

  Fal.
 Why, there is it! Come, sing me a bawdy song; make me merry.
 I
    was as virtuously given as a gentleman need to be, virtuous
    enough: swore little, dic'd not above seven times a week, went to
    a bawdy house not above once in a quarter- of an hour, paid money
    that I borrowed- three or four times, lived well, and in good
    compass; and now I live out of all order, out of all compass.
 Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needs be out of  
    all compass- out of all reasonable compass, Sir John.

  Fal.
 Do thou amend thy face, and I'll amend my life.
 Thou art the Knight of the Burning Lamp.

  Bard.
 Why, Sir John, my face does you no harm.
 I make as good use of it as many a man doth
    of a death's-head or a memento mori.
 if thou wert any way given to
    virtue, I would swear by thy face; my oath should be 'By this
    fire, that's God's angel.
 When thou ran'st up Gadshill in the night to catch my
    horse, if I did not think thou hadst been an ignis fatuus or a
    ball of wildfire, there's no purchase in money.
 God-a-mercy! so should I be sure to be heart-burn'd.


                          Enter Hostess.
 Why, Sir John, what do you think, Sir John? Do you think I
    keep thieves in my house? I have search'd, I have enquired, so
    has my husband, man by man, boy by boy, servant by servant.
 The
    tithe of a hair was never lost in my house before.

  Fal.
 Bardolph was shav'd and lost many a hair, and
    I'll be sworn my pocket was pick'd.
 Go to, you are a woman, go!
  Host.
 Go to, I know you well enough.
 I know you, Sir
    John.
 You owe me money, Sir John, and now you pick a quarrel to  
    beguile me of it.
 I bought you a dozen of shirts to your back.

  Fal.
 Dowlas, filthy dowlas! I have given them away to bakers'
    wives; they have made bolters of them.

  Host.

    You owe money here besides, Sir John, for your diet and
    by-drinkings, and money lent you, four-and-twenty pound.

  Fal.

  Host.
 He? Alas, he is poor; he hath nothing.
 How? Poor? Look upon his face.
 I'll not pay a denier.

  Host.
 O Jesu, I have heard the Prince tell him, I know not how oft,
    that that ring was copper!
  Fal.
 'Sblood, an he were
    here, I would cudgel him like a dog if he would say so.
  

    How now, lad? Is the wind in that door, i' faith? Must we all
    march?
  Bard.
 My lord, I pray you hear me.

  Prince.
 What say'st thou, Mistress Quickly? How doth thy husband?
    I love him well; he is an honest man.
 Good my lord, hear me.
 Prithee let her alone and list to me.
 What say'st thou, Jack?
  Fal.
 What didst thou lose, Jack?
  Fal.

  Prince.
 A trifle, some eightpenny matter.

  Host.
 So I told him, my lord, and I said I heard your Grace say so;
    and, my lord, he speaks most vilely of you, like a foul-mouth'd
    man as he is, and said he would cudgel you.
 What! he did not?
  Host.
 There's no more faith in thee than in a stewed prune, nor no
    more truth in thee than in a drawn fox; and for woman-hood, Maid
    Marian may be the deputy's wife of the ward to thee.
 Say, what thing? what thing?
  Fal.
 What thing? Why, a thing to thank God on.
 I am no thing to thank God on, I would thou shouldst know it!
    I am an honest man's wife, and, setting thy knight-hood aside,
    thou art a knave to call me so.
 Thou art an unjust man in saying so.
 Thou say'st true, hostess, and he slanders thee most
    grossly.

  Host.

  Host.

  Fal.
 Did I, Bardolph?
  Bard.
 Indeed, Sir John, you said so.

  Fal.

  Prince.
 Why, Hal, thou knowest, as thou art but man, I dare; but as
    thou art Prince, I fear thee as I fear the roaring of the lion's
    whelp.
 And why not as the lion?
  Fal.
 The King himself is to be feared as the lion.
  
  Prince.
 O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy knees!
    But, sirrah, there's no room for faith, truth, nor honesty in
    this bosom of thine.

    Charge an honest woman with picking thy pocket? Why, thou
    whoreson, impudent, emboss'd rascal, if there were anything in
    thy pocket but tavern reckonings, memorandums of bawdy houses,
    and one poor pennyworth of sugar candy to make thee long-winded-
    if thy pocket were enrich'd with any other injuries but these, I
    am a villain.
 And yet you will stand to it; you will not pocket
    up wrong.
 Art thou not ashamed?
  Fal.
 Dost thou hear, Hal? Thou knowest in the state of innocency
    Adam fell; and what should poor Jack Falstaff do in the days of
    villany? Thou seest I have more flesh than another man, and
    therefore more frailty.
 It appears so by the story.

  Fal.
 Go make ready breakfast.
 Love thy
    husband, look to thy servants, cherish thy guests.
 Thou shalt
    find me tractable to any honest reason.

    -Still?- Nay, prithee be gone.
 O my sweet beef, I must still be good angel to thee.

  Fal.
 O, I do not like that paying back! 'Tis a double labour.
 I am good friends with my father, and may do anything.
 Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou doest, and do it
    with unwash'd hands too.

  Bard.
 Do, my lord.
 I have procured thee, Jack, a charge of foot.
 I would it had been of horse.
 Where shall I find one that can
    steal well? O for a fine thief of the age of two-and-twenty or
    thereabouts! I am heinously unprovided.
 Well, God be thanked for
    these rebels.

  Prince.
 Bardolph!
  Bard.

                                                [Exit Bardolph.
]
    Go, Poins, to horse, to horse; for thou and I
    Have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time.
  
                                                   [Exit Poins.

    There shalt thou know thy charge.
 and there receive
    Money and order for their furniture.
                [Exit.
 Rare words! brave world! Hostess, my breakfast, come.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.
 Scene I.


Enter Harry Hotspur, Worcester, and Douglas.
 Well said, my noble Scot.
 If speaking truth
    In this fine age were not thought flattery,
    Such attribution should the Douglas have
    As not a soldier of this season's stamp
    Should go so general current through the world.

    No man so potent breathes upon the ground
    But I will beard him.


                     Enter one with letters.
 Do so, and 'tis well.
-
    What letters hast thou there?- I can but thank you.
  
  Messenger.
 Zounds! how has he the leisure to be sick
    In such a justling time? Who leads his power?
    Under whose government come they along?
  Mess.
 His letters bears his mind, not I, my lord.

  Wor.

  Wor.

    His health was never better worth than now.

    He writes me here that inward sickness-
    And that his friends by deputation could not
    So soon be drawn; no did he think it meet  
    To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
    On any soul remov'd but on his own.

    Yet doth he give us bold advertisement,
    That with our small conjunction we should on,
    To see how fortune is dispos'd to us;
    For, as he writes, there is no quailing now,
    Because the King is certainly possess'd
    Of all our purposes.
 What say you to it?
  Wor.

    A comfort of retirement lives in this.

  Wor.

    The quality and hair of our attempt
    Brooks no division.
 It will be thought
    By some that know not why he is away,
    That wisdom, loyalty, and mere dislike
    Of our proceedings kept the Earl from hence.

    And think how such an apprehension
    May turn the tide of fearful faction
    And breed a kind of question in our cause.
  
    This absence of your father's draws a curtain
    That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
    Before not dreamt of.
 You strain too far.

    I rather of his absence make this use:
    It lends a lustre and more great opinion,
    A larger dare to our great enterprise,
    Than if the Earl were here; for men must think,
    If we, without his help, can make a head
    To push against a kingdom, with his help
    We shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down.

    Yet all goes well; yet all our joints are whole.

  Doug.
 As heart can think.


  Hot.
 My cousin Vernon! welcome, by my soul.

  Ver.

    The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong,  
    Is marching hitherwards; with him Prince John.

  Hot.
 No harm.
 What more?
  Ver.
 And further, I have learn'd
    The King himself in person is set forth,
    Or hitherwards intended speedily,
    With strong and mighty preparation.

  Hot.
 He shall be welcome too.
 Where is his son,
    The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,
    And his comrades, that daff'd the world aside
    And bid it pass?
  Ver.
 All furnish'd, all in arms;
    All plum'd like estridges that with the wind
    Bated like eagles having lately bath'd;
    Glittering in golden coats like images;
    As full of spirit as the month of May
    And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer;
    Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.

  Hot.
 Let them come.

    They come like sacrifices in their trim,
    And to the fire-ey'd maid of smoky war
    All hot and bleeding Will we offer them.

    The mailed Mars Shall on his altar sit
    Up to the ears in blood.
 I am on fire
    To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh,
    And yet not ours.
 There is more news.

    I learn'd in Worcester, as I rode along,  
    He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.
 That's the worst tidings that I hear of yet.

  Wor.
 Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
 What may the King's whole battle reach unto?
  Ver.
 To thirty thousand.

  Hot.

    My father and Glendower being both away,
    The powers of us may serve so great a day.

    Doomsday is near.
 Talk not of dying.
 I am out of fear
    Of death or death's hand for this one half-year.

                                                         Exeunt.

A public road near Coventry.


Enter Falstaff and Bardolph.
 Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry; fill me a bottle of
    sack.
 Our soldiers shall march through.

  Bald.
 This bottle makes an angel.
 An if it do, take it for thy labour; an if it make twenty,
    take them all; I'll answer the coinage.
 Bid my lieutenant Peto
    meet me at town's end.
 I Will, Captain.
 Farewell.
                         Exit.

  Fal.
 If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a sous'd gurnet.
 I
    have misused the King's press damnably.
 I
    press me none but good householders, yeomen's sons; inquire me
    out contracted bachelors, such as had been ask'd twice on the
    banes- such a commodity of warm slaves as had as lieve hear the
    devil as a drum; such as fear the report of a caliver worse than  
    a struck fowl or a hurt wild duck.
 I press'd me none but such
    toasts-and-butter, with hearts in their bellies no bigger than
    pins' heads, and they have bought out their services; and now my
    whole charge consists of ancients, corporals, lieutenants,
    gentlemen of companies- slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the
    painted cloth, where the glutton's dogs licked his sores; and
    such as indeed were never soldiers, but discarded unjust
    serving-men, younger sons to Younger brothers, revolted tapsters,
    and ostlers trade-fall'n; the cankers of a calm world and a long
    peace; ten times more dishonourable ragged than an old fac'd
    ancient; and such have I to fill up the rooms of them that have
    bought out their services that you would think that I had a
    hundred and fifty tattered Prodigals lately come from
    swine-keeping, from eating draff and husks.
 But that's all one; they'll find linen enough on
    every hedge.


              Enter the Prince and the Lord of Westmoreland.
 How now, blown Jack? How now, quilt?
  Fal.
 What, Hal? How now, mad wag? What a devil dost thou in
    Warwickshire? My good Lord of Westmoreland, I cry you mercy.
 I
    thought your honour had already been at Shrewsbury.

  West.
 Faith, Sir John, 'tis more than time that I were there, and
    you too; but my powers are there already.
 We must away all, to-night.

  Fal.
 I am as vigilant as a cat to steal cream.

  Prince.
 I think, to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath already
    made thee butter.
  
  Prince.

  Fal.
 They'll fill a pit as well as better.
 Tush, man, mortal
    men, mortal men.

  West.

  Fal.
 Faith, for their poverty, I know, not where they had that; and
    for their bareness, I am surd they never learn'd that of me.

  Prince.

Exit.

  Fal.
 What, is the King encamp'd?
  West.

                                                         [Exit.
]
  Fal.
 Well,
    To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast
    Fits a dull fighter and a keen guest.

  Wor.
 It may not be.

  Ver.

  Hot.
 So do we.
 His is certain, ours 's doubtful.
 Good cousin, be advis'd; stir not to-night.

  Ver.
 Do not, my lord.
 You do not counsel well.

    You speak it out of fear and cold heart.

  Ver.
 By my life-
    And I dare well maintain it with my life-
    If well-respected honour bid me on
    I hold as little counsel with weak fear
    As you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives.
 Yea, or to-night.

  Ver.

  Hot.
 To-night, say I.

    Come, come, it may not be.

    Your uncle Worcester's horse came but to-day;
    And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
    Their courage with hard labour tame and dull,
    That not a horse is half the half of himself.
 So are the horses of the enemy,
    In general journey-bated and brought low.

    The better part of ours are full of rest.
 The number of the King exceedeth ours.


  Blunt.
 I come with gracious offers from the King,
    If you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.

  Hot.
 Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt, and would to God
    You were of our determination!
    Some of us love you well; and even those some
    Envy your great deservings and good name,
    Because you are not of our quality,
    But stand against us like an enemy.

  Hot.
 The King is kind; and well we know the King
    Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.

    My father and my uncle and myself
    Did give him that same royalty he wears;
    And when he was not six-and-twenty strong,
    Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,
    A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,
    My father gave him welcome to the shore;
    And when he heard him swear and vow to God
    He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
    To sue his livery and beg his peace,
    With tears of innocency and terms of zeal,
    My father, in kind heart and pity mov'd,
    Swore him assistance, and performed it too.

    Now, when the lords and barons of the realm  
    Perceiv'd Northumberland did lean to him,
    The more and less came in with cap and knee;
    Met him on boroughs, cities, villages,
    Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,
    Laid gifts before him, proffer'd him their oaths,
    Give him their heirs as pages, followed him
    Even at the heels in golden multitudes.
 Tut! I came not to hear this.

  Hot.
 Then to the point.

    In short time after lie depos'd the King;
    Soon after that depriv'd him of his life;
    And in the neck of that task'd the whole state;
    To make that worse, suff'red his kinsman March
    (Who is, if every owner were well placid,
    Indeed his king) to be engag'd in Wales,
    There without ransom to lie forfeited;
    Disgrac'd me in my happy victories,
    Sought to entrap me by intelligence;
    Rated mine uncle from the Council board;
    In rage dismiss'd my father from the court;
    Broke an oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong;
    And in conclusion drove us to seek out
    This head of safety, and withal to pry
    Into his title, the which we find
    Too indirect for long continuance.
 We'll withdraw awhile.

  Hot.
 And may be so we shall.

  Blunt.

                                                         Exeunt.





Scene IV.

York.


Enter the Archbishop of York and Sir Michael.


  Arch.

  Arch.

    To-morrow, good Sir Michael, is a day
    Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
    Must bide the touch; for, sir, at Shrewsbury,
    As I am truly given to understand,
    The King with mighty and quick-raised power
    Meets with Lord Harry; and I fear, Sir Michael,
    What with the sickness of Northumberland,
    Whose power was in the first proportion,
    And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,  
    Who with them was a rated sinew too
    And comes not in, overrul'd by prophecies-
    I fear the power of Percy is too weak
    To wage an instant trial with the King.

  Sir M.

  Sir M.
 And so there is; but yet the King hath drawn
    The special head of all the land together-
    The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
    The noble Westmoreland and warlike Blunt,
    And many moe corrivals and dear men
    Of estimation and command in arms.

  Sir M.

  Arch.
 I hope no less, yet needful 'tis to fear;
    And, to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed.

    For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the King  
    Dismiss his power, he means to visit us,
    For he hath heard of our confederacy,
    And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him.

    Therefore make haste.

                                                         Exeunt.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 Scene I.


Enter the King, Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster, Sir Walter Blunt,
Falstaff.


  King.
 How bloodily the sun begins to peer
    Above yon busky hill! The day looks pale
    At his distemp'rature.

  Prince.

  King.


     The trumpet sounds.


    How, now, my Lord of Worcester? 'Tis not well
    That you and I should meet upon such terms
    As now we meet.
 You have deceiv'd our trust
    And made us doff our easy robes of peace  
    To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel.
 Hear me, my liege.

    For mine own part, I could be well content
    To entertain the lag-end of my life
    With quiet hours; for I do protest
    I have not sought the day of this dislike.
 You have not sought it! How comes it then,
  Fal.
 Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
 Peace, chewet, peace!
  Wor.
 It pleas'd your Majesty to turn your looks
    Of favour from myself and all our house;
    And yet I must remember you, my lord,  
    We were the first and dearest of your friends.

    For you my staff of office did I break
    In Richard's time, and posted day and night
    To meet you on the way and kiss your hand
    When yet you were in place and in account
    Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.

    It was myself, my brother, and his son
    That brought you home and boldly did outdare
    The dangers of the time.
 You swore to us,
    And you did swear that oath at Doncaster,
    That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state,
    Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right,
    The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster.
 But in short space
    It it rain'd down fortune show'ring on your head,
    And such a flood of greatness fell on you-
    What with our help, what with the absent King,
    What with the injuries of a wanton time,
    The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
    And the contrarious winds that held the King  
    So long in his unlucky Irish wars
    That all in England did repute him dead-
    And from this swarm of fair advantages
    You took occasion to be quickly woo'd
    To gripe the general sway into your hand;
    Forgot your oath to us at Doncaster;
    And, being fed by us, you us'd us so
    As that ungentle gull, the cuckoo's bird,
    Useth the sparrow- did oppress our nest;
    Grew, by our feeding to so great a bulk
    That even our love thirst not come near your sight
    For fear of swallowing; but with nimble wing
    We were enforc'd for safety sake to fly
    Out of your sight and raise this present head;
    Whereby we stand opposed by such means
    As you yourself have forg'd against yourself
    By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
    And violation of all faith and troth
    Sworn to tis in your younger enterprise.

  King.
 In both our armies there is many a soul
    Shall pay full dearly for this encounter,
    If once they join in trial.

    Yet this before my father's Majesty-
    I am content that he shall take the odds
    Of his great name and estimation,
    And will to save the blood on either side,
    Try fortune with him in a single fight.

  King.
 And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
    Albeit considerations infinite
    Do make against it.
 So be gone.

    We offer fair; take it advisedly.

                                    Exit Worcester [with Vernon]
  Prince.

    The Douglas and the Hotspur both together
    Are confident against the world in arms.

  King.
 Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge;
    For, on their answer, will we set on them,
    And God befriend us as our cause is just!
                                Exeunt.
 Manent Prince, Falstaff.
 Hal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestride me, so!
    'Tis a point of friendship.
 Nothing but a Colossus can do thee that friendship.

  Fal.
 I would 'twere bedtime, Hal, and all well.

  Prince.
 Why, thou owest God a death.

  Fal.

    What need I be so forward with him that calls not on me? Well,
    'tis no matter; honour pricks me on.
 Or
    an arm? No.
 Honour hath no
    skill in surgery then? No.
 What is that
    word honour? Air.
 Doth be bear it? No.
 But will it not live with the
    living? No.
 Why? Detraction will not suffer it.
 Honour is a mere scutcheon- and so ends my catechism.

Exit.

The rebel camp.


Enter Worcester and Sir Richard Vernon.


  Wor.
 O no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,
    The liberal and kind offer of the King.

  Ver.
 Then are we all undone.

    He will suspect us still and find a time
    To punish this offence in other faults.

    Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes;
    For treason is but trusted like the fox
    Who, ne'er so tame, so cherish'd and lock'd up,
    Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.

    All his offences live upon my head
    And on his father's.
 We did train him on;
    And, his corruption being taken from us,
    We, as the spring of all, shall pay for all.

    Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know,
    In any case, the offer of the King.


               Enter Hotspur [and Douglas].


  Ver.

    Here comes your cousin.

  Hot.
 My uncle is return'd.

    Uncle, what news?
  Wor.
 The King will bid you battle presently.
 Defy him by the Lord Of Westmoreland.

  Hot.
 Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.
  
  Doug.
 Marry, and shall, and very willingly.

  Wor.
 There is no seeming mercy in the King.

  Hot.

    He calls us rebels, traitors, aid will scourge
    With haughty arms this hateful name in us.


                       Enter Douglas.
 Arm, gentlemen! to arms! for I have thrown
    A brave defiance in King Henry's teeth,
    And Westmoreland, that was engag'd, did bear it;
    Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
 The Prince of Wales stepp'd forth before the King
    And, nephew, challeng'd you to single fight.

  Hot.
 I never in my life
    Did hear a challenge urg'd more modestly,
    Unless a brother should a brother dare
    To gentle exercise and proof of arms.

    He gave you all the duties of a man;
    Trimm'd up your praises with a princely tongue;
    Spoke your deservings like a chronicle;
    Making you ever better than his praise
    By still dispraising praise valued with you;
    And, which became him like a prince indeed,
    He made a blushing cital of himself,
    And chid his truant youth with such a grace
    As if lie mast'red there a double spirit
    Of teaching and of learning instantly.

    There did he pause; but let me tell the world,
    If he outlive the envy of this day,
    England did never owe so sweet a hope,
    So much misconstrued in his wantonness.
  
  Hot.

    But be he as he will, yet once ere night
    I will embrace him with a soldier's arm,
    That he shall shrink under my courtesy.

    Arm, arm with speed! and, fellows, soldiers, friends,
    Better consider what you have to do
    Than I, that have not well the gift of tongue,
    Can lift your blood up with persuasion.


                       Enter a Messenger.


  Mess.
 My lord, here are letters for you.

  Hot.
 I cannot read them now.


  Mess.

  Hot.

    Now, Esperance! Percy! and set on.

    Sound all the lofty instruments of war,
    And by that music let us all embrace;
    For, heaven to earth, some of us never shall
    A second time do such a courtesy.

                          Here they embrace.
 The trumpets sound.

                                                       [Exeunt.


The King enters with his Power.
  Then enter Douglas
and Sir Walter Blunt.
 What is thy name, that in the battle thus
    Thou crossest me? What honour dost thou seek
    Upon my head?
  Doug.

  Blunt.
 They tell thee true.

  Doug.


    They fight.
 Douglas kills Blunt.
 Then enter Hotspur.
  

  Hot.
 O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,
    I never had triumph'd upon a Scot.

  Doug.
 All's done, all's won.

  Hot.
 Here.

  Hot.

    A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt;
    Semblably furnish'd like the King himself.

  Doug.

  Doug.
 Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats;
    I'll murder all his wardrop, piece by piece,
    Until I meet the King.
 Enter Falstaff solus.


  Fal.
 Here's no scoring but upon the pate.
 Soft! who are you?
    Sir Walter Blunt.
 There's honour for you! Here's no vanity! I am
    as hot as molten lead, and as heavy too.
 God keep lead out of me!
    I need no more weight than mine own bowels.
 There's not three of my
    hundred and fifty left alive; and they are for the town's end, to
    beg during life.
 But who comes here?

                         Enter the Prince.


  Prince.
 What, stand'st thou idle here? Lend me thy sword.

    Many a nobleman lies stark and stiff
    Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies,
    Whose deaths are yet unreveng'd.
 I prithee
    Rend me thy sword.

  Fal.
 Turk Gregory
    never did such deeds in arms as I have done this day.

  Prince.

    I prithee lend me thy sword.

  Fal.
 Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou get'st not my
    sword; but take my pistol, if thou wilt.
 Give it me.
 Ay, Hal.
 'Tis hot, 'tis hot.


    The Prince draws it out and finds it to he a bottle of sack.


    What, is it a time to jest and dally now?
                              He throws the bottle at him.
 Exit.

  Fal.
 Well, if Percy be alive, I'll pierce him.
 If he do come in my
    way, so; if he do not, if I come in his willingly, let him make a
    carbonado of me.
 Give me life; which if I can save, so; if not, honour comes
    unlook'd for, and there's an end.
                      Exit.





Scene IV.

Another part of the field.
 Excursions.
 Enter the King, the Prince, Lord John of Lancaster,
Earl of Westmoreland

  King.
 I prithee,
    Harry, withdraw thyself; thou bleedest too much.

    Lord John of Lancaster, go you unto him.

  John.
 Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.
 I do beseech your Majesty make up,
    Lest Your retirement do amaze your friends.

    My Lord of Westmoreland, lead him to his tent.

  Prince.
 We breathe too long.
 For God's sake, come.
]
  Prince.

    Before, I lov'd thee as a brother, John;
    But now, I do respect thee as my soul.
 I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point
    With lustier maintenance than I did look for
    Of such an ungrown warrior.

  Prince.
 O, this boy
    Lends mettle to us all!                                Exit.


                         Enter Douglas.

    I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
    That wear those colours on them.
 What art thou
    That counterfeit'st the person of a king?
  King.
 The King himself, who, Douglas, grieves at heart
    So many of his shadows thou hast met,
    And not the very King.
 So defend thyself.

  Doug.
 I fear thou art another counterfeit;
    And yet, in faith, thou bearest thee like a king.

    But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be,
    And thus I win thee.
 Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like
    Never to hold it up again! The spirits
    Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt are in my arms.
 Douglas flieth.

    Cheerly, my lord.
 How fares your Grace?
    Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succour sent,
    And so hath Clifton.
 I'll to Clifton straight.
  
    Thou hast redeem'd thy lost opinion,
    And show'd thou mak'st some tender of my life,
    In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.

  Prince.
 O God! they did me too much injury
    That ever said I heark'ned for your death.

    If it were so, I might have let alone
    The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
    Which would have been as speedy in your end
    As all the poisonous potions in the world,
    And sav'd the treacherous labour of your son.

  King.

Exit.


                      Enter Hotspur.

  Prince.
 My name is Harry Percy.

  Prince.
 Why, then I see
    A very valiant rebel of the name.
  
    I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy,
    To share with me in glory any more.
 Nor shall it, Harry; for the hour is come
    To end the one of us and would to God
    Thy name in arms were now as great as mine!
  Prince.
 I can no longer brook thy vanities.

                                                     They fight.


                      Enter Falstaff.
 Well said, Hal! to it, Hal! Nay, you shall find no boy's play
    here, I can tell you.
 [Exit Douglas.
] The Prince killeth Percy.


  Hot.

    They wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my flesh.

    But thoughts the slave, of life, and life time's fool,
    And time, that takes survey of all the world,
    Must have a stop.
 Fare thee well, great heart!
    Ill-weav'd ambition, how much art thou shrunk!
    When that this body did contain a spirit,
    A kingdom for it was too small a bound;
    But now two paces of the vilest earth
    Is room enough.
 This earth that bears thee dead
    Bears not alive so stout a gentleman.

    If thou wert sensible of courtesy,  
    I should not make so dear a show of zeal.

    But let my favours hide thy mangled face;
    And, even in thy behalf, I'll thank myself
    For doing these fair rites of tenderness.

    Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven!
    Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
    But not rememb'red in thy epitaph!
                               He spieth Falstaff on the ground.

    What, old acquaintance? Could not all this flesh
    Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell!
    I could have better spar'd a better man.

    O, I should have a heavy miss of thee
    If I were much in love with vanity!
    Death hath not struck so fat a deer to-day,
    Though many dearer, in this bloody fray.
                 Exit.


                     Falstaff riseth up.
 Embowell'd? If thou embowel me to-day, I'll give you leave to
    powder me and eat me too to-morrow.
 'Sblood, 'twas time to
    counterfeit, or that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot
    too.
 Counterfeit? I lie; I am no counterfeit.
 The better part of valour is discretion; in the
    which better part I have saved my life.
 Zounds, I am afraid of
    this gunpowder Percy, though he be dead.
 Therefore I'll make him sure; yea,
    and I'll swear I kill'd him.
 Therefore,
    sirrah [stabs him], with a new wound in your thigh, come you
    along with me.

  John.
 But, soft! whom have we here?
    Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
  Prince.
 Art thou alive,
    Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?
    I prithee speak.
 We will not trust our eyes
    Without our ears.
 Thou art not what thou seem'st.
 No, that's certain! I am not a double man; but if I be not
    Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack.
 There 's Percy.
 I look to be either earl or duke, I can assure you.
 Why, Percy I kill'd myself, and saw thee dead!
  Fal.
 If I may be believ'd, so; if not, let them that should
    reward valour bear the sin upon their own heads.
 If the man  
    were alive and would deny it, zounds! I would make him eat a
    piece of my sword.
 This is the strangest tale that ever I beard.
 This is the strangest fellow, brother John.

    For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
    I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.

    The trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours.

                          Exeunt [Prince Henry and Prince John].

  Fal.
 I'll follow, as they say, for reward.

                                    Exit [bearing off the body].





Scene V.

Another part of the field.


  King.

  King.
 Bear Worcester to the death, and Vernon too;
    Other offenders we will pause upon.
  
                         Exeunt Worcester and Vernon, [guarded].

    How goes the field?
  Prince.
 The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw
    The fortune of the day quite turn'd from him,
    The Noble Percy slain and all his men
    Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest;
    And falling from a hill,he was so bruis'd
    That the pursuers took him.
 Then brother John of Lancaster, to you
    This honourable bounty shall belong.

    Go to the Douglas and deliver him
    Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free.

  John.
 I thank your Grace for this high courtesy,
    Which I shall give away immediately.
  
  King.
 Then this remains, that we divide our power.

    Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales
    To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.



THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.

           Warkworth.
 Before NORTHUMBERLAND'S Castle

            Enter RUMOUR, painted full of tongues

  RUMOUR.
 Open your ears; for which of you will stop
    The vent of hearing when loud Rumour speaks?
    I, from the orient to the drooping west,
    Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold
    The acts commenced on this ball of earth.

    Upon my tongues continual slanders ride,
    The which in every language I pronounce,
    Stuffing the ears of men with false reports.

    I speak of peace while covert emnity,
    Under the smile of safety, wounds the world;
    And who but Rumour, who but only I,
    Make fearful musters and prepar'd defence,
    Whiles the big year, swoln with some other grief,
    Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war,
    And no such matter? Rumour is a pipe
    Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures,
    And of so easy and so plain a stop  
    That the blunt monster with uncounted heads,
    The still-discordant wav'ring multitude,
    Can play upon it.
 But what mean I
    To speak so true at first? My office is
    To noise abroad that Harry Monmouth fell
    Under the wrath of noble Hotspur's sword,
    And that the King before the Douglas' rage
    Stoop'd his anointed head as low as death.

    This have I rumour'd through the peasant towns
    Between that royal field of Shrewsbury
    And this worm-eaten hold of ragged stone,
    Where Hotspur's father, old Northumberland,
    Lies crafty-sick.
 The posts come tiring on,  
    And not a man of them brings other news
    Than they have learnt of me.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT I.
 SCENE I.
 Who keeps the gate here, ho?

                   The PORTER opens the gate

    Where is the Earl?
  PORTER.

  PORTER.

    Please it your honour knock but at the gate,
    And he himself will answer.


                      Enter NORTHUMBERLAND

  LORD BARDOLPH.
 Here comes the Earl.
                Exit PORTER
  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 What news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute now
    Should be the father of some stratagem.
  
    The times are wild; contention, like a horse
    Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose
    And bears down all before him.

  LORD BARDOLPH.
 Noble Earl,
    I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.
 As good as heart can wish.

    The King is almost wounded to the death;
    And, in the fortune of my lord your son,
    Prince Harry slain outright; and both the Blunts
    Kill'd by the hand of Douglas; young Prince John,
    And Westmoreland, and Stafford, fled the field;
    And Harry Monmouth's brawn, the hulk Sir John,
    Is prisoner to your son.
 How is this deriv'd?
    Saw you the field? Came you from Shrewsbury?
  LORD BARDOLPH.

  LORD BARDOLPH.
 After him came spurring hard
    A gentleman, almost forspent with speed,
    That stopp'd by me to breathe his bloodied horse.

    He ask'd the way to Chester; and of him
    I did demand what news from Shrewsbury.
  
    With that he gave his able horse the head
    And, bending forward, struck his armed heels
    Against the panting sides of his poor jade
    Up to the rowel-head; and starting so,
    He seem'd in running to devour the way,
    Staying no longer question.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Ha! Again:
    Said he young Harry Percy's spur was cold?
    Of Hotspur, Coldspur? that rebellion
    Had met ill luck?
  LORD BARDOLPH.
 Never talk of it.
 Who- he?
    He was some hilding fellow that had stol'n
    The horse he rode on and, upon my life,
    Spoke at a venture.
 Look, here comes more news.
 Yea, this man's brow, like to a title-leaf,
    Foretells the nature of a tragic volume.

    So looks the strand whereon the imperious flood
    Hath left a witness'd usurpation.

    Say, Morton, didst thou come from Shrewsbury?
  MORTON.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

    Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
    So dull, so dread in look, so woe-begone,
    Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night
    And would have told him half his Troy was burnt;
    But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue,
    And I my Percy's death ere thou report'st it.
  
    This thou wouldst say: 'Your son did thus and thus;
    Your brother thus; so fought the noble Douglas'-
    Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds;
    But in the end, to stop my ear indeed,
    Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise,
    Ending with 'Brother, son, and all, are dead.
 Douglas is living, and your brother, yet;
    But for my lord your son-
  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Why, he is dead.

    See what a ready tongue suspicion hath!
    He that but fears the thing he would not know
    Hath by instinct knowledge from others' eyes
    That what he fear'd is chanced.
 Yet speak, Morton;
    Tell thou an earl his divination lies,
    And I will take it as a sweet disgrace
    And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.

  MORTON.
 You are too great to be by me gainsaid;
    Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

    I see a strange confession in thine eye;  
    Thou shak'st thy head, and hold'st it fear or sin
    To speak a truth.
 If he be slain, say so:
    The tongue offends not that reports his death;
    And he doth sin that doth belie the dead,
    Not he which says the dead is not alive.

    Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news
    Hath but a losing office, and his tongue
    Sounds ever after as a sullen bell,
    Rememb'red tolling a departing friend.

  LORD BARDOLPH.
 I cannot think, my lord, your son is dead.
 I am sorry I should force you to believe
    That which I would to God I had not seen;
    But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state,
    Rend'ring faint quittance, wearied and out-breath'd,
    To Harry Monmouth, whose swift wrath beat down
    The never-daunted Percy to the earth,
    From whence with life he never more sprung up.

    In few, his death- whose spirit lent a fire
    Even to the dullest peasant in his camp-
    Being bruited once, took fire and heat away  
    From the best-temper'd courage in his troops;
    For from his metal was his party steeled;
    Which once in him abated, an the rest
    Turn'd on themselves, like dull and heavy lead.

    And as the thing that's heavy in itself
    Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed,
    So did our men, heavy in Hotspur's loss,
    Lend to this weight such lightness with their fear
    That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim
    Than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety,
    Fly from the field.
 Then was that noble Worcester
    Too soon ta'en prisoner; and that furious Scot,
    The bloody Douglas, whose well-labouring sword
    Had three times slain th' appearance of the King,
    Gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame
    Of those that turn'd their backs, and in his flight,
    Stumbling in fear, was took.
 This is the news at full.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 For this I shall have time enough to mourn.

    The lives of all your loving complices
    Lean on your health; the which, if you give o'er
    To stormy passion, must perforce decay.

    You cast th' event of war, my noble lord,
    And summ'd the account of chance before you said
    'Let us make head.

    You knew he walk'd o'er perils on an edge,
    More likely to fall in than to get o'er;
    You were advis'd his flesh was capable
    Of wounds and scars, and that his forward spirit
    Would lift him where most trade of danger rang'd;  
    Yet did you say 'Go forth'; and none of this,
    Though strongly apprehended, could restrain
    The stiff-borne action.
 What hath then befall'n,
    Or what hath this bold enterprise brought forth
    More than that being which was like to be?
  LORD BARDOLPH.

    Come, we will put forth, body and goods.

  MORTON.
 'Tis more than time.
 He is a man
    Who with a double surety binds his followers.
 But now the Bishop
    Turns insurrection to religion.

    Suppos'd sincere and holy in his thoughts,
    He's follow'd both with body and with mind;
    And doth enlarge his rising with the blood
    Of fair King Richard, scrap'd from Pomfret stones;
    Derives from heaven his quarrel and his cause;
    Tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land,
    Gasping for life under great Bolingbroke;
    And more and less do flock to follow him.

    Go in with me; and counsel every man
    The aptest way for safety and revenge.
 Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?
  PAGE.
 He said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy water; but
    for the party that owed it, he might have moe diseases than he
    knew for.
 The brain of
    this foolish-compounded clay, man, is not able to invent anything
    that intends to laughter, more than I invent or is invented on
    me.
 I do here walk before thee like a sow that hath
    overwhelm'd all her litter but one.
 If the Prince put thee into
    my service for any other reason than to set me off, why then I
    have no judgment.
 Thou whoreson mandrake, thou art fitter to be
    worn in my cap than to wait at my heels.
 I was never mann'd with
    an agate till now; but I will inset you neither in gold nor
    silver, but in vile apparel, and send you back again to your
    master, for a jewel- the juvenal, the Prince your master, whose  
    chin is not yet fledge.
 God may finish it
    when he will, 'tis not a hair amiss yet.
 He may keep it still at
    a face-royal, for a barber shall never earn sixpence out of it;
    and yet he'll be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his
    father was a bachelor.
 He may keep his own grace, but he's almost
    out of mine, I can assure him.
 What said Master Dommelton about
    the satin for my short cloak and my slops?
  PAGE.
 He said, sir, you should procure him better assurance than
    Bardolph.

  FALSTAFF.
 I
    had as lief they would put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop
    it with security.
 I look'd 'a should have sent me two and twenty  
    yards of satin, as I am a true knight, and he sends me security.
 He's gone into Smithfield to buy your worship horse.

  FALSTAFF.
 Sir, here comes the nobleman that committed the
    Prince for striking him about Bardolph.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Falstaff, an't please your lordship.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 He, my lord; but he hath since done good service at
    Shrewsbury, and, as I hear, is now going with some charge to the  
    Lord John of Lancaster.
 Boy, tell him I am deaf.

  PAGE.
 You must speak louder; my master is deaf.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 I am sure he is, to the hearing of anything good.

    Go, pluck him by the elbow; I must speak with him.

  SERVANT.
 What! a young knave, and begging! Is there not wars? Is
    there not employment? Doth not the King lack subjects? Do not the
    rebels need soldiers? Though it be a shame to be on any side but
    one, it is worse shame to beg than to be on the worst side, were
    it worse than the name of rebellion can tell how to make it.
 You mistake me, sir.

  FALSTAFF.
 Why, sir, did I say you were an honest man? Setting my
    knighthood and my soldiership aside, I had lied in my throat if I
    had said so.

  SERVANT.
 You hunt counter.

    Hence! Avaunt!
  SERVANT.
 Sir, my lord would speak with you.
 Sir John Falstaff, a word with you.
 My good lord! God give your lordship good time of day.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Sir John, I sent for you before your expedition to
    Shrewsbury.

  FALSTAFF.
 I talk not of his Majesty.
 You would not come when I
    sent for you.

  FALSTAFF.
 And I hear, moreover, his Highness is fall'n into this  
    same whoreson apoplexy.
 Well God mend him! I pray you let me speak with you.
 This apoplexy, as I take it, is a kind of lethargy, an't
    please your lordship, a kind of sleeping in the blood, a whoreson
    tingling.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 What tell you me of it? Be it as it is.

  FALSTAFF.
 I have read the cause of his effects
    in Galen; it is a kind of deafness.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Very well, my lord, very well.
 Your
    lordship may minister the potion of imprisonment to me in respect
    of poverty; but how I should be your patient to follow your
    prescriptions, the wise may make some dram of a scruple, or  
    indeed a scruple itself.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 I sent for you, when there were matters against you
    for your life, to come speak with me.

  FALSTAFF.
 Well, the truth is, Sir John, you live in great
    infamy.

  FALSTAFF.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.

  FALSTAFF.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 You have misled the youthful Prince.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Your
    day's service at Shrewsbury hath a little gilded over your
    night's exploit on Gadshill.
 You may thank th' unquiet time for
    your quiet o'erposting that action.

  FALSTAFF.
 My lord-  
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 But since all is well, keep it so: wake not a
    sleeping wolf.
 To wake a wolf is as bad as smell a fox.

  FALSTAFF.
 A wassail candle, my lord- all tallow; if I did say of
    wax, my growth would approve the truth.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 His effect of gravy, gravy,
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 You follow the young Prince up and down, like his
    ill angel.
 Not so, my lord.
 Your ill angel is light; but  hope he
    that looks upon me will take me without weighing.
 Virtue is of so
    little regard in these costermongers' times that true valour is
    turn'd berod; pregnancy is made a tapster, and his quick wit
    wasted in giving reckonings; all the other gifts appertinent to
    man, as the malice of this age shapes them, are not worth a
    gooseberry.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Do you set down your name in the scroll of youth,
    that are written down old with all the characters of age? Have
    you not a moist eye, a dry hand, a yellow cheek, a white beard, a
    decreasing leg, an increasing belly? Is not your voice broken,
    your wind short, your chin double, your wit single, and every
    part about you blasted with antiquity? And will you yet call
    yourself young? Fie, fie, fie, Sir John!
  FALSTAFF.
 My lord, I was born about three of the clock in the
    afternoon, with a white head and something a round belly.
 For my
    voice- I have lost it with hallooing and singing of anthems.
 To
    approve my youth further, I will not.
 The truth is, I am only old
    in judgment and understanding; and he that will caper with me for
    a thousand marks, let him lend me the money, and have at him.
 For
    the box of the ear that the Prince gave you- he gave it like a
    rude prince, and you took it like a sensible lord.
 I have check'd
    him for it; and the young lion repents- marry, not in ashes and
    sackcloth, but in new silk and old sack.
  
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Well, God send the Prince a better companion!
  FALSTAFF.
 God send the companion a better prince! I cannot rid my
    hands of him.
 Well, the King hath sever'd you.
 Yea; I thank your pretty sweet wit for it.
 But look you
    pray, all you that kiss my Lady Peace at home, that our armies
    join not in a hot day; for, by the Lord, I take but two shirts
    out with me, and I mean not to sweat extraordinarily.
 If it be a
    hot day, and I brandish anything but a bottle, I would I might
    never spit white again.
 If ye will needs say I
    am an old man, you should give me rest.
 I would to God my name
    were not so terrible to the enemy as it is.
 Not a penny, not a penny; you are too impatient to
    bear crosses.
 Fare you well.

                                Exeunt CHIEF JUSTICE and SERVANT
  FALSTAFF.
 A man can no
    more separate age and covetousness than 'a can part young limbs
    and lechery; but the gout galls the one, and the pox pinches the
    other; and so both the degrees prevent my curses.
 Boy!
  PAGE.
 What money is in my purse?
  PAGE.
 I can get no remedy against this consumption of the
    purse; borrowing only lingers and lingers it out, but the disease
    is incurable.
 About it; you know  
    where to find me.
  [Exit PAGE]  A pox of this gout! or, a gout of
    this pox! for the one or the other plays the rogue with my great
    toe.
 'Tis no matter if I do halt; I have the wars for my colour,
    and my pension shall seem the more reasonable.
 A good wit will
    make use of anything.
 I will turn diseases to commodity.

 Exit




SCENE III.
 The question then, Lord Hastings, standeth thus:
    Whether our present five and twenty thousand  
    May hold up head without Northumberland?
  HASTINGS.

  LORD BARDOLPH.

  ARCHBISHOP.
 It was, my lord; who lin'd himself with hope,
    Eating the air and promise of supply,
    Flatt'ring himself in project of a power
    Much smaller than the smallest of his thoughts;
    And so, with great imagination
    Proper to madmen, led his powers to death,
    And, winking, leapt into destruction.

  HASTINGS.
  
  LORD BARDOLPH.
 When we mean to build,
    We first survey the plot, then draw the model;
    And when we see the figure of the house,
    Then we must rate the cost of the erection;
    Which if we find outweighs ability,
    What do we then but draw anew the model
    In fewer offices, or at least desist
    To build at all? Much more, in this great work-
    Which is almost to pluck a kingdom down
    And set another up- should we survey
    The plot of situation and the model,
    Consent upon a sure foundation,
    Question surveyors, know our own estate
    How able such a work to undergo-
    To weigh against his opposite; or else  
    We fortify in paper and in figures,
    Using the names of men instead of men;
    Like one that draws the model of a house
    Beyond his power to build it; who, half through,
    Gives o'er and leaves his part-created cost
    A naked subject to the weeping clouds
    And waste for churlish winter's tyranny.
 Grant that our hopes- yet likely of fair birth-
    Should be still-born, and that we now possess'd
    The utmost man of expectation,
    I think we are so a body strong enough,
    Even as we are, to equal with the King.

  LORD BARDOLPH.
 To us no more; nay, not so much, Lord Bardolph;
    For his divisions, as the times do brawl,
    Are in three heads: one power against the French,
    And one against Glendower; perforce a third
    Must take up us.
  
  ARCHBISHOP.
 That he should draw his several strengths together
    And come against us in full puissance
    Need not be dreaded.
 If he should do so,
    He leaves his back unarm'd, the French and Welsh
    Baying at his heels.
 Never fear that.

  LORD BARDOLPH.
 The Duke of Lancaster and Westmoreland;
    Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth;
    But who is substituted against the French
    I have no certain notice.

  ARCHBISHOP.
 Let us on,
    And publish the occasion of our arms.

    The commonwealth is sick of their own choice;
    Their over-greedy love hath surfeited.

    An habitation giddy and unsure
    Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.

    O thou fond many, with what loud applause
    Didst thou beat heaven with blessing Bolingbroke
    Before he was what thou wouldst have him be!  
    And being now trimm'd in thine own desires,
    Thou, beastly feeder, art so full of him
    That thou provok'st thyself to cast him up.

    So, so, thou common dog, didst thou disgorge
    Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard;
    And now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up,
    And howl'st to find it.

    Thou that threw'st dust upon his goodly head,
    When through proud London he came sighing on
    After th' admired heels of Bolingbroke,
    Criest now 'O earth, yield us that king again,
    And take thou this!' O thoughts of men accurs'd!
    Past and to come seems best; things present, worst.

  MOWBRAY.

                                                          Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.
 SCENE I.
 A street

Enter HOSTESS with two officers, FANG and SNARE

  HOSTESS.
 Master Fang, have you ent'red the action?
  FANG.
 It is ent'red.

  HOSTESS.
 Where's your yeoman? Is't a lusty yeoman? Will 'a stand
    to't?
  FANG.
 Sirrah, where's Snare?
  HOSTESS.

  SNARE.

  FANG.
 Snare, we must arrest Sir John Falstaff.

  HOSTESS.
 It may chance cost some of our lives, for he will stab.

  HOSTESS.
 Alas the day! take heed of him; he stabb'd me in mine own
    house, and that most beastly.
 In good faith, 'a cares not what
    mischief he does, if his weapon be out; he will foin like any
    devil; he will spare neither man, woman, nor child.

  FANG.

  HOSTESS.

  FANG.
 An I but fist him once; an 'a come but within my vice!  
  HOSTESS.
 Good Master Fang, hold him sure.
 'A comes continuantly to
    Pie-corner- saving your manhoods- to buy a saddle; and he is
    indited to dinner to the Lubber's Head in Lumbert Street, to
    Master Smooth's the silkman.
 I pray you, since my exion is
    ent'red, and my case so openly known to the world, let him be
    brought in to his answer.
 A hundred mark is a long one for a poor
    lone woman to bear; and I have borne, and borne, and borne; and
    have been fubb'd off, and fubb'd off, and fubb'd off, from this
    day to that day, that it is a shame to be thought on.
 There is no
    honesty in such dealing; unless a woman should be made an ass and
    a beast, to bear every knave's wrong.


            Enter SIR JOHN FALSTAFF, PAGE, and BARDOLPH

    Yonder he comes; and that arrant malmsey-nose knave, Bardolph,
    with him.
 Do your offices, do your offices, Master Fang and
    Master Snare; do me, do me, do me your offices.

  FALSTAFF.
 How now! whose mare's dead? What's the matter?  
  FANG.
 Sir John, I arrest you at the suit of Mistress Quickly.

  FALSTAFF.
 Away, varlets! Draw, Bardolph.
 Throw the quean in the channel.

  HOSTESS.

    Wilt thou? wilt thou? thou bastardly rogue! Murder, murder! Ah,
    thou honeysuckle villain! wilt thou kill God's officers and the
    King's? Ah, thou honey-seed rogue! thou art a honey-seed; a
    man-queller and a woman-queller.
 Keep them off, Bardolph.

  FANG.
 A rescue! a rescue!
  HOSTESS.
 Good people, bring a rescue or two.
 Thou wot, wot thou!
    thou wot, wot ta? Do, do, thou rogue! do, thou hemp-seed!
  PAGE.
 Away, you scullion! you rampallian! you fustilarian!
    I'll tickle your catastrophe.
 What is the matter? Keep the peace here, ho!
  HOSTESS.
 Good my lord, be good to me.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 How now, Sir John! what, are you brawling here?  
    Doth this become your place, your time, and business?
    You should have been well on your way to York.

    Stand from him, fellow; wherefore hang'st thou upon him?
  HOSTESS.
 O My most worshipful lord, an't please your Grace, I am a
    poor widow of Eastcheap, and he is arrested at my suit.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 But I will have some of it
    out again, or I will ride thee a nights like a mare.
 I think I am as like to ride the mare, if I have any
    vantage of ground to get up.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the money
    too.
 Thou didst swear to me upon a parcel-gilt goblet, sitting in
    my Dolphin chamber, at the round table, by a sea-coal fire, upon  
    Wednesday in Wheeson week, when the Prince broke thy head for
    liking his father to singing-man of Windsor- thou didst swear to
    me then, as I was washing thy wound, to marry me and make me my
    lady thy wife.
 Canst thou deny it? Did not goodwife Keech, the
    butcher's wife, come in then and call me gossip Quickly? Coming
    in to borrow a mess of vinegar, telling us she had a good dish of
    prawns, whereby thou didst desire to eat some, whereby I told
    thee they were ill for green wound? And didst thou not, when she
    was gone down stairs, desire me to be no more so familiarity with
    such poor people, saying that ere long they should call me madam?
    And didst thou not kiss me, and bid me fetch the thirty
    shillings? I put thee now to thy book-oath.

  FALSTAFF.
 My lord, this is a poor mad soul, and she says up and
    down the town that her eldest son is like you.
 But
    for these foolish officers, I beseech you I may have redress
    against them.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.

  HOSTESS.
 Pay her the debt you owe her, and
    unpay the villainy you have done with her; the one you may do
    with sterling money, and the other with current repentance.

  FALSTAFF.

  FALSTAFF.


                               Enter GOWER  

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 The King, my lord, and Harry Prince of Wales
    Are near at hand.
 The rest the paper tells.
 [Gives a letter]
  FALSTAFF.
 As I am a gentleman!
  HOSTESS.
 Faith, you said so before.

  FALSTAFF.

  HOSTESS.
 Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking; and for thy
    walls, a pretty slight drollery, or the story of the Prodigal, or
    the German hunting, in water-work, is worth a thousand of these
    bed-hangers and these fly-bitten tapestries.
 Let it be ten pound,
    if thou canst.
 Go, wash thy face, and draw the
    action.
 Come, thou must not be in this humour with me; dost not
    know me? Come, come, I know thou wast set on to this.
 Pray thee, Sir John, let it be but twenty nobles;
    i' faith, I am loath to pawn my plate, so God save me, la!
  FALSTAFF.

  HOSTESS.
 Will I live?  [To BARDOLPH]  Go, with her, with her; hook
    on, hook on.

  HOSTESS.
 No more words; let's have her.

                          Exeunt HOSTESS, BARDOLPH, and OFFICERS
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 I have heard better news.

  FALSTAFF.
 What's the news, my lord?
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Where lay the King to-night?
  GOWER.
 At Basingstoke, my lord.

  FALSTAFF.
 What is the news, my lord?
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Come all his forces back?
  GOWER.
 No; fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse,
    Are march'd up to my Lord of Lancaster,
    Against Northumberland and the Archbishop.

  FALSTAFF.
 Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 You shall have letters of me presently.

    Come, go along with me, good Master Gower.
  
  FALSTAFF.
 What's the matter?
  FALSTAFF.
 Master Gower, shall I entreat you with me to dinner?
  GOWER.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Sir John, you loiter here too long, being you are to
    take soldiers up in counties as you go.

  FALSTAFF.
 Will you sup with me, Master Gower?
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 What foolish master taught you these manners, Sir
    John?
  FALSTAFF.
 Master Gower, if they become me not, he was a fool that
    taught them me.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE II.

London.
 Another street

Enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS

  PRINCE.

  POINS.
 Faith, it does me; though it discolours the complexion of
    my greatness to acknowledge it.
 Doth it not show vilely in me to
    desire small beer?
  POINS.
 Why, a prince should not be so loosely studied as to
    remember so weak a composition.
, these, and those that were thy
    peach-colour'd ones- or to bear the inventory of thy shirts- as,
    one for superfluity, and another for use! But that the
    tennis-court-keeper knows better than I; for it is a low ebb of  
    linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there; as thou hast
    not done a great while, because the rest of thy low countries
    have made a shift to eat up thy holland.
 And God knows whether
    those that bawl out of the ruins of thy linen shall inherit his
    kingdom; but the midwives say the children are not in the fault;
    whereupon the world increases, and kindreds are mightily
    strengthened.
 Shall I tell thee one thing, Poins?
  POINS.
 Yes, faith; and let it be an excellent good thing.

  PRINCE.
 It shall serve among wits of no higher breeding than thine.

  PRINCE.

  POINS.
  
  PRINCE.
 But I tell thee my heart bleeds inwardly that my
    father is so sick; and keeping such vile company as thou art hath
    in reason taken from me all ostentation of sorrow.

  POINS.
 The reason?
  PRINCE.
 What wouldst thou think of me if I should weep?
  POINS.
 I would think thee a most princely hypocrite.

  PRINCE.
 Every man would think
    me an hypocrite indeed.

  PRINCE.
 And to thee.
 The worst that they can say of me is that I am a second
    brother and that I am a proper fellow of my hands; and those two
    things, I confess, I cannot help.

  BARDOLPH.
 God save your Grace!
  PRINCE.
 And yours, most noble Bardolph!
  POINS.
 Come, you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must you be
    blushing? Wherefore blush you now? What a maidenly man-at-arms
    are you become! Is't such a matter to get a pottle-pot's
    maidenhead?
  PAGE.
 At last I
    spied his eyes; and methought he had made two holes in the
    alewife's new petticoat, and so peep'd through.

  PRINCE.
 Away, you rascally Althaea's dream, away!  
  PRINCE.
 Instruct us, boy; what dream, boy?
  PAGE.
 Marry, my lord, Althaea dreamt she was delivered of a
    firebrand; and therefore I call him her dream.

  PRINCE.
 There 'tis, boy.

                                                [Giving a crown]
  POINS.

  BARDOLPH.
 An you do not make him be hang'd among you, the gallows
    shall have wrong.
 And how doth thy master, Bardolph?
  BARDOLPH.
 He heard of your Grace's coming to town.

    There's a letter for you.

  POINS.
 In bodily health, sir.

  POINS.

  PRINCE.
' 'How comes that?'
    says he that takes upon him not to conceive.
 The answer is as
    ready as a borrower's cap: 'I am the King's poor cousin, sir.
'
  PRINCE.
 Nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it from
    Japhet.
 But the letter:  [Reads]  'Sir John Falstaff, knight, to
    the son of the King nearest his father, Harry Prince of Wales,
    greeting.
'
  POINS.
 Why, this is a certificate.

  PRINCE.
 Be not too familiar with Poins; for he misuses thy
    favours so much that he swears thou art to marry his sister Nell.

    Repent at idle times as thou mayst, and so farewell.

      Thine, by yea and no- which is as much as to say as
        thou usest him- JACK FALSTAFF with my familiars,
        JOHN with my brothers and sisters, and SIR JOHN with  
        all Europe.
 My lord, I'll steep this letter in sack and make him eat it.

  PRINCE.
 God send the wench no worse fortune! But I never said so.

  PRINCE.
 Is your master here in
    London?
  BARDOLPH.
 Yea, my lord.

  PRINCE.

  PRINCE.
 What company?
  PAGE.
 Ephesians, my lord, of the old church.
 None, my lord, but old Mistress Quickly and Mistress Doll
    Tearsheet.
 What pagan may that be?
  PAGE.
 Even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town bull.

    Shall we steal upon them, Ned, at supper?  
  POINS.
 I am your shadow, my lord; I'll follow you.
 I have no tongue, sir.

  PRINCE.
 I warrant you, as common as the way between Saint Albans and
    London.

  PRINCE.
 How might we see Falstaff bestow himself to-night in his
    true colours, and not ourselves be seen?
  POINS.
 Put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait upon him at
    his table as drawers.

  PRINCE.
 From a god to a bull? A heavy descension! It was Jove's
    case.
 Follow me, Ned.

Warkworth.
 I pray thee, loving wife, and gentle daughter,
    Give even way unto my rough affairs;
    Put not you on the visage of the times
    And be, like them, to Percy troublesome.

  LADY NORTHUMBERLAND.
 I have given over, I will speak no more.

    Do what you will; your wisdom be your guide.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
  
    For yours, the God of heaven brighten it!
    For his, it stuck upon him as the sun
    In the grey vault of heaven; and by his light
    Did all the chivalry of England move
    To do brave acts.
 And him- O wondrous him!
    O miracle of men!- him did you leave-
    Second to none, unseconded by you-
    To look upon the hideous god of war
    In disadvantage, to abide a field  
    Where nothing but the sound of Hotspur's name
    Did seem defensible.

    Had my sweet Harry had but half their numbers,
    To-day might I, hanging on Hotspur's neck,
    Have talk'd of Monmouth's grave.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

    But I must go and meet with danger there,
    Or it will seek me in another place,
    And find me worse provided.

  LADY NORTHUMBERLAND.
 O, fly to Scotland
    Till that the nobles and the armed commons
    Have of their puissance made a little taste.

  LADY PERCY.
 If they get ground and vantage of the King,
    Then join you with them, like a rib of steel,  
    To make strength stronger; but, for all our loves,
    First let them try themselves.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

London.
 The Boar's Head Tavern in Eastcheap

Enter FRANCIS and another DRAWER

  FRANCIS.
 What the devil hast thou brought there-apple-johns? Thou
    knowest Sir John cannot endure an apple-john.

  SECOND DRAWER.
 Mass, thou say'st true.


                        Enter third DRAWER

  THIRD DRAWER.

  FRANCIS.
 I'll see if I can find out Sneak.

                                 Exeunt second and third DRAWERS

                Enter HOSTESS and DOLL TEARSHEET

  HOSTESS.
 Your pulsidge beats as extraordinarily as heart
    would desire; and your colour, I warrant you, is as red as any
    rose, in good truth, la! But, i' faith, you have drunk too much
    canaries; and that's a marvellous searching wine, and it perfumes
    the blood ere one can say 'What's this?' How do you now?
  DOLL.

  HOSTESS.
 Why, that's well said; a good heart's worth gold.


                          Enter FALSTAFF
  
  FALSTAFF.
  [Singing]  'When Arthur first in court'- Empty the
    jordan.
 Sick of a calm; yea, good faith.
 A pox damn you, you muddy rascal! Is that all the comfort you
    give me?
  FALSTAFF.
 You make fat rascals, Mistress Doll.

  DOLL.
 I make them! Gluttony and diseases make them: I make them
    not.
 We catch of you, Doll, we catch of you; grant
    that, my poor virtue, grant that.
 Yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.
 'Your brooches, pearls, and ouches.
' For to serve bravely
    is to come halting off; you know, to come off the breach with his
    pike bent bravely, and to surgery bravely; to venture upon the
    charg'd chambers bravely-
  DOLL.
 Hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!  
  HOSTESS.
 What the good-year! one must bear, and that must be
    you.
 You are the weaker vessel, as as they say, the emptier
    vessel.

  DOLL.
 Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full hogs-head?
    There's a whole merchant's venture of Bourdeaux stuff in him; you
    have not seen a hulk better stuff'd in the hold.
 Come, I'll be
    friends with thee, Jack.
 Thou art going to the wars; and whether
    I shall ever see thee again or no, there is nobody cares.


                            Re-enter FRANCIS

  FRANCIS.
 Hang him, swaggering rascal! Let him not come hither; it is
    the foul-mouth'dst rogue in England.
 No, by my faith! I
    must live among my neighbours; I'll no swaggerers.
 Shut the door.
 Shut the door, I pray you.

  FALSTAFF.
 Dost thou hear, hostess?
  HOSTESS.

  FALSTAFF.
' Now 'a said so, I can tell whereupon.
 'For' says he
    'you are an honest woman and well thought on, therefore take heed
    what guests you receive.
 You would bless you to hear
    what he said.

  FALSTAFF.
 He's no swagg'rer, hostess; a tame cheater, i' faith; you
    may stroke him as gently as a puppy greyhound.
 He'll not swagger
    with a Barbary hen, if her feathers turn back in any show of  
    resistance.
 Call him up, drawer.
 I am
    the worse when one says 'swagger.
' Feel, masters, how I shake;
    look you, I warrant you.
 Do I? Yea, in very truth, do I, an 'twere an aspen leaf.


                   Enter PISTOL, BARDOLPH, and PAGE

  PISTOL.
 God save you, Sir John!
  FALSTAFF.
 Welcome, Ancient Pistol.
 Here, Pistol, I charge you with
    a cup of sack; do you discharge upon mine hostess.
 I will discharge upon her, Sir John, with two bullets.

  FALSTAFF.

  HOSTESS.
  
  PISTOL.
 Then to you, Mistress Dorothy; I will charge you.
 Charge me! I scorn you, scurvy companion.
 What! you poor,
    base, rascally, cheating, lack-linen mate! Away, you mouldy
    rogue, away! I am meat for your master.

  PISTOL.
 God let me not live but I will murder your ruff for this.

  FALSTAFF.

    Discharge yourself of our company, Pistol.

  HOSTESS.
 No, good Captain Pistol; not here, sweet captain.

  DOLL.
 Captain! Thou abominable damn'd cheater, art thou not ashamed
    to be called captain? An captains were of my mind, they would
    truncheon you out, for taking their names upon you before you
    have earn'd them.
 You a captain! you slave, for what? For tearing
    a poor whore's ruff in a bawdy-house? He a captain! hang him,
    rogue! He lives upon mouldy stew'd prunes and dried cakes.
 A  
    captain! God's light, these villains will make the word as odious
    as the word 'occupy'; which was an excellent good word before it
    was ill sorted.
 Therefore captains had need look to't.
 Pray thee go down, good ancient.
 Not I! I tell thee what, Corporal Bardolph, I could tear
    her; I'll be reveng'd of her.
 Pray thee go down.

  PISTOL.

    Hold hook and line, say I.
 Down, down, dogs! down, faitors! Have
    we not Hiren here?
  HOSTESS.

  PISTOL.
  
    Shall we fall foul for toys?
  HOSTESS.
 By my troth, Captain, these are very bitter words.
 O' my word, Captain, there's none such here.
 What the
    good-year! do you think I would deny her? For God's sake, be
    quiet.
 Then feed and be fat, my fair Calipolis.

    Come, give's some sack.
'
    Fear we broadsides? No, let the fiend give fire.

    Give me some sack; and, sweetheart, lie thou there.
 Pistol, I would be quiet.
 Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf.
 What! we have seen the seven
    stars.

  DOLL.
 For God's sake thrust him down stairs; I cannot endure such a
    fustian rascal.
  
  PISTOL.

    Nay, an 'a do nothing but speak nothing, 'a shall be nothing
    here.

  BARDOLPH.
 Come, get you down stairs.

  PISTOL.
 What! shall we have incision? Shall we imbrue?
                                        [Snatching up his sword]
    Then death rock me asleep, abridge my doleful days!
    Why, then, let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds
    Untwine the Sisters Three! Come, Atropos, I say!
  HOSTESS.
 I pray thee, Jack, I pray thee, do not draw.

  FALSTAFF.

                                [Drawing and driving PISTOL out]
  HOSTESS.
 So; murder, I warrant now.

    Alas, alas! put up your naked weapons, put up your naked weapons.

                                      Exeunt PISTOL and BARDOLPH
  DOLL.
 I pray thee, Jack, be quiet; the rascal's gone.
 Ah, you  
    whoreson little valiant villain, you!
  HOSTESS.


                        Re-enter BARDOLPH

  FALSTAFF.
 Yea, sir.
 The rascal's drunk.

  FALSTAFF.
 Ah, you sweet little rogue, you! Alas, poor ape, how thou
    sweat'st! Come, let me wipe thy face.
 Ah, rogue! i' faith, I love thee.
 Thou art as valorous as
    Hector of Troy, worth five of Agamemnon, and ten times better
    than the Nine Worthies.

  DOLL.
 An thou dost, I'll canvass
    thee between a pair of sheets.


                          Enter musicians  

  PAGE.

  FALSTAFF.
 Let them play.
 Play, sirs.
 Sit on my knee, Don.

  DOLL.
 Thou
    whoreson little tidy Bartholomew boar-pig, when wilt thou leave
    fighting a days and foining a nights, and begin to patch up thine
    old body for heaven?

       Enter, behind, PRINCE HENRY and POINS disguised as drawers

  FALSTAFF.

  DOLL.
 A good shallow young fellow.
 'A would have made a good
    pantler; 'a would ha' chipp'd bread well.

  DOLL.
 They say Poins has a good wit.
 He a good wit! hang him, baboon! His wit's as thick as
    Tewksbury mustard; there's no more conceit in him than is in a
    mallet.
 Because their legs are both of a bigness, and 'a plays at
    quoits well, and eats conger and fennel, and drinks off candles'
    ends for flap-dragons, and rides the wild mare with the boys, and
    jumps upon join'd-stools, and swears with a good grace, and wears
    his boots very smooth, like unto the sign of the Leg, and breeds
    no bate with telling of discreet stories; and such other gambol
    faculties 'a has, that show a weak mind and an able body, for the
    which the Prince admits him.
 For the Prince himself is such
    another; the weight of a hair will turn the scales between their
    avoirdupois.
 Would not this nave of a wheel have his ears cut off?
  POINS.

  PRINCE.
 Look whe'er the wither'd elder hath not his poll claw'd
    like a parrot.

  POINS.
 Is it not strange that desire should so many years outlive
    performance?
  FALSTAFF.
 Kiss me, Doll.
 And look whether the fiery Trigon, his man, be not lisping
    to his master's old tables, his note-book, his counsel-keeper.

  DOLL.
 By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant heart.

  DOLL.
 I love thee better than I love e'er a scurvy young boy of
    them all.
 Shalt have a cap to-morrow.
 A merry song, come.
 'A
    grows late; we'll to bed.
 Thou't forget me when I am gone.

    Prove that ever I dress myself handsome till thy return.
 Well,
    hearken a' th' end.

  FALSTAFF.
 Some sack, Francis.
                   [Advancing]
  FALSTAFF.
 Ha! a bastard son of the King's? And art thou not Poins
    his brother?
  PRINCE.
 Why, thou globe of sinful continents, what a life dost thou
    lead!
  FALSTAFF.
 A better than thou.
 I am a gentleman: thou art a drawer.
 Very true, sir, and I come to draw you out by the ears.

  HOSTESS.
 O Jesu, are
    you come from Wales?
  FALSTAFF.
 How, you fat fool! I scorn you.

  POINS.
 YOU whoreson candle-mine, you, how vilely did you speak of
    me even now before this honest, virtuous, civil gentlewoman!
  HOSTESS.
 God's blessing of your good heart! and so she is, by my
    troth.
 Didst thou hear me?
  PRINCE.
 Yea; and you knew me, as you did when you ran away by
    Gadshill.

  FALSTAFF.
 I shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse, and
    then I know how to handle you.
 No abuse, Hal, o' mine honour; no abuse.
 Not- to dispraise me, and call me pander, and
    bread-chipper, and I know not what!
  FALSTAFF.
 No abuse, Hal.

  POINS.
 No abuse!
  FALSTAFF.
 I
    disprais'd him before the wicked- that the wicked might not fall
    in love with thee; in which doing, I have done the part of a
    careful friend and a true subject; and thy father is to give me
    thanks for it.

  PRINCE.
 Answer, thou dead elm, answer.

  PRINCE.
 For th' other- I owe her money; and whether she be damn'd
    for that, I know not.

  HOSTESS.
 No, I warrant you.
 No, I think thou art not; I think thou art quit for that.

  HOSTESS.
 All vict'lers do so.
 You, gentlewoman-
  DOLL.

                                               [Knocking within]
  HOSTESS.
 Who knocks so loud at door? Look to th' door there,
    Francis.
  

                              Enter PETO

  PRINCE.
 The King your father is at Westminster;
    And there are twenty weak and wearied posts
    Come from the north; and as I came along
    I met and overtook a dozen captains,
    Bare-headed, sweating, knocking at the taverns,
    And asking every one for Sir John Falstaff.

    Give me my sword and cloak.
 Now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and we  
    must hence, and leave it unpick'd.
 You must away to court, sir, presently;
    A dozen captains stay at door for you.

  FALSTAFF.
  [To the PAGE].
 Pay the musicians, sirrah.
- Farewell,
    hostess; farewell, Doll.
 You see, my good wenches, how men of
    merit are sought after; the undeserver may sleep, when the man of
    action is call'd on.
 Farewell, good wenches.
 If I be not sent
    away post, I will see you again ere I go.

  DOLL.
 I cannot speak.

  FALSTAFF.
 Farewell, farewell.

                                    Exeunt FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH
  HOSTESS.
 Well, fare thee well.
 I have known thee these twenty-nine
    years, come peascod-time; but an honester and truer-hearted man
    -well fare thee well.
  
  BARDOLPH.
 What's the matter?
  BARDOLPH.
  [ Within]  Bid Mistress Tearsheet come to my master.

  HOSTESS.
  [To BARDOLPH]  She
    comes blubber'd.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT III.
 Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick;
    But, ere they come, bid them o'er-read these letters
    And well consider of them.


                    Enter WARWICK and Surrey

  WARWICK.
 Many good morrows to your Majesty!
  KING.
 Is it good morrow, lords?
  WARWICK.
 'Tis one o'clock, and past.
  
  KING.
 We have, my liege.

  WARWICK.

    My Lord Northumberland will soon be cool'd.

  KING.
 O God! that one might read the book of fate,
    And see the revolution of the times
    Make mountains level, and the continent,
    Weary of solid firmness, melt itself
    Into the sea; and other times to see
    The beachy girdle of the ocean
    Too wide for Neptune's hips; how chances mock,
    And changes fill the cup of alteration
    With divers liquors! O, if this were seen,
    The happiest youth, viewing his progress through,  
    What perils past, what crosses to ensue,
    Would shut the book and sit him down and die.
 It is but eight years since
    This Percy was the man nearest my soul;
    Who like a brother toil'd in my affairs
    And laid his love and life under my foot;
    Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard
    Gave him defiance.

    Such things become the hatch and brood of time;
    And, by the necessary form of this,
    King Richard might create a perfect guess
    That great Northumberland, then false to him,
    Would of that seed grow to a greater falseness;
    Which should not find a ground to root upon
    Unless on you.

  KING.
 Are these things then necessities?
    Then let us meet them like necessities;  
    And that same word even now cries out on us.

    They say the Bishop and Northumberland
    Are fifty thousand strong.

  WARWICK.
 It cannot be, my lord.
 Please it your Grace
    To go to bed.
 Upon my soul, my lord,
    The powers that you already have sent forth
    Shall bring this prize in very easily.

    Your Majesty hath been this fortnight ill;
    And these unseasoned hours perforce must ad
    Unto your sickness.

  KING.
 I will take your counsel.
            Exeunt




SCENE II.
 Before Justice, SHALLOW'S house

Enter SHALLOW and SILENCE, meeting; MOULDY, SHADOW, WART, FEEBLE, BULLCALF,
and servants behind

  SHALLOW.

  SHALLOW.
 And how doth my cousin, your bed-fellow? and your fairest
    daughter and mine, my god-daughter Ellen?
  SILENCE.
 Indeed, sir, to my cost.

  SHALLOW.
 'A must, then, to the Inns o' Court shortly.
 I was once of
    Clement's Inn; where I think they will talk of mad Shallow yet.

  SHALLOW.
 By the mass, I was call'd anything; and I would have done
    anything indeed too, and roundly too.
 There was I, and little
    John Doit of Staffordshire, and black George Barnes, and Francis  
    Pickbone, and Will Squele a Cotsole man- you had not four such
    swinge-bucklers in all the Inns of Court again.
 And I may say to
    you we knew where the bona-robas were, and had the best of them
    all at commandment.

  SILENCE.
 This Sir John, cousin, that comes hither anon about
    soldiers?
  SHALLOW.
 The same Sir John, the very same.
 I see him break
    Scoggin's head at the court gate, when 'a was a crack not thus
    high; and the very same day did I fight with one Sampson
    Stockfish, a fruiterer, behind Gray's Inn.
 Jesu, Jesu, the mad
    days that I have spent! and to see how many of my old
    acquaintance are dead!
  SILENCE.
 We shall all follow, cousin.

  SHALLOW.
 Certain, 'tis certain; very sure, very sure.
 Death, as the
    Psalmist saith, is certain to all; all shall die.
 How a good yoke
    of bullocks at Stamford fair?
  SILENCE.
 By my troth, I was not there.
 Death is certain.
 Is old Double of your town living yet?
  SILENCE.
 Dead! 'A would have clapp'd i' th' clout at twelve
    score, and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen
    and a half, that it would have done a man's heart good to see.

    How a score of ewes now?
  SILENCE.

  SHALLOW.
 And is old Double dead?

                    Enter BARDOLPH, and one with him

  SILENCE.
 Here come two of Sir John Falstaffs men, as I think.
 Good morrow, honest gentlemen.
 I beseech you, which is Justice Shallow?
  SHALLOW.
 I am Robert Shallow, sir, a poor esquire of this county,
    and one of the King's justices of the peace.
 What is your good
    pleasure with me?
  BARDOLPH.
 Sir, pardon; a soldier is better accommodated than with a
    wife.
 It is well said, in faith, sir; and it is well said indeed
    too.
 Good
    phrases are surely, and ever were, very commendable.

    'Accommodated!' It comes of accommodo.
 Very good; a good phrase.
 'Phrase' call you it?
    By this day, I know not the phrase; but I will maintain the word
    with my sword to be a soldier-like word, and a word of exceeding
    good command, by heaven.
 Accommodated: that is, when a man is, as
    they say, accommodated; or, when a man is being-whereby 'a may be
    thought to be accommodated; which is an excellent thing.


                              Enter FALSTAFF

  SHALLOW.
 It is very just.
 Look, here comes good Sir John.
 By my troth,  
    you like well and bear your years very well.

  FALSTAFF.
 I am glad to see you well, good Master Robert Shallow.
 No, Sir John; it is my cousin Silence, in commission with
   me.

  FALSTAFF.

  SILENCE.
 Your good worship is welcome.

  FALSTAFF.
 Gentlemen, have you provided me
    here half a dozen sufficient men?
  SHALLOW.
 Marry, have we, sir.
 Will you sit?
  FALSTAFF.
 Let me see; where is Mouldy?
  MOULDY.
 Here, an't please you.

  SHALLOW.
 Is thy name Mouldy?
  MOULDY.

  FALSTAFF.
 'Tis the more time thou wert us'd.

  SHALLOW.
 Ha, ha, ha! most excellent, i' faith! Things that are
    mouldy lack use.
 Prick him.

  MOULDY.
 Go to; peace, Mouldy; you shall go.
 Peace, fellow, peace; stand aside; know you where you are?
    For th' other, Sir John- let me see.
 Simon Shadow!
  FALSTAFF.
 Yea, marry, let me have him to sit under.
 He's like to be
    a cold soldier.

  SHALLOW.
 Where's Shadow?
  SHADOW.
  
  FALSTAFF.
 Shadow, whose son art thou?
  SHADOW.
 Thy mother's son! Like enough; and thy father's shadow.

    So the son of the female is the shadow of the male.
 It is often
    so indeed; but much of the father's substance!
  SHALLOW.
 Do you like him, Sir John?
  FALSTAFF.
 Prick him; for we have a
    number of shadows fill up the muster-book.
 Thomas Wart!
  FALSTAFF.
 Where's he?
  WART.
 Here, sir.

  FALSTAFF.

  FALSTAFF.
 Thou art a very ragged wart.

  SHALLOW.
 Shall I prick him, Sir John?
  FALSTAFF.
 It were superfluous; for his apparel is built upon his
    back, and the whole frame stands upon pins.
 I commend
    you well.
 Francis Feeble!
  FEEBLE.
  
  FALSTAFF.

  SHALLOW.
 You may; but if he had been a man's tailor, he'd ha'
    prick'd you.
 I will do my good will, sir; you can have no more.

  FALSTAFF.
 Prick the woman's tailor- well, Master
    Shallow, deep, Master Shallow.

  FEEBLE.
 I would Wart might have gone, sir.
 I cannot put him to a private
    soldier, that is the leader of so many thousands.
 Let that
    suffice, most forcible Feeble.

  FALSTAFF.
 I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble.
 Who is next?
  SHALLOW.
 Peter Bullcalf o' th' green!
  FALSTAFF.
 Yea, marry, let's see Bullcalf.
  
  BULLCALF.

  FALSTAFF.
 Fore God, a likely fellow! Come, prick me Bullcalf till
    he roar again.
 What, dost thou roar before thou art prick'd?
  BULLCALF.
 O Lord, sir! I am a diseased man.

  FALSTAFF.
 What disease hast thou?
  BULLCALF.
 Here is two more call'd than your number.

  FALSTAFF.
 Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot tarry
    dinner.

  SHALLOW.
 No more of that, Master Shallow, no more of that.

  SHALLOW.
 She lives, Master Shallow.

  SHALLOW.
 She never could away with me.

  FALSTAFF.
 By the mass, I could anger her to th' heart.
 Doth she hold her own well?
  FALSTAFF.
 Old, old, Master Shallow.
 Nay, she must be old; she cannot choose but be old;
    certain she's old; and had Robin Nightwork, by old Nightwork,
    before I came to Clement's Inn.

  SILENCE.
 That's fifty-five year ago.
 That we have, that we have, that we have; in faith, Sir
    John, we have.
 Jesus, the days that we have seen!
    Come, come.

                                Exeunt FALSTAFF and the JUSTICES
  BULLCALF.
 Good Master Corporate Bardolph, stand my friend; and  
    here's four Harry ten shillings in French crowns for you.
 And yet, for
    mine own part, sir, I do not care; but rather because I am
    unwilling and, for mine own part, have a desire to stay with my
    friends; else, sir, I did not care for mine own part so much.

  BARDOLPH.
 Go to; stand aside.
 She has nobody to do anything about her when I
    am gone; and she is old, and cannot help herself.

  BARDOLPH.
 Go to; stand aside.

  FEEBLE.
 By my troth, I care not; a man can die but once; we owe God
    a death.
 I'll ne'er bear a base mind.

  FEEBLE.


                    Re-enter FALSTAFF and the JUSTICES  

  FALSTAFF.
 Come, sir, which men shall I have?
  SHALLOW.
 Four of which you please.

  BARDOLPH.
 Sir, a word with you.
 I have three pound to free Mouldy
    and Bullcalf.

  FALSTAFF.
 Come, Sir John, which four will you have?
  FALSTAFF.
 Do you choose for me.

  SHALLOW.
 Mouldy and Bullcalf: for you, Mouldy, stay at home till
    you are past service; and for your part, Bullcalf, grow you come
    unto it.
 I will none of you.

  SHALLOW.
 Sir John, Sir John, do not yourself wrong.
 They are your
    likeliest men, and I would have you serv'd with the best.

  FALSTAFF.
 Here's
    Wart; you see what a ragged appearance it is.
 'A shall charge you
    and discharge you with the motion of a pewterer's hammer, come
    off and on swifter than he that gibbets on the brewer's bucket.
  
    And this same half-fac'd fellow, Shadow- give me this man.
 And, for a retreat- how swiftly
    will this Feeble, the woman's tailor, run off! O, give me the
    spare men, and spare me the great ones.
 Hold, Wart.

  FALSTAFF.
 Go to; very
    good; exceeding good.
 O, give me always a little, lean, old,
    chopt, bald shot.

  SHALLOW.
 I
    remember at Mile-end Green, when I lay at Clement's Inn- I was
    then Sir Dagonet in Arthur's show- there was a little quiver
    fellow, and 'a would manage you his piece thus; and 'a would
    about and about, and come you in and come you in.
 'Rah, tah,
    tah!' would 'a say; 'Bounce!' would 'a say; and away again would
    'a go, and again would 'a come.
 I shall ne'er see such a fellow.

  FALSTAFF.
 Master Shallow, God keep you!
    Master Silence, I will not use many words with you: Fare you  
    well! Gentlemen both, I thank you.
 I must a dozen mile to-night.

    Bardolph, give the soldiers coats.

  SHALLOW.
 Sir John, the Lord bless you; God prosper your affairs;
    God send us peace! At your return, visit our house; let our old
    acquaintance be renewed.
 Peradventure I will with ye to the
    court.
 Fore God, would you would.

  SHALLOW.
 Go to; I have spoke at a word.

  FALSTAFF.
  [Exeunt JUSTICES]  On,
    Bardolph; lead the men away.
  [Exeunt all but FALSTAFF]  As I
    return, I will fetch off these justices.
 Lord, Lord, how subject we old men are to this
    vice of lying! This same starv'd justice hath done nothing but
    prate to me of the wildness of his youth and the feats he hath
    done about Turnbull Street; and every third word a lie, duer paid
    to the hearer than the Turk's tribute.
 I do remember him at
    Clement's Inn, like a man made after supper of a cheese-paring.

    When 'a was naked, he was for all the world like a fork'd radish,
    with a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife.
 'A was so
    forlorn that his dimensions to any thick sight were invisible.
 'A  
    was the very genius of famine; yet lecherous as a monkey, and the
    whores call'd him mandrake.
 I saw it, and told John a Gaunt he beat his own
    name; for you might have thrust him and all his apparel into an
    eel-skin; the case of a treble hautboy was a mansion for him, a
    court- and now has he land and beeves.
 Well, I'll be acquainted
    with him if I return; and 't shall go hard but I'll make him a
    philosopher's two stones to me.
 If the young dace be a bait for
    the old pike, I see no reason in the law of nature but I may snap
    at him.
 Let time shape, and there an end.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE I.
 Within the Forest of Gaultree

Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK, MOWBRAY, HASTINGS, and others

  ARCHBISHOP.
 What is this forest call'd
  HASTINGS.
 'Tis Gaultree Forest, an't shall please your Grace.
 Here stand, my lords, and send discoverers forth
    To know the numbers of our enemies.

  HASTINGS.
 We have sent forth already.
 'Tis well done.

    My friends and brethren in these great affairs,
    I must acquaint you that I have receiv'd
    New-dated letters from Northumberland;
    Their cold intent, tenour, and substance, thus:
    Here doth he wish his person, with such powers
    As might hold sortance with his quality,
    The which he could not levy; whereupon
    He is retir'd, to ripe his growing fortunes,
    To Scotland; and concludes in hearty prayers
    That your attempts may overlive the hazard  
    And fearful meeting of their opposite.

  MOWBRAY.
 Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground
    And dash themselves to pieces.
 Now, what news?
  MESSENGER.

  MOWBRAY.
 The just proportion that we gave them out.

    Let us sway on and face them in the field.


                        Enter WESTMORELAND

  ARCHBISHOP.
 What well-appointed leader fronts us here?
  MOWBRAY.
 I think it is my Lord of Westmoreland.

  WESTMORELAND.
  
  ARCHBISHOP.
 Say on, my Lord of Westmoreland, in peace,
    What doth concern your coming.

  WESTMORELAND.
 Then, my lord,
    Unto your Grace do I in chief address
    The substance of my speech.
 You, Lord Archbishop,
    Whose see is by a civil peace maintain'd,
    Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touch'd,
    Whose learning and good letters peace hath tutor'd,
    Whose white investments figure innocence,
    The dove, and very blessed spirit of peace-
    Wherefore you do so ill translate yourself  
    Out of the speech of peace, that bears such grace,
    Into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war;
    Turning your books to graves, your ink to blood,
    Your pens to lances, and your tongue divine
    To a loud trumpet and a point of war?
  ARCHBISHOP.

    Briefly to this end: we are all diseas'd
    And with our surfeiting and wanton hours
    Have brought ourselves into a burning fever,
    And we must bleed for it; of which disease
    Our late King, Richard, being infected, died.

    But, my most noble Lord of Westmoreland,
    I take not on me here as a physician;
    Nor do I as an enemy to peace
    Troop in the throngs of military men;
    But rather show awhile like fearful war
    To diet rank minds sick of happiness,
    And purge th' obstructions which begin to stop
    Our very veins of life.
 Hear me more plainly.

    The dangers of the days but newly gone,
    Whose memory is written on the earth
    With yet appearing blood, and the examples
    Of every minute's instance, present now,
    Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms;
    Not to break peace, or any branch of it,
    But to establish here a peace indeed,
    Concurring both in name and quality.
  
  WESTMORELAND.
 When ever yet was your appeal denied;
    Wherein have you been galled by the King;
    What peer hath been suborn'd to grate on you
    That you should seal this lawless bloody book
    Of forg'd rebellion with a seal divine,
    And consecrate commotion's bitter edge?
  ARCHBISHOP.

  MOWBRAY.
 O my good Lord Mowbray,
    Construe the times to their necessities,
    And you shall say, indeed, it is the time,
    And not the King, that doth you injuries.
  
    Yet, for your part, it not appears to me,
    Either from the King or in the present time,
    That you should have an inch of any ground
    To build a grief on.
 What thing, in honour, had my father lost
    That need to be reviv'd and breath'd in me?
    The King that lov'd him, as the state stood then,
    Was force perforce compell'd to banish him,
    And then that Henry Bolingbroke and he,
    Being mounted and both roused in their seats,
    Their neighing coursers daring of the spur,
    Their armed staves in charge, their beavers down,
    Their eyes of fire sparkling through sights of steel,
    And the loud trumpet blowing them together-
    Then, then, when there was nothing could have stay'd
    My father from the breast of Bolingbroke,
    O, when the King did throw his warder down-
    His own life hung upon the staff he threw-  
    Then threw he down himself, and all their lives
    That by indictment and by dint of sword
    Have since miscarried under Bolingbroke.

  WESTMORELAND.
 You speak, Lord Mowbray, now you know not what.

    Who knows on whom fortune would then have smil'd?
    But if your father had been victor there,
    He ne'er had borne it out of Coventry;
    For all the country, in a general voice,
    Cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and love
    Were set on Hereford, whom they doted on,
    And bless'd and grac'd indeed more than the King.

    Here come I from our princely general
    To know your griefs; to tell you from his Grace
    That he will give you audience; and wherein
    It shall appear that your demands are just,
    You shall enjoy them, everything set off
    That might so much as think you enemies.
  
  MOWBRAY.
 But he hath forc'd us to compel this offer;
    And it proceeds from policy, not love.

  WESTMORELAND.
 Mowbray.

    Our battle is more full of names than yours,
    Our men more perfect in the use of arms,
    Our armour all as strong, our cause the best;
    Then reason will our hearts should be as good.

    Say you not, then, our offer is compell'd.

  MOWBRAY.
 Well, by my will we shall admit no parley.

  WESTMORELAND.

  HASTINGS.
 Hath the Prince John a full commission,
    In very ample virtue of his father,
    To hear and absolutely to determine
    Of what conditions we shall stand upon?
  WESTMORELAND.
 That is intended in the general's name.

  ARCHBISHOP.
 Then take, my Lord of Westmoreland, this schedule,
    For this contains our general grievances.

    Each several article herein redress'd,
    All members of our cause, both here and hence,
    That are insinewed to this action,
    Acquitted by a true substantial form,
    And present execution of our wills
    To us and to our purposes confin'd-
    We come within our awful banks again,
    And knit our powers to the arm of peace.

  ARCHBISHOP.
          Exit WESTMORELAND
  MOWBRAY.
 There is a thing within my bosom tells me
    That no conditions of our peace can stand.
 Fear you not that: if we can make our peace  
    Upon such large terms and so absolute
    As our conditions shall consist upon,
    Our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.
 Yea, but our valuation shall be such
    That every slight and false-derived cause,
    Yea, every idle, nice, and wanton reason,
    Shall to the King taste of this action;
    That, were our royal faiths martyrs in love,
    We shall be winnow'd with so rough a wind
    That even our corn shall seem as light as chaff,
    And good from bad find no partition.

  ARCHBISHOP.
 No, no, my lord.

    So that this land, like an offensive wife
    That hath enrag'd him on to offer strokes,
    As he is striking, holds his infant up,
    And hangs resolv'd correction in the arm
    That was uprear'd to execution.

  HASTINGS.
 Besides, the King hath wasted all his rods
    On late offenders, that he now doth lack
    The very instruments of chastisement;
    So that his power, like to a fangless lion,
    May offer, but not hold.

  MOWBRAY.
 Be it so.
  
    Here is return'd my Lord of Westmoreland.


                       Re-enter WESTMORELAND

  WESTMORELAND.
 The Prince is here at hand.
 Pleaseth your lordship
    To meet his Grace just distance 'tween our armies?
  MOWBRAY.
 Your Grace of York, in God's name then, set forward.

  ARCHBISHOP.

    Good day to you, gentle Lord Archbishop;
    And so to you, Lord Hastings, and to all.

    My Lord of York, it better show'd with you
    When that your flock, assembled by the bell,
    Encircled you to hear with reverence
    Your exposition on the holy text
    Than now to see you here an iron man,
    Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum,
    Turning the word to sword, and life to death.

    That man that sits within a monarch's heart
    And ripens in the sunshine of his favour,
    Would he abuse the countenance of the king,
    Alack, what mischiefs might he set abroach
    In shadow of such greatness! With you, Lord Bishop,  
    It is even so.

  MOWBRAY.
 If not, we ready are to try our fortunes
    To the last man.
 And though we here fall down,
    We have supplies to second our attempt.
 YOU are too shallow, Hastings, much to shallow,
    To sound the bottom of the after-times.

  WESTMORELAND.
 Pleaseth your Grace to answer them directly
    How far forth you do like their articles.
  
  PRINCE JOHN.

    My lord, these griefs shall be with speed redress'd;
    Upon my soul, they shall.
 I take your princely word for these redresses.

  PRINCE JOHN.

  HASTINGS.
 Go, Captain, and deliver to the army
    This news of peace.

    I know it will please them.
 Hie thee, Captain.
  
  WESTMORELAND.
 I pledge your Grace; and if you knew what pains
    I have bestow'd to breed this present peace,
    You would drink freely; but my love to ye
    Shall show itself more openly hereafter.

  ARCHBISHOP.
 I do not doubt you.

    Health to my lord and gentle cousin, Mowbray.

  MOWBRAY.
 You wish me health in very happy season,
    For I am on the sudden something ill.

  ARCHBISHOP.
 Against ill chances men are ever merry;
    But heaviness foreruns the good event.
 Therefore be merry, coz; since sudden sorrow
    Serves to say thus, 'Some good thing comes to-morrow.
'
  ARCHBISHOP.
 So much the worse, if your own rule be true.
 The word of peace is rend'red.
 Hark, how they shout!
  MOWBRAY.
 This had been cheerful after victory.

  ARCHBISHOP.
 A peace is of the nature of a conquest;
    For then both parties nobly are subdu'd,  
    And neither party loser.

  PRINCE JOHN.
 Go, my lord,
    And let our army be discharged too.

                                               Exit WESTMORELAND
    And, good my lord, so please you let our trains
    March by us, that we may peruse the men
    We should have cop'd withal.
 Go, good Lord Hastings,
    And, ere they be dismiss'd, let them march by.

                                                   Exit HASTINGS
  PRINCE JOHN.
 I trust, lords, we shall lie to-night together.


                      Re-enter WESTMORELAND

    Now, cousin, wherefore stands our army still?
  WESTMORELAND.
 The leaders, having charge from you to stand,
    Will not go off until they hear you speak.

  PRINCE JOHN.


                        Re-enter HASTINGS  

  HASTINGS.

    Like youthful steers unyok'd, they take their courses
    East, west, north, south; or like a school broke up,
    Each hurries toward his home and sporting-place.
 Good tidings, my Lord Hastings; for the which
    I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason;
    And you, Lord Archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray,
    Of capital treason I attach you both.

  MOWBRAY.
 I pawn'd thee none:
    I promis'd you redress of these same grievances
    Whereof you did complain; which, by mine honour,
    I will perform with a most Christian care.

    But for you, rebels- look to taste the due
    Meet for rebellion and such acts as yours.

    Some guard these traitors to the block of death,
    Treason's true bed and yielder-up of breath.

Another part of the forest

Alarum; excursions.
 What's your name, sir? Of what condition are you, and of
    what place, I pray?
  COLVILLE.
 I am a knight sir; and my name is Colville of the Dale.
 Well then, Colville is your name, a knight is your
    degree, and your place the Dale.
 Colville shall still be your
    name, a traitor your degree, and the dungeon your place- a place
    deep enough; so shall you be still Colville of the Dale.

  COLVILLE.
 As good a man as he, sir, whoe'er I am.
 Do you yield,
    sir, or shall I sweat for you? If I do sweat, they are the drops
    of thy lovers, and they weep for thy death; therefore rouse up
    fear and trembling, and do observance to my mercy.

  COLVILLE.
 I think you are Sir John Falstaff, and in that thought
    yield me.

  FALSTAFF.
 I have a whole school of tongues in this belly of mine;
    and not a tongue of them all speaks any other word but my name.

    Here comes our general.


            Enter PRINCE JOHN OF LANCASTER, WESTMORELAND,
                            BLUNT, and others

  PRINCE JOHN.

    Call in the powers, good cousin Westmoreland.

                                               Exit WESTMORELAND
    Now, Falstaff, where have you been all this while?
    When everything is ended, then you come.

    These tardy tricks of yours will, on my life,
    One time or other break some gallows' back.
 But what of that?
    He saw me, and yielded; that I may justly say with the hook-nos'd
    fellow of Rome-I came, saw, and overcame.

  PRINCE JOHN.
 It was more of his courtesy than your deserving.
 I know not.
 Therefore let me have right, and let desert mount.
 Thine's too heavy to mount.

  FALSTAFF.
 Thine's too thick to shine.

  FALSTAFF.
 A famous rebel art thou, Colville.

  FALSTAFF.

  COLVILLE.
 I am, my lord, but as my betters are
    That led me hither.
 Had they been rul'd by me,
    You should have won them dearer than you have.


                       Re-enter WESTMORELAND

  PRINCE JOHN.
 Now, have you left pursuit?
  WESTMORELAND.
 Retreat is made, and execution stay'd.
 Send Colville, with his confederates,
    To York, to present execution.

    Blunt, lead him hence; and see you guard him sure.

    I hear the King my father is sore sick.
  
    Our news shall go before us to his Majesty,
    Which, cousin, you shall bear to comfort him
    And we with sober speed will follow you.

  FALSTAFF.
 My lord, I beseech you, give me leave to go through
    Gloucestershire; and, when you come to court, stand my good lord,
    pray, in your good report.

  PRINCE JOHN.
 I, in my condition,
    Shall better speak of you than you deserve.

                                         Exeunt all but FALSTAFF
  FALSTAFF.
 I would you had but the wit; 'twere better than your
    dukedom.
 Good faith, this same young sober-blooded boy doth not
    love me; nor a man cannot make him laugh- but that's no marvel;
    he drinks no wine.
 There's never none of these demure boys come
    to any proof; for thin drink doth so over-cool their blood, and
    making many fish-meals, that they fall into a kind of male
    green-sickness; and then, when they marry, they get wenches.
 A good sherris-sack hath a two-fold
    operation in it.
 It ascends me into the brain; dries me there all
    the foolish and dull and crudy vapours which environ it; makes it  
    apprehensive, quick, forgetive, full of nimble, fiery, and
    delectable shapes; which delivered o'er to the voice, the tongue,
    which is the birth, becomes excellent wit.
 So
    that skill in the weapon is nothing without sack, for that sets
    it a-work; and learning, a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil
    till sack commences it and sets it in act and use.
 Hereof comes
    it that Prince Harry is valiant; for the cold blood he did
    naturally inherit of his father, he hath, like lean, sterile, and
    bare land, manured, husbanded, and till'd, with excellent
    endeavour of drinking good and good store of fertile sherris,
    that he is become very hot and valiant.

  FALSTAFF.
 Let them go.
 I'll through Gloucestershire, and there will
    I visit Master Robert Shallow, Esquire.
 I have him already
    temp'ring between my finger and my thumb, and shortly will I seal
    with him.
 Come away.
 The Jerusalem Chamber

Enter the KING, PRINCE THOMAS OF CLARENCE, PRINCE HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER,
WARWICK, and others

  KING.
 Now, lords, if God doth give successful end
    To this debate that bleedeth at our doors,
    We will our youth lead on to higher fields,
    And draw no swords but what are sanctified.

  WARWICK.
 Humphrey, my son of Gloucester,
    Where is the Prince your brother?
  PRINCE HUMPHREY.
 I think he's gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor.

  KING.
 And how accompanied?  
  PRINCE HUMPHREY.
 I do not know, my lord.
 No, my good lord, he is in presence here.

  CLARENCE.
 What would my lord and father?
  KING.
 Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence.

    How chance thou art not with the Prince thy brother?
    He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas.

    Thou hast a better place in his affection
    Than all thy brothers; cherish it, my boy,
    And noble offices thou mayst effect
    Of mediation, after I am dead,
    Between his greatness and thy other brethren.

    Therefore omit him not; blunt not his love,
    Nor lose the good advantage of his grace
    By seeming cold or careless of his will;
    For he is gracious if he be observ'd.

    His temper, therefore, must be well observ'd.

    Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
    When you perceive his blood inclin'd to mirth;
    But, being moody, give him line and scope
    Till that his passions, like a whale on ground,
    Confound themselves with working.
 Learn this, Thomas,
    And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends,
    A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in,
    That the united vessel of their blood,
    Mingled with venom of suggestion-
    As, force perforce, the age will pour it in-
    Shall never leak, though it do work as strong
    As aconitum or rash gunpowder.

  CLARENCE.
 I shall observe him with all care and love.

  KING.
 Why art thou not at Windsor with him, Thomas?
  CLARENCE.
 He is not there to-day; he dines in London.

  KING.
 And how accompanied? Canst thou tell that?
  CLARENCE.
 With Poins, and other his continual followers.

    The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape,
    In forms imaginary, th'unguided days
    And rotten times that you shall look upon
    When I am sleeping with my ancestors.

    For when his headstrong riot hath no curb,
    When rage and hot blood are his counsellors
    When means and lavish manners meet together,
    O, with what wings shall his affections fly
    Towards fronting peril and oppos'd decay!
  WARWICK.
 My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite.
 So, like gross terms,
    The Prince will, in the perfectness of time,  
    Cast off his followers; and their memory
    Shall as a pattern or a measure live
    By which his Grace must mete the lives of other,
    Turning past evils to advantages.

  KING.


                      Enter WESTMORELAND

    Who's here? Westmoreland?
  WESTMORELAND.

    Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings, and all,
    Are brought to the correction of your law.

    There is not now a rebel's sword unsheath'd,
    But Peace puts forth her olive everywhere.


                        Enter HARCOURT

    Look here's more news.

    The manner and true order of the fight
    This packet, please it you, contains at large.

  KING.

    O me! come near me now I am much ill.

  PRINCE HUMPHREY.
 Comfort, your Majesty!
  CLARENCE.
 My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up.

  CLARENCE.

    Th' incessant care and labour of his mind
    Hath wrought the mure that should confine it in
    So thin that life looks through, and will break out.

  PRINCE HUMPHREY.

  CLARENCE.
 The river hath thrice flow'd, no ebb between;  
    And the old folk, Time's doting chronicles,
    Say it did so a little time before
    That our great grandsire, Edward, sick'd and died.
 Speak lower, Princes, for the King recovers.

  PRINCE HUMPHREY.
 This apoplexy will certain be his end.

  KING.
 I pray you take me up, and bear me hence
    Into some other chamber.

Westminster.
 Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends;
    Unless some dull and favourable hand
    Will whisper music to my weary spirit.

  WARWICK.
 Set me the crown upon my pillow here.
 His eye is hollow, and he changes much.

  WARWICK.
 Less noise! less noise!

                        Enter PRINCE HENRY

  PRINCE.
 Who saw the Duke of Clarence?
  CLARENCE.
 I am here, brother, full of heaviness.

  PRINCE.

  PRINCE.
 Heard he the good news yet? Tell it him.
  
  PRINCE HUMPHREY.
 He alt'red much upon the hearing it.
 Let us withdraw into the other room.

  WARWICK.
 No; I will sit and watch here by the King.

                                       Exeunt all but the PRINCE
    Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
    Being so troublesome a bedfellow?
    O polish'd perturbation! golden care!
    That keep'st the ports of slumber open wide
    To many a watchful night! Sleep with it now!
    Yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet
    As he whose brow with homely biggen bound
    Snores out the watch of night.
 O majesty!
    When thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost sit
    Like a rich armour worn in heat of day
    That scald'st with safety.
 By his gates of breath
    There lies a downy feather which stirs not.
 My gracious lord! my father!
    This sleep is sound indeed; this is a sleep
    That from this golden rigol hath divorc'd
    So many English kings.
 Thy due from me
    Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood
    Which nature, love, and filial tenderness,
    Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously.

    My due from thee is this imperial crown,
    Which, as immediate from thy place and blood,
    Derives itself to me.
  [Putting on the crown]  Lo where it sits-
    Which God shall guard; and put the world's whole strength
    Into one giant arm, it shall not force
    This lineal honour from me.
 This from thee
    Will I to mine leave as 'tis left to me.
                Exit
  KING.
 Warwick! Gloucester! Clarence!

           Re-enter WARWICK, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE

  CLARENCE.
 Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?
  CLARENCE.
 We left the Prince my brother here, my liege,
    Who undertook to sit and watch by you.

    He is not here.

  PRINCE HUMPHREY.
 He came not through the chamber where we stay'd.

  KING.
 Where is the crown? Who took it from my pillow?
  WARWICK.
 When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.
 The Prince hath ta'en it hence.
 Go, seek him out.

    Is he so hasty that he doth suppose
    My sleep my death?
    Find him, my lord of Warwick; chide him hither.

                                                    Exit WARWICK
    This part of his conjoins with my disease
    And helps to end me.


                         Re-enter WARWICK

    Now where is he that will not stay so long
    Till his friend sickness hath determin'd me?
  WARWICK.
 My lord, I found the Prince in the next room,
    Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks,
    With such a deep demeanour in great sorrow,  
    That tyranny, which never quaff'd but blood,
    Would, by beholding him, have wash'd his knife
    With gentle eye-drops.
 He is coming hither.
 But wherefore did he take away the crown?

                        Re-enter PRINCE HENRY

    Lo where he comes.

    Depart the chamber, leave us here alone.

                          Exeunt all but the KING and the PRINCE
  PRINCE.

  KING.
 Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought.

    I stay too long by thee, I weary thee.

    Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair
    That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honours
    Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish youth!
    Thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm thee.
  
    Thou hast stol'n that which, after some few hours,
    Were thine without offense; and at my death
    Thou hast seal'd up my expectation.

    Pluck down my officers, break my decrees;
    For now a time is come to mock at form-
    Harry the Fifth is crown'd.
 Up, vanity:
    Down, royal state.
  
    And to the English court assemble now,
    From every region, apes of idleness.

    Now, neighbour confines, purge you of your scum.

    O my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows!
    When that my care could not withhold thy riots,
    What wilt thou do when riot is thy care?
    O, thou wilt be a wilderness again.
  
    Other, less fine in carat, is more precious,
    Preserving life in med'cine potable;
    But thou, most fine, most honour'd, most renown'd,
    Hast eat thy bearer up.
' Thus, my most royal liege,
    Accusing it, I put it on my head,
    To try with it- as with an enemy
    That had before my face murd'red my father-
    The quarrel of a true inheritor.

    But if it did infect my blood with joy,
    Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride;
    If any rebel or vain spirit of mine
    Did with the least affection of a welcome
    Give entertainment to the might of it,
    Let God for ever keep it from my head,
    And make me as the poorest vassal is,
    That doth with awe and terror kneel to it!
  KING.
 O my son,
    God put it in thy mind to take it hence,
    That thou mightst win the more thy father's love,
    Pleading so wisely in excuse of it!  
    Come hither, Harry; sit thou by my bed,
    And hear, I think, the very latest counsel
    That ever I shall breathe.
 It seem'd in me
    But as an honour snatch'd with boist'rous hand;
    And I had many living to upbraid
    My gain of it by their assistances;
    Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed,
    Wounding supposed peace.
 All these bold fears
    Thou seest with peril I have answered;
    For all my reign hath been but as a scene
    Acting that argument.
 My gracious liege,  
    You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me;
    Then plain and right must my possession be;
    Which I with more than with a common pain
    'Gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.

  PRINCE JOHN.
 Health, peace, and happiness, to my royal father!
  KING.
 Thou bring'st me happiness and peace, son John;
    But health, alack, with youthful wings is flown
    From this bare wither'd trunk.

    Where is my Lord of Warwick?
  PRINCE.
 My Lord of Warwick!
  KING.
 Doth any name particular belong
    Unto the lodging where I first did swoon?
  WARWICK.
 'Tis call'd Jerusalem, my noble lord.

  KING.
 Laud be to God! Even there my life must end.

    But bear me to that chamber; there I'll lie;
    In that Jerusalem shall Harry die.
                    Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.

Gloucestershire.

    What, Davy, I say!
  FALSTAFF.
 Here, sir.

  SHALLOW.
 Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy; let me see, Davy; let me see,
    Davy; let me see- yea, marry, William cook, bid him come hither.

    Sir John, you shall not be excus'd.

  DAVY.
 Marry, sir, thus: those precepts cannot be served; and,
    again, sir- shall we sow the headland with wheat?
  SHALLOW.
 But for William cook- are there no
    young pigeons?  
  DAVY.
 Yes, sir.
 Here is now the smith's note for shoeing and
    plough-irons.
 Let it be cast, and paid.
 Sir John, you shall not be
    excused.

  DAVY.
 Now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be had; and,
    sir, do you mean to stop any of William's wages about the sack he
    lost the other day at Hinckley fair?
  SHALLOW.
 'A shall answer it.

  DAVY.
 Yea, Davy; I will use him well.
 A friend i' th' court is
    better than a penny in purse.

  DAVY.
 No worse than they are backbitten, sir; for they have
    marvellous foul linen.
 I beseech you, sir, to countenance William Visor of Woncot
    against Clement Perkes o' th' hill.

  SHALLOW.
 There, is many complaints, Davy, against that Visor.
 That  
    Visor is an arrant knave, on my knowledge.
 An honest man, sir, is able to speak for
    himself, when a knave is not.
 I have serv'd your worship truly,
    sir, this eight years; an I cannot once or twice in a quarter
    bear out a knave against an honest man, I have but a very little
    credit with your worship.
 Go to; I say he shall have no wrong.
 Look about,
  DAVY.
  [Exit DAVY]  Where are you, Sir John? Come, come, come, off
    with your boots.
 Give me your hand, Master Bardolph.

  BARDOLPH.

  SHALLOW.

    [To the PAGE]  And welcome, my tall fellow.

  FALSTAFF.
 I'll follow you, good Master Robert Shallow.
  [Exeunt BARDOLPH
    and PAGE]  If I were sawed into quantities, I should make four
    dozen of such bearded hermits' staves as Master Shallow.
 It is a
    wonderful thing to see the semblable coherence of his men's  
    spirits and his.
 They, by observing of him, do bear themselves
    like foolish justices: he, by conversing with them, is turned
    into a justice-like serving-man.
 If I had a suit to
    Master Shallow, I would humour his men with the imputation of
    being near their master; if to his men, I would curry with Master
    Shallow that no man could better command his servants.
  [Within]  Sir John!
  FALSTAFF.
 I come, Master Shallow; I come, Master Shallow.

 Exit




SCENE II.

Westminster.
 The palace

Enter, severally, WARWICK, and the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE

  WARWICK.
 How now, my Lord Chief Justice; whither away?
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 How doth the King?
  WARWICK.
 I hope, not dead.

  WARWICK.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 I would his Majesty had call'd me with him.

    The service that I truly did his life
    Hath left me open to all injuries.
 Indeed, I think the young king loves you not.
 I know he doth not, and do arm myself
    To welcome the condition of the time,
    Which cannot look more hideously upon me
    Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.


              Enter LANCASTER, CLARENCE, GLOUCESTER,  
                     WESTMORELAND, and others

  WARWICK.
 O God, I fear all will be overturn'd.

  PRINCE JOHN.
 Good morrow, cousin Warwick, good morrow.

  WARWICK.
 We do remember; but our argument
    Is all too heavy to admit much talk.

  PRINCE JOHN.
 Well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy!
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 O, good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed;
    And I dare swear you borrow not that face
    Of seeming sorrow- it is sure your own.
 Though no man be assur'd what grace to find,
    You stand in coldest expectation.
  
    I am the sorrier; would 'twere otherwise.

  CLARENCE.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Sweet Princes, what I did, I did in honour,
    Led by th' impartial conduct of my soul;
    And never shall you see that I will beg
    A ragged and forestall'd remission.

    If truth and upright innocency fail me,
    I'll to the King my master that is dead,
    And tell him who hath sent me after him.
 Here comes the Prince.


            Enter KING HENRY THE FIFTH, attended

  CHIEF JUSTICE.

    Brothers, you mix your sadness with some fear.
 Yet be sad, good brothers,
    For, by my faith, it very well becomes you.
 Why, then, be sad;
    But entertain no more of it, good brothers,
    Than a joint burden laid upon us all.

    Yet weep that Harry's dead, and so will I;
    But Harry lives that shall convert those tears
    By number into hours of happiness.

  BROTHERS.

  KING.

    You are, I think, assur'd I love you not.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 No?
    How might a prince of my great hopes forget  
    So great indignities you laid upon me?
    What, rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison,
    Th' immediate heir of England! Was this easy?
    May this be wash'd in Lethe and forgotten?
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 I then did use the person of your father;
    The image of his power lay then in me;
    And in th' administration of his law,
    Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth,
    Your Highness pleased to forget my place,
    The majesty and power of law and justice,
    The image of the King whom I presented,
    And struck me in my very seat of judgment;
    Whereon, as an offender to your father,
    I gave bold way to my authority
    And did commit you.
 If the deed were ill,
    Be you contented, wearing now the garland,
    To have a son set your decrees at nought,
    To pluck down justice from your awful bench,
    To trip the course of law, and blunt the sword
    That guards the peace and safety of your person;  
    Nay, more, to spurn at your most royal image,
    And mock your workings in a second body.

  KING.
 You are right, Justice, and you weigh this well;
    Therefore still bear the balance and the sword;
    And I do wish your honours may increase
    Till you do live to see a son of mine
    Offend you, and obey you, as I did.

    So shall I live to speak my father's words:
    'Happy am I that have a man so bold  
    That dares do justice on my proper son;
    And not less happy, having such a son
    That would deliver up his greatness so
    Into the hands of justice.
' You did commit me;
    For which I do commit into your hand
    Th' unstained sword that you have us'd to bear;
    With this remembrance- that you use the same
    With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit
    As you have done 'gainst me.

    You shall be as a father to my youth;
    My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear;
    And I will stoop and humble my intents
    To your well-practis'd wise directions.

    And, Princes all, believe me, I beseech you,
    My father is gone wild into his grave,
    For in his tomb lie my affections;
    And with his spirits sadly I survive,
    To mock the expectation of the world,
    To frustrate prophecies, and to raze out
    Rotten opinion, who hath writ me down  
    After my seeming.
 The tide of blood in me
    Hath proudly flow'd in vanity till now.

    Now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea,
    Where it shall mingle with the state of floods,
    And flow henceforth in formal majesty.

    Now call we our high court of parliament;
    And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel,
    That the great body of our state may go
    In equal rank with the best govern'd nation;
    That war, or peace, or both at once, may be
    As things acquainted and familiar to us;
    In which you, father, shall have foremost hand.

    Our coronation done, we will accite,
    As I before rememb'red, all our state;
    And- God consigning to my good intents-
    No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say,
    God shorten Harry's happy life one day.
 Come, cousin Silence.
 And then to bed.
 Fore God, you have here a goodly dwelling and rich.
 Spread, Davy, spread, Davy; well said, Davy.

  FALSTAFF.

  SHALLOW.
 A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good varlet, Sir
    John.
 A good
    varlet.

  SILENCE.
 Ah, sirrah! quoth-a- we shall               [Singing]

              Do nothing but eat and make good cheer,
              And praise God for the merry year;
              When flesh is cheap and females dear,  
              And lusty lads roam here and there,
                  So merrily,
                And ever among so merrily.


  FALSTAFF.

  DAVY.
 Sweet sir, sit; I'll be with you anon; most sweet sir, sit.

    Master Page, good Master Page, sit.
 Proface! What you want in
    meat, we'll have in drink.
 But you must bear; the heart's all.
 Be merry, Master Bardolph; and, my little soldier there,
    be merry.

  SILENCE.

         Be merry, be merry.

  SILENCE.
  [To BARDOLPH]  There's a dish of leather-coats for you.

  SHALLOW.
 Davy!
  DAVY.
 Your worship! I'll be with you straight.

  SILENCE.
 An we shall be merry, now comes in the sweet o' th' night.


  SHALLOW.
 Honest Bardolph, welcome; if thou want'st anything and
    wilt not call, beshrew thy heart.
 Welcome, my little tiny thief
    and welcome indeed too.

  DAVY.
 By the mass, you'R crack a quart together- ha! will you
    not, Master Bardolph?
  BARDOLPH.
 Yea, sir, in a pottle-pot.

  SHALLOW.
 By God's liggens, I thank thee.
 And I'll stick by him, sir.
 Why, there spoke a king.

    [One knocks at door]  Look who's at door there, ho! Who knocks?  
                                                       Exit DAVY
  FALSTAFF.
  [To SILENCE, who has drunk a bumper]  Why, now you have
    done me right.
  [Singing]

         Do me right,
         And dub me knight.

           Samingo.

  SILENCE.


                        Re-enter DAVY

  DAVY.

  FALSTAFF.
 From the court? Let him come in.


                        Enter PISTOL  

    How now, Pistol?
  PISTOL.
 Not the ill wind which blows no man to good.

  SILENCE.

  PISTOL.
 I pray thee now, deliver them like a man of this world.

  PISTOL.

  FALSTAFF.
 O base Assyrian knight, what is thy news?
    Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof.

  SILENCE.

  PISTOL.
 Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons?  
    And shall good news be baffled?
    Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies' lap.

  SHALLOW.

  PISTOL.
 Why, then, lament therefore.

  SHALLOW.
 Give me pardon, sir.
 If, sir, you come with news from the
    court, I take it there's but two ways- either to utter them or
    conceal them.
 I am, sir, under the King, in some authority.

  PISTOL.
 Harry the Fourth- or Fifth?
  SHALLOW.

    When Pistol lies, do this; and fig me, like
    The bragging Spaniard.
 What, is the old king dead?
  PISTOL.
 As nail in door.
 The things I speak are just.

  FALSTAFF.
 Away, Bardolph! saddle my horse.
 O joyful day!
    I would not take a knighthood for my fortune.
 What, I do bring good news?
  FALSTAFF.
 Master Shallow, my Lord
    Shallow, be what thou wilt- I am Fortune's steward.
 O sweet Pistol! Away, Bardolph!
    [Exit BARDOLPH]  Come, Pistol, utter more to me; and withal
    devise something to do thyself good.
 Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also!
    'Where is the life that late I led?' say they.

    Why, here it is; welcome these pleasant days!         Exeunt




SCENE IV.

London.
 A street

Enter BEADLES, dragging in HOSTESS QUICKLY and DOLL TEARSHEET

  HOSTESS.

  FIRST BEADLE.
 There hath been
    a man or two lately kill'd about her.
 Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie.
 Come on; I'll tell thee what,
    thou damn'd tripe-visag'd rascal, an the child I now go with do
    miscarry, thou wert better thou hadst struck thy mother, thou
    paper-fac'd villain.

  HOSTESS.
 O the Lord, that Sir John were come! He would make this a
    bloody day to somebody.
 But I pray God the fruit of her womb
    miscarry!
  FIRST BEADLE.
  
  DOLL.
 I'll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, I will have you
    as soundly swing'd for this- you blue-bottle rogue, you filthy
    famish'd correctioner, if you be not swing'd, I'll forswear
    half-kirtles.
 Come, come, you she knight-errant, come.

  HOSTESS.
 Come, you rogue, come; bring me to a justice.

  HOSTESS.
 Ay, come, you starv'd bloodhound.

  DOLL.
 Goodman death, goodman bones!
  HOSTESS.
 Thou atomy, thou!
  DOLL.
 Come, you thin thing! come, you rascal!
  FIRST BEADLE.
 Very well.

Westminster.
 Near the Abbey

Enter GROOMS, strewing rushes

  FIRST GROOM.
 The trumpets have sounded twice.
                       Exeunt

        Trumpets sound, and the KING and his train pass
       over the stage.
 After them enter FALSTAFF, SHALLOW,
                  PISTOL, BARDOLPH, and page

  FALSTAFF.
 I will leer upon him, as 'a comes by; and do
    but mark the countenance that he will give me.
 God bless thy lungs, good knight!
  FALSTAFF.
  
  SHALLOW.
 It shows my earnestness of affection-
  SHALLOW.
 It doth so.

  FALSTAFF.
 It doth, it doth, it doth.

  FALSTAFF.

  FALSTAFF.
 But to stand stained with travel, and sweating with
    desire to see him; thinking of nothing else, putting all affairs
    else in oblivion, as if there were nothing else to be done but to
    see him.

  PISTOL.
 'Tis 'semper idem' for 'obsque hoc nihil est.

  SHALLOW.

  PISTOL.
 My knight, I will inflame thy noble liver
    And make thee rage.

    Thy Doll, and Helen of thy noble thoughts,
    Is in base durance and contagious prison;
    Hal'd thither  
    By most mechanical and dirty hand.

    Rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell Alecto's snake,
    For Doll is in.
 Pistol speaks nought but truth.

  FALSTAFF.

                         [Shouts,within, and the trumpets sound]
  PISTOL.


        Enter the KING and his train, the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE
                               among them

  FALSTAFF.
 The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal imp of fame!
  FALSTAFF.
 God save thee, my sweet boy!
  KING.
 My Lord Chief Justice, speak to that vain man.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 Have you your wits? Know you what 'tis you speak?
  FALSTAFF.

    Till then I banish thee, on pain of death,
    As I have done the rest of my misleaders,
    Not to come near our person by ten mile.

    For competence of life I will allow you,
    That lack of means enforce you not to evils;
    And, as we hear you do reform yourselves,
    We will, according to your strengths and qualities,
    Give you advancement.
                        Exeunt the KING and his train
  FALSTAFF.
 Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pounds.

  SHALLOW.

  FALSTAFF.
 That can hardly be, Master Shallow.
 Do not you grieve at
    this; I shall be sent for in private to him.
 Look you, he must
    seem thus to the world.

  SHALLOW.
 I cannot perceive how, unless you give me your doublet,
    and stuff me out with straw.
 I beseech you, good Sir John, let me
    have five hundred of my thousand.
 Sir, I will be as good as my word.
 This that you heard
    was but a colour.

  SHALLOW.
 A colour that I fear you will die in, Sir John.
 Fear no colours; go with me to dinner.
 Come, Lieutenant
    Pistol; come, Bardolph.


            Re-enter PRINCE JOHN, the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE,
                            with officers  

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 My lord, my lord-
  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 I will hear you soon.

    Take them away.

  PISTOL.
 Si fortuna me tormenta, spero me contenta.
 I like this fair proceeding of the King's.

    He hath intent his wonted followers
    Shall all be very well provided for;
    But all are banish'd till their conversations
    Appear more wise and modest to the world.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 And so they are.

  CHIEF JUSTICE.
 He hath.

  PRINCE JOHN.
 I will lay odds that, ere this year expire,
    We bear our civil swords and native fire
    As far as France.
  
    Come, will you hence?                                 Exeunt

EPILOGUE
                           EPILOGUE.
 My fear, is your
displeasure; my curtsy, my duty; and my speech, to beg your pardons.
 But to the purpose, and so to the venture.

Be it known to you, as it is very well, I was lately here in the end
of a displeasing play, to pray your patience for it and to promise you
a better.
 I meant, indeed, to pay you with this; which if like an
ill venture it come unluckily home, I break, and you, my gentle
creditors, lose.
 Here I promis'd you I would be, and here I commit
my body to your mercies.
 Bate me some, and I will pay you some, and,
as most debtors do, promise you infinitely; and so I kneel down before
you- but, indeed, to pray for the Queen.
 If the gentlemen will not, then the gentlemen do not agree with
the gentlewomen, which was never seen before in such an assembly.

  One word more, I beseech you.
 If you be not too much cloy'd with fat
meat, our humble author will continue the story, with Sir John in
it, and make you merry with fair Katherine of France; where, for
anything I know, Falstaff shall die of a sweat, unless already 'a be
killed with your hard opinions; for Oldcastle died a martyr and this
is not the man.
 My tongue is weary; when my legs are too, I will bid
you good night.



THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1599

THE LIFE OF KING HENRY THE FIFTH

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  CHORUS
  KING HENRY THE FIFTH
  DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, brother to the King
  DUKE OF BEDFORD,       "     "  "    "
  DUKE OF EXETER, Uncle to the King
  DUKE OF YORK, cousin to the King
  EARL OF SALISBURY
  EARL OF WESTMORELAND
  EARL OF WARWICK
  ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY
  BISHOP OF ELY

  EARL OF CAMBRIDGE, conspirator against the King
  LORD SCROOP,            "         "     "    "
  SIR THOMAS GREY,        "         "     "    "
  SIR THOMAS ERPINGHAM, officer in the King's army
  GOWER,                  "      "  "    "     "
  FLUELLEN,               "      "  "    "     "
  MACMORRIS,              "      "  "    "     "
  JAMY,                   "      "  "    "     "  

  BATES,    soldier in the King's army
  COURT,       "    "   "    "     "
  WILLIAMS,    "    "   "    "     "
  NYM,         "    "   "    "     "
  BARDOLPH,    "    "   "    "     "
  PISTOL,      "    "   "    "     "

  BOY                               A HERALD

  CHARLES THE SIXTH, King of France
  LEWIS, the Dauphin                DUKE OF BURGUNDY
  DUKE OF ORLEANS                   DUKE OF BRITAINE
  DUKE OF BOURBON                   THE CONSTABLE OF FRANCE
  RAMBURES, French Lord
  GRANDPRE,    "    "
  GOVERNOR OF HARFLEUR              MONTJOY, a French herald
  AMBASSADORS to the King of England

  ISABEL, Queen of France  
  KATHERINE, daughter to Charles and Isabel
  ALICE, a lady attending her
  HOSTESS of the Boar's Head, Eastcheap; formerly Mrs.
 Quickly, now
    married to Pistol

  Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Messengers, Attendants


                              SCENE:
                        England and France

PROLOGUE
                            PROLOGUE.


                          Enter CHORUS

 CHORUS.
 But pardon, gentles all,
   The flat unraised spirits that hath dar'd
   On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth
   So great an object.
 Can this cockpit hold
   The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram
   Within this wooden O the very casques
   That did affright the air at Agincourt?
   O, pardon! since a crooked figure may
   Attest in little place a million;
   And let us, ciphers to this great accompt,
   On your imaginary forces work.

   Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts:
   Into a thousand parts divide one man,
   And make imaginary puissance;
   Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them
   Printing their proud hoofs i' th' receiving earth;
   For 'tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,
   Carry them here and there, jumping o'er times,
   Turning th' accomplishment of many years
   Into an hour-glass; for the which supply,
   Admit me Chorus to this history;
   Who prologue-like, your humble patience pray
   Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play.
               Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT I.
 An ante-chamber in the KING'S palace

Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY and the BISHOP OF ELY

 CANTERBURY.
 But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?
 CANTERBURY.
 It must be thought on.
 If it pass against us,
   We lose the better half of our possession;
   For all the temporal lands which men devout
   By testament have given to the church
   Would they strip from us; being valu'd thus-
   As much as would maintain, to the King's honour,
   Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights,
   Six thousand and two hundred good esquires;
   And, to relief of lazars and weak age,
   Of indigent faint souls, past corporal toil,
   A hundred alms-houses right well supplied;
   And to the coffers of the King, beside,
   A thousand pounds by th' year: thus runs the bill.
 This would drink deep.
 'T would drink the cup and all.
 The courses of his youth promis'd it not.

   Never was such a sudden scholar made;
   Never came reformation in a flood,
   With such a heady currance, scouring faults;
   Nor never Hydra-headed wilfulnes
   So soon did lose his seat, and all at once,
   As in this king.

 ELY.

 CANTERBURY.

   Turn him to any cause of policy,
   The Gordian knot of it he will unloose,  
   Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks,
   The air, a charter'd libertine, is still,
   And the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears
   To steal his sweet and honey'd sentences;
   So that the art and practic part of life
   Must be the mistress to this theoric;
   Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it,
   Since his addiction was to courses vain,
   His companies unletter'd, rude, and shallow,
   His hours fill'd up with riots, banquets, sports;
   And never noted in him any study,
   Any retirement, any sequestration
   From open haunts and popularity.
 The strawberry grows underneath the nettle,
   And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best
   Neighbour'd by fruit of baser quality;
   And so the Prince obscur'd his contemplation
   Under the veil of wildness; which, no doubt,
   Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night,
   Unseen, yet crescive in his faculty.

 ELY.
 He seems indifferent
   Or rather swaying more upon our part
   Than cherishing th' exhibiters against us;
   For I have made an offer to his Majesty-
   Upon our spiritual convocation
   And in regard of causes now in hand,
   Which I have open'd to his Grace at large,
   As touching France- to give a greater sum
   Than ever at one time the clergy yet
   Did to his predecessors part withal.
 How did this offer seem receiv'd, my lord?
 CANTERBURY.
 What was th' impediment that broke this off?
 CANTERBURY.
 It is.

 CANTERBURY.
 Then go we in, to know his embassy;
   Which I could with a ready guess declare,
   Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.

 ELY.
 I'll wait upon you, and I long to hear it.
          Exeunt




SCENE II.

London.

  KING HENRY.
 Not yet, my cousin; we would be resolv'd,
    Before we hear him, of some things of weight
    That task our thoughts, concerning us and France.
 God and his angels guard your sacred throne,
    And make you long become it!
  KING HENRY.
 Sure, we thank you.

    Therefore take heed how you impawn our person,
    How you awake our sleeping sword of war-
    We charge you, in the name of God, take heed;
    For never two such kingdoms did contend
    Without much fall of blood; whose guiltless drops
    Are every one a woe, a sore complaint,
    'Gainst him whose wrongs gives edge unto the swords
    That makes such waste in brief mortality.

  CANTERBURY.

    Yet their own authors faithfully affirm
    That the land Salique is in Germany,
    Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe;
    Where Charles the Great, having subdu'd the Saxons,
    There left behind and settled certain French;
    Who, holding in disdain the German women
    For some dishonest manners of their life,
    Establish'd then this law: to wit, no female  
    Should be inheritrix in Salique land;
    Which Salique, as I said, 'twixt Elbe and Sala,
    Is at this day in Germany call'd Meisen.

    Then doth it well appear the Salique law
    Was not devised for the realm of France;
    Nor did the French possess the Salique land
    Until four hundred one and twenty years
    After defunction of King Pharamond,
    Idly suppos'd the founder of this law;
    Who died within the year of our redemption
    Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great
    Subdu'd the Saxons, and did seat the French
    Beyond the river Sala, in the year
    Eight hundred five.
 Besides, their writers say,
    King Pepin, which deposed Childeric,
    Did, as heir general, being descended
    Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair,
    Make claim and title to the crown of France.

    So that, as clear as is the summer's sun,
    King Pepin's title, and Hugh Capet's claim,
    King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear
    To hold in right and tide of the female;
    So do the kings of France unto this day,  
    Howbeit they would hold up this Salique law
    To bar your Highness claiming from the female;
    And rather choose to hide them in a net
    Than amply to imbar their crooked tides
    Usurp'd from you and your progenitors.
 May I with right and conscience make this claim?
  CANTERBURY.
 Gracious lord,
    Stand for your own, unwind your bloody flag,
    Look back into your mighty ancestors.

    Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire's tomb,
    From whom you claim; invoke his warlike spirit,
    And your great-uncle's, Edward the Black Prince,
    Who on the French ground play'd a tragedy,
    Making defeat on the fun power of France,
    Whiles his most mighty father on a hill
    Stood smiling to behold his lion's whelp
    Forage in blood of French nobility.
 Awake remembrance of these valiant dead,
    And with your puissant arm renew their feats.

  EXETER.
 Your brother kings and monarchs of the earth
    Do all expect that you should rouse yourself,
    As did the former lions of your blood.

  WESTMORELAND.
 They know your Grace hath cause and means and might-
    So hath your Highness; never King of England
    Had nobles richer and more loyal subjects,
    Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England
    And lie pavilion'd in the fields of France.
 O, let their bodies follow, my dear liege,  
    With blood and sword and fire to win your right!
    In aid whereof we of the spiritualty
    Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum
    As never did the clergy at one time
    Bring in to any of your ancestors.

  KING HENRY.

  CANTERBURY.
 She hath been then more fear'd than harm'd, my liege;
    For hear her but exampled by herself:
    When all her chivalry hath been in France,
    And she a mourning widow of her nobles,
    She hath herself not only well defended
    But taken and impounded as a stray
    The King of Scots; whom she did send to France,
    To fill King Edward's fame with prisoner kings,
    And make her chronicle as rich with praise
    As is the ooze and bottom of the sea
    With sunken wreck and sumless treasuries.

  WESTMORELAND.
'
  
    For once the eagle England being in prey,
    To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot
    Comes sneaking, and so sucks her princely eggs,
    Playing the mouse in absence of the cat,
    To tear and havoc more than she can eat.

  EXETER.
 It follows, then, the cat must stay at home;
    Yet that is but a crush'd necessity,
    Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries
    And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.

  CANTERBURY.
 Therefore doth heaven divide
    The state of man in divers functions,
    Setting endeavour in continual motion;
    To which is fixed as an aim or but
    Obedience; for so work the honey bees,  
    Creatures that by a rule in nature teach
    The act of order to a peopled kingdom.
 I this infer,
    That many things, having full reference
    To one consent, may work contrariously;
    As many arrows loosed several ways  
    Come to one mark, as many ways meet in one town,
    As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea,
    As many lines close in the dial's centre;
    So many a thousand actions, once afoot,
    End in one purpose, and be all well home
    Without defeat.
 Therefore to France, my liege.

  KING HENRY.

    Either our history shall with full mouth
    Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave,
    Like Turkish mute, shall have a tongueless mouth,
    Not worshipp'd with a waxen epitaph.


                  Enter AMBASSADORS of France

    Now are we well prepar'd to know the pleasure
    Of our fair cousin Dauphin; for we hear
    Your greeting is from him, not from the King.
 We are no tyrant, but a Christian king,
    Unto whose grace our passion is as subject
    As are our wretches fett'red in our prisons;  
    Therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness
    Tell us the Dauphin's mind.
 Thus then, in few.

    Your Highness, lately sending into France,
    Did claim some certain dukedoms in the right
    Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third.

    In answer of which claim, the Prince our master
    Says that you savour too much of your youth,
    And bids you be advis'd there's nought in France
    That can be with a nimble galliard won;
    You cannot revel into dukedoms there.

    He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,
    This tun of treasure; and, in lieu of this,
    Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim
    Hear no more of you.

  KING HENRY.
 What treasure, uncle?
  EXETER.

  KING HENRY.
 We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us;
    His present and your pains we thank you for.
 And we understand him well,
    How he comes o'er us with our wilder days,
    Not measuring what use we made of them.

    We never valu'd this poor seat of England;
    And therefore, living hence, did give ourself
    To barbarous licence; as 'tis ever common
    That men are merriest when they are from home.

    But tell the Dauphin I will keep my state,
    Be like a king, and show my sail of greatness,
    When I do rouse me in my throne of France;
    For that I have laid by my majesty
    And plodded like a man for working-days;
    But I will rise there with so full a glory
    That I will dazzle all the eyes of France,
    Yea, strike the Dauphin blind to look on us.

    And tell the pleasant Prince this mock of his  
    Hath turn'd his balls to gun-stones, and his soul
    Shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance
    That shall fly with them; for many a thousand widows
    Shall this his mock mock of their dear husbands;
    Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down;
    And some are yet ungotten and unborn
    That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin's scorn.

    So get you hence in peace; and tell the Dauphin
    His jest will savour but of shallow wit,
    When thousands weep more than did laugh at it.
 Fare you well.

                                              Exeunt AMBASSADORS
  EXETER.

  KING HENRY.

    Therefore let every man now task his thought
    That this fair action may on foot be brought.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.


Flourish.
 Enter CHORUS

  CHORUS.

    For now sits Expectation in the air,
    And hides a sword from hilts unto the point
    With crowns imperial, crowns, and coronets,
    Promis'd to Harry and his followers.

    The French, advis'd by good intelligence
    Of this most dreadful preparation,
    Shake in their fear and with pale policy
    Seek to divert the English purposes.

    Linger your patience on, and we'll digest
    Th' abuse of distance, force a play.

    But, till the King come forth, and not till then,
    Unto Southampton do we shift our scene.

London.

  NYM.
 Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph.

  BARDOLPH.
 What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet?
  NYM.
 I dare
    not fight; but I will wink and hold out mine iron.
 It is a simple
    one; but what though? It will toast cheese, and it will endure
    cold as another man's sword will; and there's an end.

  BARDOLPH.
 I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and we'll
    be all three sworn brothers to France.
 Let't be so, good Corporal
    Nym.

  NYM.
 Faith, I will live so long as I may, that's the certain of it;
    and when I cannot live any longer, I will do as I may.
 That is my
    rest, that is the rendezvous of it.
 Men may sleep, and
    they may have their throats about them at that time; and some say
    knives have edges.
 There must be conclusions.
 Well, I
    cannot tell.


                     Enter PISTOL and HOSTESS

  BARDOLPH.
 Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife.

  NYM.
 How now, mine host Pistol!
  PISTOL.

  HOSTESS.
 [Nym draws] O well-a-day, Lady, if he be not drawn! Now
    we shall see wilful adultery and murder committed.

  NYM.
 Pish for thee, Iceland dog! thou prick-ear'd cur of
    Iceland!
  HOSTESS.
 Good Corporal Nym, show thy valour, and put up your sword.

  NYM.
 Will you shog off? I would have you solus.

  NYM.
 I am not Barbason: you cannot conjure me.
 I have an humour to
    knock you indifferently well.
 If you grow foul with me, Pistol, I
    will scour you with my rapier, as I may, in fair terms; if you
    would walk off I would prick your guts a little, in good terms,
    as I may, and thaes the humour of it.

  PISTOL.
 O braggart vile and damned furious wight!
    The grave doth gape and doting death is near;
    Therefore exhale.
                             [PISTOL draws]  
  BARDOLPH.
 Hear me, hear me what I say: he that strikes the first
    stroke I'll run him up to the hilts, as I am a soldier.

                                                         [Draws]
  PISTOL.

                           [PISTOL and Nym sheathe their swords]
    Give me thy fist, thy fore-foot to me give;
    Thy spirits are most tall.

  NYM.
 I will cut thy throat one time or other, in fair terms; that
    is the humour of it.
 'Couple a gorge!'
    That is the word.

    I have, and I will hold, the quondam Quickly
    For the only she; and- pauca, there's enough.

    Go to.

  
                        Enter the Boy

  BOY.
 Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master; and your
    hostess- he is very sick, and would to bed.

    Faith, he's very ill.

  BARDOLPH.

  HOSTESS.
 Let floods o'erswell, and fiends for food howl on!
  NYM.
 Base is the slave that pays.

  NYM.
 By this sword, he that makes the first thrust I'll kill  
    him; by this sword, I will.

                                            [Sheathes his sword]
  BARDOLPH.
 Corporal Nym, an thou wilt be friends, be friends; an
    thou wilt not, why then be enemies with me too.
 Prithee put up.

  NYM.
 I shall have my eight shillings I won of you at betting?
  PISTOL.

    I'll live by Nym and Nym shall live by me.

    Give me thy hand.

  NYM.
 [Sheathing his sword] I shall have my noble?
  PISTOL.
 In cash most justly paid.
 [Shaking hands] Well, then, that's the humour of't.
  
    Ah, poor heart! he is so shak'd of a burning quotidian tertian
    that it is most lamentable to behold.
 Sweet men, come to him.

  NYM.
 The King hath run bad humours on the knight; that's the even
    of it.

  PISTOL.

  NYM.
 The King is a good king, but it must be as it may; he passes
    some humours and careers.

  PISTOL.
 Let us condole the knight; for, lambkins, we will live.

Southampton.

  EXETER.
 How smooth and even they do bear themselves,
    As if allegiance in their bosoms sat,
    Crowned with faith and constant loyalty!
  BEDFORD.
 Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow,
    Whom he hath dull'd and cloy'd with gracious favours-
    That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell
    His sovereign's life to death and treachery!

               Trumpets sound.
 Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard.
 No doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.

  KING HENRY.
 Never was monarch better fear'd and lov'd
    Than is your Majesty.

  GREY.
 True: those that were your father's enemies
    Have steep'd their galls in honey, and do serve you
    With hearts create of duty and of zeal.

  KING HENRY.
 We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
    And shall forget the office of our hand  
    Sooner than quittance of desert and merit
    According to the weight and worthiness.
 So service shall with steeled sinews toil,
    And labour shall refresh itself with hope,
    To do your Grace incessant services.

  KING HENRY.

  SCROOP.

    Let him be punish'd, sovereign, lest example
    Breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.
 O, let us yet be merciful!
  CAMBRIDGE.
 So may your Highness, and yet punish too.
 Alas, your too much love and care of me
    Are heavy orisons 'gainst this poor wretch!  
    If little faults proceeding on distemper
    Shall not be wink'd at, how shall we stretch our eye
    When capital crimes, chew'd, swallow'd, and digested,
    Appear before us? We'll yet enlarge that man,
    Though Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in their dear care
    And tender preservation of our person,
    Would have him punish'd.
 And now to our French causes:
    Who are the late commissioners?
  CAMBRIDGE.

    Your Highness bade me ask for it to-day.

  SCROOP.
 And I, my royal sovereign.

  KING HENRY.
 Then, Richard Earl of Cambridge, there is yours;
    There yours, Lord Scroop of Masham; and, Sir Knight,
    Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours.

    Read them, and know I know your worthiness.

    My Lord of Westmoreland, and uncle Exeter,
    We will aboard to-night.
 Why, how now, gentlemen?
    What see you in those papers, that you lose
    So much complexion? Look ye how they change!  
    Their cheeks are paper.
 Why, what read you there
    That have so cowarded and chas'd your blood
    Out of appearance?
  CAMBRIDGE.

  GREY, SCROOP.
 The mercy that was quick in us but late
   By your own counsel is suppress'd and kill'd.
 But, O,
    What shall I say to thee, Lord Scroop, thou cruel,
    Ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature?
    Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels,
    That knew'st the very bottom of my soul,
    That almost mightst have coin'd me into gold,
    Wouldst thou have practis'd on me for thy use-
    May it be possible that foreign hire
    Could out of thee extract one spark of evil
    That might annoy my finger? 'Tis so strange
    That, though the truth of it stands off as gross
    As black and white, my eye will scarcely see it.

    Treason and murder ever kept together,
    As two yoke-devils sworn to either's purpose,
    Working so grossly in a natural cause
    That admiration did not whoop at them;
    But thou, 'gainst all proportion, didst bring in
    Wonder to wait on treason and on murder;
    And whatsoever cunning fiend it was
    That wrought upon thee so preposterously  
    Hath got the voice in hell for excellence;
    And other devils that suggest by treasons
    Do botch and bungle up damnation
    With patches, colours, and with forms, being fetch'd
    From glist'ring semblances of piety;
    But he that temper'd thee bade thee stand up,
    Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason,
    Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor.
 Seem they grave and learned?
    Why, so didst thou.
 Come they of noble family?
    Why, so didst thou.
 Seem they religious?
    Why, so didst thou.
 Their faults are open.

    Arrest them to the answer of the law;
    And God acquit them of their practices!
  EXETER.

    I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Henry Lord Scroop
      of Masham.

  SCROOP.
 Our purposes God justly hath discover'd,
    And I repent my fault more than my death;  
    Which I beseech your Highness to forgive,
    Although my body pay the price of it.
 For me, the gold of France did not seduce,
    Although I did admit it as a motive
    The sooner to effect what I intended;
    But God be thanked for prevention,
    Which I in sufferance heartily will rejoice,
    Beseeching God and you to pardon me.

    My fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.

    You have conspir'd against our royal person,
    Join'd with an enemy proclaim'd, and from his coffers
    Receiv'd the golden earnest of our death;
    Wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter,
    His princes and his peers to servitude,
    His subjects to oppression and contempt,  
    And his whole kingdom into desolation.

    Touching our person seek we no revenge;
    But we our kingdom's safety must so tender,
    Whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws
    We do deliver you.
 Get you therefore hence,
    Poor miserable wretches, to your death;
    The taste whereof God of his mercy give
    You patience to endure, and true repentance
    Of all your dear offences.
 Bear them hence.

    Then, forth, dear countrymen; let us deliver
    Our puissance into the hand of God,
    Putting it straight in expedition.
  
    Cheerly to sea; the signs of war advance;
    No king of England, if not king of France!
                                                Flourish.
 Exeunt




SCENE III.

Eastcheap.
 Before the Boar's Head tavern

Enter PISTOL, HOSTESS, NYM, BARDOLPH, and Boy

  HOSTESS.
 Prithee, honey-sweet husband, let me bring thee to
     Staines.

  PISTOL.
 No; for my manly heart doth earn.

    Bardolph, be blithe; Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins;
    Boy, bristle thy courage up.

  BARDOLPH.
 Would I were with him, wheresome'er he is, either in
    heaven or in hell!
  HOSTESS.
 Nay, sure, he's not in hell: he's in Arthur's bosom, if
    ever man went to Arthur's bosom.
 'A made a finer end, and went
    away an it had been any christom child; 'a parted ev'n just
    between twelve and one, ev'n at the turning o' th' tide; for
    after I saw him fumble with the sheets, and play with flowers,
    and smile upon his fingers' end, I knew there was but one way;
    for his nose was as sharp as a pen, and 'a babbl'd of green
    fields.
' So 'a cried out 'God, God, God!' three or four times.
 Now  
    I, to comfort him, bid him 'a should not think of God; I hop'd
    there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet.

    So 'a bade me lay more clothes on his feet; I put my hand into
    the bed and felt them, and they were as cold as any stone; then I
    felt to his knees, and so upward and upward, and all was as cold
    as any stone.

  NYM.
 They say he cried out of sack.
 Nay, that 'a did not.

  BOY.

  HOSTESS.
 'A could never abide carnation; 'twas a colour he never
    liked.

  BOY.
 'A said once the devil would have him about women.
 'A did in some sort, indeed, handle women; but then he was
    rheumatic, and talk'd of the Whore of Babylon.
 Do you not remember 'a saw a flea stick upon Bardolph's nose,
    and 'a said it was a black soul burning in hell?
  BARDOLPH.
 Shall we shog? The King will be gone from Southampton.
 Come, let's away.
 My love, give me thy lips.
 The word is 'Pitch and Pay.

    Go, clear thy crystals.
 Yoke-fellows in arms,
    Let us to France, like horse-leeches, my boys,
    To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck.

  BOY.
 And that's but unwholesome food, they say.

  PISTOL.
 Touch her soft mouth and march.
 Farewell, hostess.
                     [Kissing her]
  NYM.
 I cannot kiss, that is the humour of it; but adieu.

  PISTOL.
 Farewell; adieu.
                               Exeunt




SCENE IV.
 The KING'S palace

Flourish.
 Enter the FRENCH KING, the DAUPHIN, the DUKES OF BERRI
and BRITAINE, the CONSTABLE, and others

  FRENCH KING.
 Thus comes the English with full power upon us;
    And more than carefully it us concerns
    To answer royally in our defences.

    Therefore the Dukes of Berri and of Britaine,
    Of Brabant and of Orleans, shall make forth,
    And you, Prince Dauphin, with all swift dispatch,
    To line and new repair our towns of war
    With men of courage and with means defendant;
    For England his approaches makes as fierce
    As waters to the sucking of a gulf.

    It fits us, then, to be as provident
    As fear may teach us, out of late examples
    Left by the fatal and neglected English
    Upon our fields.
 My most redoubted father,
    It is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe;  
    For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom,
    Though war nor no known quarrel were in question,
    But that defences, musters, preparations,
    Should be maintain'd, assembled, and collected,
    As were a war in expectation.

    Therefore, I say, 'tis meet we all go forth
    To view the sick and feeble parts of France;
    And let us do it with no show of fear-
    No, with no more than if we heard that England
    Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance;
    For, my good liege, she is so idly king'd,
    Her sceptre so fantastically borne
    By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth,
    That fear attends her not.

  CONSTABLE.

    Question your Grace the late ambassadors
    With what great state he heard their embassy,
    How well supplied with noble counsellors,
    How modest in exception, and withal  
    How terrible in constant resolution,
    And you shall find his vanities forespent
    Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,
    Covering discretion with a coat of folly;
    As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots
    That shall first spring and be most delicate.

  DAUPHIN.
 Well, 'tis not so, my Lord High Constable;
    But though we think it so, it is no matter.

    In cases of defence 'tis best to weigh
    The enemy more mighty than he seems;
    So the proportions of defence are fill'd;
    Which of a weak and niggardly projection
    Doth like a miser spoil his coat with scanting
    A little cloth.
 Think we King Harry strong;
    And, Princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.

    Witness our too much memorable shame  
    When Cressy battle fatally was struck,
    And all our princes capdv'd by the hand
    Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of Wales;
    Whiles that his mountain sire- on mountain standing,
    Up in the air, crown'd with the golden sun-
    Saw his heroical seed, and smil'd to see him,
    Mangle the work of nature, and deface
    The patterns that by God and by French fathers
    Had twenty years been made.
 This is a stern
    Of that victorious stock; and let us fear
    The native mightiness and fate of him.


                      Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER.

  FRENCH KING.
 We'll give them present audience.
 Go and bring them.

  DAUPHIN.
 Good my sovereign,
    Take up the English short, and let them know
    Of what a monarchy you are the head.


               Re-enter LORDS, with EXETER and train

  FRENCH KING.
 From our brother of England?
  EXETER.
 From him, and thus he greets your Majesty:
    He wills you, in the name of God Almighty,
    That you divest yourself, and lay apart
    The borrowed glories that by gift of heaven,
    By law of nature and of nations, 'longs
    To him and to his heirs- namely, the crown,
    And all wide-stretched honours that pertain,
    By custom and the ordinance of times,
    Unto the crown of France.

    And when you find him evenly deriv'd
    From his most fam'd of famous ancestors,
    Edward the Third, he bids you then resign
    Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held
    From him, the native and true challenger.

  FRENCH KING.

    Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming,
    In thunder and in earthquake, like a Jove,
    That if requiring fail, he will compel;
    And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord,
    Deliver up the crown; and to take mercy
    On the poor souls for whom this hungry war
    Opens his vasty jaws; and on your head  
    Turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries,
    The dead men's blood, the privy maidens' groans,
    For husbands, fathers, and betrothed lovers,
    That shall be swallowed in this controversy.

    This is his claim, his threat'ning, and my message;
    Unless the Dauphin be in presence here,
    To whom expressly I bring greeting too.

  FRENCH KING.

  DAUPHIN.
 For the Dauphin:
    I stand here for him.
 Scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt,
    And anything that may not misbecome
    The mighty sender, doth he prize you at.
 Say, if my father render fair return,
    It is against my will; for I desire
    Nothing but odds with England.

  EXETER.
 He'll make your Paris Louvre shake for it,
    Were it the mistress court of mighty Europe;
    And be assur'd you'll find a difference,
    As we his subjects have in wonder found,
    Between the promise of his greener days
    And these he masters now.
 Now he weighs time
    Even to the utmost grain; that you shall read
    In your own losses, if he stay in France.

  FRENCH KING.
 To-morrow shall you know our mind at full.

  EXETER.
 Dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king
    Come here himself to question our delay;
    For he is footed in this land already.
 You shall be soon dispatch'd with fair conditions.
 Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
>>



ACT III.
 PROLOGUE.
 Enter CHORUS

  CHORUS.
 O, do but think
    You stand upon the rivage and behold
    A city on th' inconstant billows dancing;
    For so appears this fleet majestical,
    Holding due course to Harfleur.
 Follow, follow!
    Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy  
    And leave your England as dead midnight still,
    Guarded with grandsires, babies, and old women,
    Either past or not arriv'd to pith and puissance;
    For who is he whose chin is but enrich'd
    With one appearing hair that will not follow
    These cull'd and choice-drawn cavaliers to France?
    Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege;
    Behold the ordnance on their carriages,
    With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur.

    Suppose th' ambassador from the French comes back;
    Tells Harry that the King doth offer him
    Katherine his daughter, and with her to dowry
    Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms.

    The offer likes not; and the nimble gunner
    With linstock now the devilish cannon touches,
                                   [Alarum, and chambers go off]
    And down goes an before them.
             Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.

France.
 On, on, you noblest English,
    Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof-
    Fathers that like so many Alexanders
    Have in these parts from morn till even fought,
    And sheath'd their swords for lack of argument.

    Dishonour not your mothers; now attest
    That those whom you call'd fathers did beget you.
 And you, good yeomen,
    Whose limbs were made in England, show us here
    The mettle of your pasture; let us swear
    That you are worth your breeding- which I doubt not;
    For there is none of you so mean and base
    That hath not noble lustre in your eyes.

    I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
    Straining upon the start.
 Alarum, and chambers go off]




SCENE II.

Before Harfleur

Enter NYM, BARDOLPH, PISTOL, and BOY

  BARDOLPH.
 On, on, on, on, on! to the breach, to the breach!
  NYM.

  PISTOL.
  

  BOY.
             As duly, but not as truly,
                   As bird doth sing on bough.
 Be merciful, great duke, to men of mould.

    Abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage;
    Abate thy rage, great duke.

    Good bawcock, bate thy rage.
 Use lenity, sweet chuck.

  NYM.

                                              Exeunt all but BOY
  BOY.
 As young as I am, I have observ'd these three swashers.
 I am
    boy to them all three; but all they three, though they would
    serve me, could not be man to me; for indeed three such antics do
    not amount to a man.
 For Bardolph, he is white-liver'd and
    red-fac'd; by the means whereof 'a faces it out, but fights not.

    For Pistol, he hath a killing tongue and a quiet sword; by the  
    means whereof 'a breaks words and keeps whole weapons.
 They will steal anything,
    and call it purchase.
 Nym and Bardolph are
    sworn brothers in filching, and in Calais they stole a
    fire-shovel; I knew by that piece of service the men would carry
    coals.
 They would have me as familiar with men's pockets as their
    gloves or their handkerchers; which makes much against my
    manhood, if I should take from another's pocket to put into mine;
    for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs.
 I must leave them and
    seek some better service; their villainy goes against my weak
    stomach, and therefore I must cast it up.
 Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to the mines; the  
    Duke of Gloucester would speak with you.
 To the mines! Tell you the Duke it is not so good to come
    to the mines; for, look you, the mines is not according to the
    disciplines of the war; the concavities of it is not sufficient.

    For, look you, th' athversary- you may discuss unto the Duke,
    look you- is digt himself four yard under the countermines; by
    Cheshu, I think 'a will plow up all, if there is not better
    directions.

  GOWER.
 The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is
    given, is altogether directed by an Irishman- a very vallant
    gentleman, i' faith.

  FLUELLEN.
 It is Captain Macmorris, is it not?
  GOWER.
 I think it be.

  FLUELLEN.

  FLUELLEN.
 Captain Jamy is a marvellous falorous gentleman, that is
    certain, and of great expedition and knowledge in th' aunchient
    wars, upon my particular knowledge of his directions.

  JAMY.
 I say gud day, Captain Fluellen.

  FLUELLEN.
 God-den to your worship, good Captain James.
 By Chrish, la, tish ill done! The work ish give over,
    the trompet sound the retreat.
 By my hand, I swear, and my
    father's soul, the work ish ill done; it ish give over; I would
    have blowed up the town, so Chrish save me, la, in an hour.
 Captain Macmorris, I beseech you now, will you voutsafe
    me, look you, a few disputations with you, as partly touching or
    concerning the disciplines of the war, the Roman wars, in the way
    of argument, look you, and friendly communication; partly to  
    satisfy my opinion, and partly for the satisfaction, look you, of
    my mind, as touching the direction of the military discipline,
    that is the point.

  MACMORRIS.
 The day
    is hot, and the weather, and the wars, and the King, and the
    Dukes; it is no time to discourse.
 By the mess, ere theise eyes of mine take themselves to
    slomber, ay'll de gud service, or I'll lig i' th' grund for it;
    ay, or go to death.
 Marry, I wad
    full fain heard some question 'tween you tway.
 Captain Macmorris, I think, look you, under your  
    correction, there is not many of your nation-
  MACMORRIS.
 Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.

  JAMY.
              [A parley sounded]
  GOWER.
 The town sounds a parley.
 How yet resolves the Governor of the town?
    This is the latest parle we will admit;
    Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves
    Or, like to men proud of destruction,
    Defy us to our worst; for, as I am a soldier,
    A name that in my thoughts becomes me best,
    If I begin the batt'ry once again,
    I will not leave the half-achieved Harfleur
    Till in her ashes she lie buried.

    The gates of mercy shall be all shut up,
    And the flesh'd soldier, rough and hard of heart,
    In liberty of bloody hand shall range
    With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass
    Your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring infants.
 Therefore, you men of Harfleur,
    Take pity of your town and of your people
    Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command;
    Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace
    O'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds
    Of heady murder, spoil, and villainy.

    If not- why, in a moment look to see
    The blind and bloody with foul hand
    Defile the locks of your shrill-shrieking daughters;
    Your fathers taken by the silver beards,
    And their most reverend heads dash'd to the walls;  
    Your naked infants spitted upon pikes,
    Whiles the mad mothers with their howls confus'd
    Do break the clouds, as did the wives of Jewry
    At Herod's bloody-hunting slaughtermen.
 Therefore, great King,
    We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy.

    Enter our gates; dispose of us and ours;
    For we no longer are defensible.

  KING HENRY.
 [Exit GOVERNOR] Come, uncle Exeter,
    Go you and enter Harfleur; there remain,
    And fortify it strongly 'gainst the French;
    Use mercy to them all.

    To-night in Harfleur will we be your guest;  
    To-morrow for the march are we addrest.

               [Flourish.
 The KING and his train enter the town]




SCENE IV.
 Un peu, madame.

  KATHERINE.
 Je te prie, m'enseignez; il faut que j'apprenne a
    parler.
 Comment appelez-vous la main en Anglais?
  ALICE.
 La main? Elle est appelee de hand.

  KATHERINE.
 Et les doigts?
  ALICE.
 Les doigts? Ma foi, j'oublie les doigts; mais je me
    souviendrai.

  KATHERINE.

    Comment appelez-vous les ongles?
  ALICE.

  KATHERINE.
 De nails.
 Ecoutez; dites-moi si je parle bien: de hand,
    de fingres, et de nails.
  
  KATHERINE.
 De arm, madame.

  KATHERINE.
 Et le coude?
  ALICE.
 D'elbow.
 Je m'en fais la repetition de tous les mots que
    vous m'avez appris des a present.

  ALICE.

  KATHERINE.
 Excusez-moi, Alice; ecoutez: d'hand, de fingre, de
    nails, d'arma, de bilbow.

  ALICE.
 D'elbow, madame.

  KATHERINE.

    Comment appelez-vous le col?
  ALICE.
 De nick, madame.

  KATHERINE.
 Et le menton?
  ALICE.
 De chin.
 De sin.
 Le col, de nick; le menton, de sin.

  ALICE.
 Oui.

  KATHERINE.
 Je ne doute point d'apprendre, par la grace de Dieu, et
    en peu de temps.
  
  ALICE.
 Non, je reciterai a vous promptement: d'hand, de fingre,
    de mails-
  ALICE.
 De nails, madame.
 De nails, de arm, de ilbow.

  ALICE.
 Sauf votre honneur, d'elbow.

  KATHERINE.
 Comment
    appelez-vous le pied et la robe?
  ALICE.
 Le foot et le count.
 O Seigneur Dieu! ils sont mots de
    son mauvais, corruptible, gros, et impudique, et non pour les
    dames d'honneur d'user: je ne voudrais prononcer ces mots devant
    les seigneurs de France pour tout le monde.
 Foh! le foot et le
    count! Neanmoins, je reciterai une autre fois ma lecon ensemble:
    d'hand, de fingre, de nails, d'arm, d'elbow, de nick, de sin, de
    foot, le count.
 Excellent, madame!
  KATHERINE.
 And if he be not fought withal, my lord,
    Let us not live in France; let us quit an,
    And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.

  DAUPHIN.
 O Dieu vivant! Shall a few sprays of us,
    The emptying of our fathers' luxury,
    Our scions, put in wild and savage stock,
    Spirt up so suddenly into the clouds,
    And overlook their grafters?
  BRITAINE.

  CONSTABLE.
 Dieu de batailles! where have they this mettle?
    Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull;  
    On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,
    Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water,
    A drench for sur-rein'd jades, their barley-broth,
    Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
    And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine,
    Seem frosty? O, for honour of our land,
    Let us not hang like roping icicles
    Upon our houses' thatch, whiles a more frosty people
    Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields-
    Poor we call them in their native lords!
  DAUPHIN.
 By faith and honour,
    Our madams mock at us and plainly say
    Our mettle is bred out, and they will give
    Their bodies to the lust of English youth
    To new-store France with bastard warriors.
 They bid us to the English dancing-schools
    And teach lavoltas high and swift corantos,
    Saying our grace is only in our heels
    And that we are most lofty runaways.

    Up, Princes, and, with spirit of honour edged
    More sharper than your swords, hie to the field:
    Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;
    You Dukes of Orleans, Bourbon, and of Berri,
    Alengon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy;
    Jaques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont,
    Beaumont, Grandpre, Roussi, and Fauconbridge,
    Foix, Lestrake, Bouciqualt, and Charolois;
    High dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and knights,
    For your great seats now quit you of great shames.

    Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land
    With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur.

    Rush on his host as doth the melted snow
    Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat
    The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon;
    Go down upon him, you have power enough,
    And in a captive chariot into Rouen
    Bring him our prisoner.
 This becomes the great.

  FRENCH KING.
 Therefore, Lord Constable, haste on Montjoy,
    And let him say to England that we send
    To know what willing ransom he will give.
 Not so, I do beseech your Majesty.

  FRENCH KING.
 Be patient, for you shall remain with us.
          Exeunt




SCENE VI.

The English camp in Picardy

Enter CAPTAINS, English and Welsh, GOWER and FLUELLEN

  GOWER.
 He is
    not- God be praised and blessed!- any hurt in the world, but
    keeps the bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline.
 There
    is an aunchient Lieutenant there at the bridge- I think in my
    very conscience he is as valiant a man as Mark Antony; and he is
    man of no estimation in the world; but I did see him do as
    gallant service.
 What do you call him?
  FLUELLEN.
 He is call'd Aunchient Pistol.

  GOWER.
 I know him not.
 Here is the man.

  PISTOL.
 Captain, I thee beseech to do me favours.

    The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.

  FLUELLEN.
 Ay, I praise God; and I have merited some love at his
    hands.

  PISTOL.
 By your patience, Aunchient Pistol.
  
  PISTOL.
 Fortune is Bardolph's foe, and frowns on him;
    For he hath stol'n a pax, and hanged must 'a be-
    A damned death!
    Let gallows gape for dog; let man go free,
    And let not hemp his windpipe suffocate.

    But Exeter hath given the doom of death
    For pax of little price.

    Therefore, go speak- the Duke will hear thy voice;
    And let not Bardolph's vital thread be cut
    With edge of penny cord and vile reproach.

    Speak, Captain, for his life, and I will thee requite.

  FLUELLEN.
 Aunchient Pistol, I do partly understand your meaning.

  FLUELLEN.
 Die and be damn'd! and figo for thy friendship!
  FLUELLEN.
 It is well.
 Very good.

  GOWER.
 Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal; I remember him
    now- a bawd, a cutpurse.
 But it is very well; what he
    has spoke to me, that is well, I warrant you, when time is serve.

  GOWER.

  FLUELLEN.
 I tell you what, Captain Gower, I do perceive he is not
    the man that he would gladly make show to the world he is; if I  
    find a hole in his coat I will tell him my mind.
 [Drum within]
    Hark you, the King is coming; and I must speak with him from the
    pridge.
 How now, Fluellen! Cam'st thou from the bridge?
  FLUELLEN.
 The Duke of Exeter has very
    gallantly maintain'd the pridge; the French is gone off, look
    you, and there is gallant and most prave passages.
 Marry, th'
    athversary was have possession of the pridge; but he is enforced
    to retire, and the Duke of Exeter is master of the pridge; I can
    tell your Majesty the Duke is a prave man.
 The perdition of th' athversary hath been very great,
    reasonable great; marry, for my part, I think the Duke hath lost
    never a man, but one that is like to be executed for robbing a
    church- one Bardolph, if your Majesty know the man; his face is  
    all bubukles, and whelks, and knobs, and flames o' fire; and his
    lips blows at his nose, and it is like a coal of fire, sometimes
    plue and sometimes red; but his nose is executed and his fire's
    out.

  KING HENRY.
 And we
    give express charge that in our marches through the country there
    be nothing compell'd from the villages, nothing taken but paid
    for, none of the French upbraided or abused in disdainful
    language; for when lenity and cruelty play for a kingdom the
    gentler gamester is the soonest winner.


                        Tucket.
 Enter MONTJOY

  MONTJOY.
 You know me by my habit.
 Well then, I know thee; what shall I know of thee?
  MONTJOY.
 My master's mind.

  KING HENRY.
 Unfold it.

  MONTJOY.
 Thus says my king.
 Say thou to Harry of England: Though we
    seem'd dead we did but sleep; advantage is a better soldier than
    rashness.
 Tell him we could have rebuk'd him at Harfleur, but  
    that we thought not good to bruise an injury till it were full
    ripe.
 Now we speak upon our cue, and our voice is imperial:
    England shall repent his folly, see his weakness, and admire our
    sufferance.
 Bid him therefore consider of his ransom, which must
    proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we have lost,
    the disgrace we have digested; which, in weight to re-answer, his
    pettiness would bow under.
 What is thy name? I know thy quality.

  KING HENRY.
 Thou dost thy office fairly.
 Turn thee back,
    And tell thy king I do not seek him now,
    But could be willing to march on to Calais
    Without impeachment; for, to say the sooth-
    Though 'tis no wisdom to confess so much  
    Unto an enemy of craft and vantage-
    My people are with sickness much enfeebled;
    My numbers lessen'd; and those few I have
    Almost no better than so many French;
    Who when they were in health, I tell thee, herald,
    I thought upon one pair of English legs
    Did march three Frenchmen.

    Go, therefore, tell thy master here I am;
    My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk;
    My army but a weak and sickly guard;
    Yet, God before, tell him we will come on,
    Though France himself and such another neighbour
    Stand in our way.
 There's for thy labour, Montjoy.

    The sum of all our answer is but this:  
    We would not seek a battle as we are;
    Nor as we are, we say, we will not shun it.

  MONTJOY.
 Thanks to your Highness.
     Exit
  GLOUCESTER.
 I hope they will not come upon us now.
 We are in God's hand, brother, not in theirs.

The French camp near Agincourt

Enter the CONSTABLE OF FRANCE, the LORD RAMBURES, the DUKE OF ORLEANS,
the DAUPHIN, with others

  CONSTABLE.
 Tut! I have the best armour of the world.

    Would it were day!
  ORLEANS.

  CONSTABLE.

  ORLEANS.
 My Lord of Orleans and my Lord High Constable, you talk of
    horse and armour?
  ORLEANS.
 You are as well provided of both as any prince in the
    world.

  DAUPHIN.
 What a long night is this! I will not change my horse with
    any that treads but on four pasterns.
 Ca, ha! he bounds from the
    earth as if his entrails were hairs; le cheval volant, the
    Pegasus, chez les narines de feu! When I bestride him I soar, I
    am a hawk.
 He's of the colour of the nutmeg.
 And of the heat of the ginger.

  CONSTABLE.

  DAUPHIN.
 No more, cousin.

  DAUPHIN.
 Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the rising of
    the lark to the lodging of the lamb, vary deserved praise on my
    palfrey.
 It is a theme as fluent as the sea: turn the sands into
    eloquent tongues, and my horse is argument for them all: 'tis a
    subject for a sovereign to reason on, and for a sovereign's
    sovereign to ride on; and for the world- familiar to us and
    unknown- to lay apart their particular functions and wonder at
    him.
 I have heard a sonnet begin so to one's mistress.

  ORLEANS.

  DAUPHIN.
 Me well; which is the prescript praise and perfection of a
    good and particular mistress.

  CONSTABLE.

  DAUPHIN.
 So perhaps did yours.

  CONSTABLE.

  DAUPHIN.
 You have good judgment in horsemanship.
 Be warn'd by me, then: they that ride so, and ride not
    warily, fall into foul bogs.
 I had rather have my horse to my
    mistress.
  
  CONSTABLE.
 I could make as true a boast as that, if I had a sow to
    my mistress.

  DAUPHIN.
' Thou mak'st use of anything.
 Yet do I not use my horse for my mistress, or any such
    proverb so little kin to the purpose.

  RAMBURES.
 My Lord Constable, the armour that I saw in your tent
    to-night- are those stars or suns upon it?
  CONSTABLE.
 Some of them will fall to-morrow, I hope.
 And yet my sky shall not want.

  DAUPHIN.
 That may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and 'twere
    more honour some were away.

  CONSTABLE.

  DAUPHIN.
 I will not say so, for fear I should be fac'd out of my
    way; but I would it were morning, for I would fain be about the  
    ears of the English.

  RAMBURES.
 Who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners?
  CONSTABLE.
 You must first go yourself to hazard ere you have them.
               Exit
  ORLEANS.
 The Dauphin longs for morning.

  RAMBURES.

  ORLEANS.
 He never did harm that I heard of.

  CONSTABLE.
 Nor will do none to-morrow: he will keep that good name
    still.

  ORLEANS.
 I know him to be valiant.
 I was told that by one that knows him better than you.
 Marry, he told me so himself; and he said he car'd not
    who knew it.

  ORLEANS.
 He needs not; it is no hidden virtue in him.
 By my faith, sir, but it is; never anybody saw it but
      his lackey.

  ORLEANS.
 Ill-wind never said well.
 I will cap that proverb with 'There is flattery in
    friendship.
 And I will take up that with 'Give the devil his due.
'
  CONSTABLE.
 Well plac'd! There stands your friend for the devil;
    have at the very eye of that proverb with 'A pox of the devil!'
  ORLEANS.
 You have shot over.

  ORLEANS.
 'Tis not the first time you were overshot.
 My Lord High Constable, the English lie within fifteen
    hundred paces of your tents.

  CONSTABLE.
 A valiant and most expert gentleman.
 Would it were day!
    Alas, poor Harry of England! he longs not for the dawning as we
    do.
 That they lack; for if their heads had any intellectual
    armour, they could never wear such heavy head-pieces.

  RAMBURES.

  CONSTABLE.
 Just, just! and the men do sympathise with the mastiffs
    in robustious and rough coming on, leaving their wits with their
    wives; and then give them great meals of beef and iron and steel;
    they will eat like wolves and fight like devils.
  
  ORLEANS.

  CONSTABLE.
 Now is it time to arm.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>



ACT IV.


Enter CHORUS

  CHORUS.
 Now entertain conjecture of a time
    When creeping murmur and the poring dark
    Fills the wide vessel of the universe.

    From camp to camp, through the foul womb of night,
    The hum of either army stilly sounds,
    That the fix'd sentinels almost receive
    The secret whispers of each other's watch.

    The country cocks do crow, the clocks do ton,
    And the third hour of drowsy morning name.

    Proud of their numbers and secure in soul,
    The confident and over-lusty French  
    Do the low-rated English play at dice;
    And chide the cripple tardy-gaited night
    Who like a foul and ugly witch doth limp
    So tediously away.

    Upon his royal face there is no note
    How dread an army hath enrounded him;
    Nor doth he dedicate one jot of colour
    Unto the weary and all-watched night;  
    But freshly looks, and over-bears attaint
    With cheerful semblance and sweet majesty;
    That every wretch, pining and pale before,
    Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks;
    A largess universal, like the sun,
    His liberal eye doth give to every one,
    Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all
    Behold, as may unworthiness define,
    A little touch of Harry in the night.

    And so our scene must to the battle fly;
    Where- O for pity!- we shall much disgrace
    With four or five most vile and ragged foils,
    Right ill-dispos'd in brawl ridiculous,
    The name of Agincourt.
 Yet sit and see,
    Minding true things by what their mock'ries be.

France.
 The English camp at Agincourt

Enter the KING, BEDFORD, and GLOUCESTER

  KING HENRY.
 Gloucester, 'tis true that we are in great danger;
    The greater therefore should our courage be.

    Good morrow, brother Bedford.
 God Almighty!
    There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
    Would men observingly distil it out;
    For our bad neighbour makes us early stirrers,
    Which is both healthful and good husbandry.
 Not so, my liege; this lodging likes me better,
    Since I may say 'Now lie I like a king.
 'Tis good for men to love their present pains
    Upon example; so the spirit is eased;
    And when the mind is quick'ned, out of doubt
    The organs, though defunct and dead before,
    Break up their drowsy grave and newly move
    With casted slough and fresh legerity.

    Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas.
 We shall, my liege.

  ERPINGHAM.
 Shall I attend your Grace?
  KING HENRY.
 No, my good knight:
    Go with my brothers to my lords of England;
    I and my bosom must debate awhile,
    And then I would no other company.

  ERPINGHAM.
 God-a-mercy, old heart! thou speak'st cheerfully.


                          Enter PISTOL

  PISTOL.
 Qui va la?
  KING HENRY.
 I am a gentleman of a company.
 Trail'st thou the puissant pike?
  KING HENRY.
 As good a gentleman as the Emperor.

  KING HENRY.
 The King's a bawcock and a heart of gold,
    A lad of life, an imp of fame;
    Of parents good, of fist most valiant.

    I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart-string
    I love the lovely bully.
 What is thy name?
  KING HENRY.
 Harry le Roy.
 No, I am a Welshman.

  PISTOL.
 Tell him I'll knock his leek about his pate
    Upon Saint Davy's day.
 Do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day, lest
    he knock that about yours.

  PISTOL.
 Art thou his friend?
  KING HENRY.

  PISTOL.
 I thank you; God be with you!
  PISTOL.
 It sorts well with your fierceness.


                    Enter FLUELLEN and GOWER

  GOWER.
 Captain Fluellen!
  FLUELLEN.
 It is the
    greatest admiration in the universal world, when the true and  
    aunchient prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept: if you
    would take the pains but to examine the wars of Pompey the Great,
    you shall find, I warrant you, that there is no tiddle-taddle nor
    pibble-pabble in Pompey's camp; I warrant you, you shall find the
    ceremonies of the wars, and the cares of it, and the forms of it,
    and the sobriety of it, and the modesty of it, to be otherwise.

  GOWER.
 Why, the enemy is loud; you hear him all night.

  FLUELLEN.
 If the enemy is an ass, and a fool, and a prating
    coxcomb, is it meet, think you, that we should also, look you, be
    an ass, and a fool, and a prating coxcomb? In your own
    conscience, now?
  GOWER.
 I will speak lower.

  FLUELLEN.


          Enter three soldiers: JOHN BATES, ALEXANDER COURT,
                       and MICHAEL WILLIAMS
  
  COURT.
 I think it be; but we have no great cause to desire the
    approach of day.
 We see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think we
    shall never see the end of it.
 Who goes there?
  KING HENRY.

  WILLIAMS.
 Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.
 A good old commander and a most kind gentleman.
 No; nor it is not meet he should.
 For though I speak it
    to you, I think the King is but a man as I am: the violet smells
    to him as it doth to me; the element shows to him as it doth to
    me; all his senses have but human conditions; his ceremonies laid
    by, in his nakedness he appears but a man; and though his
    affections are higher mounted than ours, yet, when they stoop,  
    they stoop with the like wing.
 Therefore, when he sees reason of
    fears, as we do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same relish
    as ours are; yet, in reason, no man should possess him with any
    appearance of fear, lest he, by showing it, should dishearten his
    army.

  BATES.
 He may show what outward courage he will; but I believe, as
    cold a night as 'tis, he could wish himself in Thames up to the
    neck; and so I would he were, and I by him, at all adventures, so
    we were quit here.

  KING HENRY.
 Then I would he were here alone; so should he be sure to be
    ransomed, and a many poor men's lives saved.
 I dare say you love him not so ill to wish him here
    alone, howsoever you speak this, to feel other men's minds;
    methinks I could not die anywhere so contented as in the King's
    company, his cause being just and his quarrel honourable.

  WILLIAMS.
 That's more than we know.
 Ay, or more than we should seek after; for we know enough if
    we know we are the King's subjects.

  WILLIAMS.
 But if the cause be not good, the King himself hath a
    heavy reckoning to make when all those legs and arms and heads,
    chopp'd off in a battle, shall join together at the latter day
    and cry all 'We died at such a place'- some swearing, some crying
    for a surgeon, some upon their wives left poor behind them, some
    upon the debts they owe, some upon their children rawly left.
 I
    am afeard there are few die well that die in a battle; for how
    can they charitably dispose of anything when blood is their
    argument? Now, if these men do not die well, it will be a black
    matter for the King that led them to it; who to disobey were
    against all proportion of subjection.

  KING HENRY.
 So, if a son that is by his father sent about
    merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the sea, the imputation of
    his wickedness, by your rule, should be imposed upon his father
    that sent him; or if a servant, under his master's command
    transporting a sum of money, be assailed by robbers and die in
    many irreconcil'd iniquities, you may call the business of the
    master the author of the servant's damnation.
 Besides, there is no king, be his cause never so
    spotless, if it come to the arbitrement of swords, can try it out
    with all unspotted soldiers: some peradventure have on them the
    guilt of premeditated and contrived murder; some, of beguiling
    virgins with the broken seals of perjury; some, making the wars
    their bulwark, that have before gored the gentle bosom of peace
    with pillage and robbery.
 Now, if these men have defeated the law
    and outrun native punishment, though they can outstrip men they
    have no wings to fly from God: war is His beadle, war is His
    vengeance; so that here men are punish'd for before-breach of the
    King's laws in now the King's quarrel.
 Where they feared the
    death they have borne life away; and where they would be safe
    they perish.
 Then if they die unprovided, no more is the King
    guilty of their damnation than he was before guilty of those
    impieties for the which they are now visited.

    Therefore should every soldier in the wars do as every sick man
    in his bed- wash every mote out of his conscience; and dying so,  
    death is to him advantage; or not dying, the time was blessedly
    lost wherein such preparation was gained; and in him that escapes
    it were not sin to think that, making God so free an offer, He
    let him outlive that day to see His greatness, and to teach
    others how they should prepare.

  WILLIAMS.
 'Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon his
    own head- the King is not to answer for it.
 I do not desire he should answer for me, and yet I determine
    to fight lustily for him.

  KING HENRY.

  WILLIAMS.

  KING HENRY.

  WILLIAMS.
 You pay him then! That's a perilous shot out of an
    elder-gun, that a poor and a private displeasure can do against a
    monarch! You may as well go about to turn the sun to ice with
    fanning in his face with a peacock's feather.

  KING HENRY.
 Your reproof is something too round; I should be angry
    with you, if the time were convenient.
 Let it be a quarrel between us if you live.

  KING HENRY.
 I embrace it.
 Give me any gage of thine, and I will wear it in my
    bonnet; then if ever thou dar'st acknowledge it, I will make it
    my quarrel.

  WILLIAMS.
 Here's my glove; give me another of thine.

  KING HENRY.
 There.
 This will I also wear in my cap; if ever thou come to me
    and say, after to-morrow, 'This is my glove,' by this hand I will
    take thee a box on the ear.

  KING HENRY.
 Well, I will do it, though I take thee in the King's
    company.

  WILLIAMS.
 Fare thee well.
 Be friends, you English fools, be friends; we have
    French quarrels enow, if you could tell how to reckon.

  KING HENRY.
 Indeed, the French may lay twenty French crowns to one
    they will beat us, for they bear them on their shoulders; but it  
    is no English treason to cut French crowns, and to-morrow the
    King himself will be a clipper.
 O hard condition,
    Twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath
    Of every fool, whose sense no more can feel
    But his own wringing! What infinite heart's ease
    Must kings neglect that private men enjoy!
    And what have kings that privates have not too,
    Save ceremony- save general ceremony?
    And what art thou, thou idol Ceremony?
    What kind of god art thou, that suffer'st more
    Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers?
    What are thy rents? What are thy comings-in?
    O Ceremony, show me but thy worth!
    What is thy soul of adoration?
    Art thou aught else but place, degree, and form,  
    Creating awe and fear in other men?
    Wherein thou art less happy being fear'd
    Than they in fearing.

    I am a king that find thee; and I know
    'Tis not the balm, the sceptre, and the ball,
    The sword, the mace, the crown imperial,
    The intertissued robe of gold and pearl,
    The farced tide running fore the king,
    The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp
    That beats upon the high shore of this world-
    No, not all these, thrice gorgeous ceremony,  
    Not all these, laid in bed majestical,
    Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave
    Who, with a body fill'd and vacant mind,
    Gets him to rest, cramm'd with distressful bread;
    Never sees horrid night, the child of hell;
    But, like a lackey, from the rise to set
    Sweats in the eye of Pheebus, and all night
    Sleeps in Elysium; next day, after dawn,
    Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse;
    And follows so the ever-running year
    With profitable labour, to his grave.

    And but for ceremony, such a wretch,
    Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep,
    Had the fore-hand and vantage of a king.

  KING.
 Good old knight,
    Collect them all together at my tent:
    I'll be before thee.

  ERPINGHAM.
 I shall do't, my lord.
                         Exit
  KING.
 O God of battles, steel my soldiers' hearts,
    Possess them not with fear! Take from them now
    The sense of reck'ning, if th' opposed numbers
    Pluck their hearts from them! Not to-day, O Lord,
    O, not to-day, think not upon the fault
    My father made in compassing the crown!
    I Richard's body have interred new,
    And on it have bestowed more contrite tears
    Than from it issued forced drops of blood;
    Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay,
    Who twice a day their wither'd hands hold up
    Toward heaven, to pardon blood; and I have built
    Two chantries, where the sad and solemn priests  
    Sing still for Richard's soul.
 My liege!
  KING HENRY.
     Exeunt




SCENE II.

The French camp

Enter the DAUPHIN, ORLEANS, RAMBURES, and others

  ORLEANS.
 The sun doth gild our armour; up, my lords!
  DAUPHIN.
 Montez a cheval! My horse! Varlet, laquais! Ha!
  ORLEANS.
 Via! Les eaux et la terre-
  ORLEANS.

  DAUPHIN.
 Mount them, and make incision in their hides,
    That their hot blood may spin in English eyes,
    And dout them with superfluous courage, ha!
  RAMBURES.
 What, will you have them weep our horses' blood?
    How shall we then behold their natural tears?
  
                        Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER.
 The English are embattl'd, you French peers.

  CONSTABLE.
 To horse, you gallant Princes! straight to horse!
    Do but behold yon poor and starved band,
    And your fair show shall suck away their souls,
    Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
 What's to say?
    A very little little let us do,
    And all is done.
 Why do you stay so long, my lords of France?
    Yond island carrions, desperate of their bones,
    Ill-favouredly become the morning field;
    Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose,
    And our air shakes them passing scornfully;
    Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggar'd host,
    And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps.

  CONSTABLE.
 They have said their prayers and they stay for death.

  DAUPHIN.
 Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits,
    And give their fasting horses provender,
    And after fight with them?
  CONSTABLE.
 To the field!
    I will the banner from a trumpet take,
    And use it for my haste.
 Come, come, away!
    The sun is high, and we outwear the day.
              Exeunt




SCENE III.

The English camp

Enter GLOUCESTER, BEDFORD, EXETER, ERPINGHAM, with all his host;
SALISBURY and WESTMORELAND

  GLOUCESTER.
 Where is the King?
  BEDFORD.

  WESTMORELAND.
 Of fighting men they have full three-score thousand.
 There's five to one; besides, they all are fresh.

  SALISBURY.
 God's arm strike with us! 'tis a fearful odds.

    If we no more meet till we meet in heaven,
    Then joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford,
    My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,
    And my kind kinsman- warriors all, adieu!
  BEDFORD.
 Farewell, good Salisbury; and good luck go with thee!
  EXETER.
 Farewell, kind lord.
 O that we now had here
    But one ten thousand of those men in England
    That do no work to-day!
  KING.

    God's peace! I would not lose so great an honour  
    As one man more methinks would share from me
    For the best hope I have.
 O, do not wish one more!
    Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through my host,
    That he which hath no stomach to this fight,
    Let him depart; his passport shall be made,
    And crowns for convoy put into his purse;
    We would not die in that man's company
    That fears his fellowship to die with us.

    This day is call'd the feast of Crispian.

    He that shall live this day, and see old age,
    Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours,
    And say 'To-morrow is Saint Crispian.
'
    Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars,
    And say 'These wounds I had on Crispian's day.
'
    Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot,
    But he'll remember, with advantages,
    What feats he did that day.

    This story shall the good man teach his son;
    And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by,
    From this day to the ending of the world,
    But we in it shall be remembered-
    We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
    For he to-day that sheds his blood with me
    Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile,
    This day shall gentle his condition;
    And gentlemen in England now-a-bed
    Shall think themselves accurs'd they were not here,
    And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
    That fought with us upon Saint Crispin's day.
 My sovereign lord, bestow yourself with speed:  
    The French are bravely in their battles set,
    And will with all expedience charge on us.

  KING HENRY.

  WESTMORELAND.
 Perish the man whose mind is backward now!
  KING HENRY.
 Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?
  WESTMORELAND.
 God's will, my liege! would you and I alone,
    Without more help, could fight this royal battle!
  KING HENRY.
 Why, now thou hast unwish'd five thousand men;
    Which likes me better than to wish us one.

    You know your places.
 Enter MONTJOY

  MONTJOY.
 Once more I come to know of thee, King Harry,
    If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound,
    Before thy most assured overthrow;
    For certainly thou art so near the gulf
    Thou needs must be englutted.
 Besides, in mercy,
    The constable desires thee thou wilt mind
    Thy followers of repentance, that their souls  
    May make a peaceful and a sweet retire
    From off these fields, where, wretches, their poor bodies
    Must lie and fester.

  KING HENRY.
 Who hath sent thee now?
  MONTJOY.

  KING HENRY.

    And those that leave their valiant bones in France,
    Dying like men, though buried in your dunghills,
    They shall be fam'd; for there the sun shall greet them
    And draw their honours reeking up to heaven,
    Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,
    The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France.

    But, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim;
    And my poor soldiers tell me yet ere night
    They'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
    The gay new coats o'er the French soldiers' heads
    And turn them out of service.
 If they do this-
    As, if God please, they shall- my ransom then
    Will soon be levied.
 Herald, save thou thy labour;
    Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald;
    They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints;
    Which if they have, as I will leave 'em them,  
    Shall yield them little, tell the Constable.

  MONTJOY.
 And so fare thee well:
    Thou never shalt hear herald any more.
                  Exit
  KING HENRY.
 My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg
    The leading of the vaward.

  KING HENRY.
 Take it, brave York.

The field of battle

Alarum.
  Excursions.

  FRENCH SOLDIER.

  FRENCH SOLDIER.

  FRENCH SOLDIER.
 Est-il impossible d'echapper la force de ton bras?  
  PISTOL.
 Brass, cur?
    Thou damned and luxurious mountain-goat,
    Offer'st me brass?
  FRENCH SOLDIER.
 O, pardonnez-moi!
  PISTOL.
 Monsieur le Fer.
 He says his name is Master Fer.

  BOY.
 I do not know the French for fer, and ferret, and firk.

  FRENCH SOLDIER.
 Que dit-il, monsieur?
  BOY.
 Il me commande a vous dire que vous faites vous pret; car ce
    soldat ici est dispose tout a cette heure de couper votre gorge.

  PISTOL.
 Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy!
    Peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns;
    Or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword.
 O, je vous supplie, pour l'amour de Dieu, me
    pardonner! Je suis gentilhomme de bonne maison.
 Encore qu'il est contre son jurement de pardonner aucun
    prisonnier, neamnoins, pour les ecus que vous l'avez promis, il
    est content a vous donner la liberte, le franchisement.

  BOY.
 He gives you, upon his knees, a thousand thanks; and he
    esteems himself happy that he hath fall'n into the hands of one-
    as he thinks- the most brave, valorous, and thrice-worthy  
    signieur of England.
                                              Exit
  BOY.
 Suivez-vous le grand capitaine.
       Exit FRENCH SOLDIER
    I did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart; but
    the saying is true- the empty vessel makes the greatest sound.
 I must stay with the
    lackeys, with the luggage of our camp.
                                               Exit




SCENE V.
 O diable!
  ORLEANS.
 O Seigneur! le jour est perdu, tout est perdu!
  DAUPHIN.
 Mort Dieu, ma vie! all is confounded, all!
    Reproach and everlasting shame
    Sits mocking in our plumes.
                 [A short alarum]
    O mechante fortune! Do not run away.

  CONSTABLE.

  DAUPHIN.
 O perdurable shame! Let's stab ourselves.

    Be these the wretches that we play'd at dice for?
  ORLEANS.
 Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?
  BOURBON.
 Shame, and eternal shame, nothing but shame!
    Let us die in honour: once more back again;
    And he that will not follow Bourbon now,
    Let him go hence and, with his cap in hand
    Like a base pander, hold the chamber-door
    Whilst by a slave, no gender than my dog,  
    His fairest daughter is contaminated.

  CONSTABLE.
 Disorder, that hath spoil'd us, friend us now!
    Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.

  ORLEANS.
 We are enow yet living in the field
    To smother up the English in our throngs,
    If any order might be thought upon.

  BOURBON.
 The devil take order now! I'll to the throng.

Another part of the field

Alarum.
 Enter the KING and his train, with prisoners; EXETER, and others

  KING HENRY.
 Well have we done, thrice-valiant countrymen;
    But all's not done- yet keep the French the field.

  EXETER.
 The Duke of York commends him to your Majesty.
 Lives he, good uncle? Thrice within this hour
    I saw him down; thrice up again, and fighting;
    From helmet to the spur all blood he was.

  EXETER.
 In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie
    Larding the plain; and by his bloody side,
    Yoke-fellow to his honour-owing wounds,
    The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.

  KING HENRY.
 I blame you not;
    For, hearing this, I must perforce compound
    With mistful eyes, or they will issue too.
          [Alarum]
    But hark! what new alarum is this same?  
    The French have reinforc'd their scatter'd men.

    Then every soldier kill his prisoners;
    Give the word through.
                                Exeunt




SCENE VII.
 Kill the poys and the luggage! 'Tis expressly against the
    law of arms; 'tis as arrant a piece of knavery, mark you now, as
    can be offert; in your conscience, now, is it not?
  GOWER.
 O, 'tis a gallant King!
  FLUELLEN.
 Ay, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain Gower.
 What call you
    the town's name where Alexander the Pig was born?
  GOWER.

  FLUELLEN.

  GOWER.

  FLUELLEN.
 I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porn.
 I tell  
    you, Captain, if you look in the maps of the 'orld, I warrant you
    sall find, in the comparisons between Macedon and Monmouth, that
    the situations, look you, is both alike.
 If you
    mark Alexander's life well, Harry of Monmouth's life is come
    after it indifferent well; for there is figures in all things.
 Our king is not like him in that: he never kill'd any of his
    friends.
 It is not well done, mark you now, to take the tales out
    of my mouth ere it is made and finished.
 I speak but in the
    figures and comparisons of it; as Alexander kill'd his friend
    Cleitus, being in his ales and his cups, so also Harry Monmouth,  
    being in his right wits and his good judgments, turn'd away the
    fat knight with the great belly doublet; he was full of jests,
    and gipes, and knaveries, and mocks; I have forgot his name.
 I'll tell you there is good men porn at
    Monmouth.

  GOWER.
 Here comes his Majesty.
 Enter the KING, WARWICK, GLOUCESTER,
            EXETER, and others, with prisoners.
 Flourish

  KING HENRY.

    If they'll do neither, we will come to them
    And make them skirr away as swift as stones
    Enforced from the old Assyrian slings;
    Besides, we'll cut the throats of those we have,  
    And not a man of them that we shall take
    Shall taste our mercy.
 Go and tell them so.


                      Enter MONTJOY

  EXETER.

  GLOUCESTER.
 His eyes are humbler than they us'd to be.

  KING HENRY.
 How now! What means this, herald? know'st thou not
    That I have fin'd these bones of mine for ransom?
    Com'st thou again for ransom?
  MONTJOY.
 No, great King;
    I come to thee for charitable licence,
    That we may wander o'er this bloody field
    To book our dead, and then to bury them;
    To sort our nobles from our common men;
    For many of our princes- woe the while!-
    Lie drown'd and soak'd in mercenary blood;
    So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs
    In blood of princes; and their wounded steeds
    Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage  
    Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters,
    Killing them twice.
 I tell thee truly, herald,
    I know not if the day be ours or no;
    For yet a many of your horsemen peer
    And gallop o'er the field.
 Then call we this the field of Agincourt,
    Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.

  FLUELLEN.
 Your grandfather of famous memory, an't please your
    Majesty, and your great-uncle Edward the Plack Prince of Wales,
    as I have read in the chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here
    in France.

  KING HENRY.

  FLUELLEN.

  KING HENRY.

  FLUELLEN.
 All the water in Wye cannot wash your Majesty's Welsh
    plood out of your pody, I can tell you that.
 Got pless it and
    preserve it as long as it pleases his Grace and his Majesty too!
  KING HENRY.
 Thanks, good my countryman.

  FLUELLEN.


                       Enter WILLIAMS

  KING HENRY.
 God keep me so! Our heralds go with him:
    Bring me just notice of the numbers dead  
    On both our parts.
 Soldier, you must come to the King.

  KING HENRY.
 An't please your Majesty, 'tis the gage of one that I
    should fight withal, if he be alive.
 An Englishman?
  WILLIAMS.

  KING HENRY.

  KING HENRY.

  FLUELLEN.
 Though he be as good a gentleman as the Devil is, as
    Lucifier and Belzebub himself, it is necessary, look your Grace,  
    that he keep his vow and his oath; if he be perjur'd, see you
    now, his reputation is as arrant a villain and a Jacksauce as
    ever his black shoe trod upon God's ground and his earth, in my
    conscience, la.
 Then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou meet'st the
    fellow.

  WILLIAMS.
 So I Will, my liege, as I live.

  FLUELLEN.
 Gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge and
    literatured in the wars.
 Call him hither to me, soldier.

  WILLIAMS.
 I will, my liege.
 Here, Fluellen; wear thou this favour for me, and stick
    it in thy cap; when Alencon and myself were down together, I
    pluck'd this glove from his helm.
 If any man challenge this, he
    is a friend to Alencon and an enemy to our person; if thou
    encounter any such, apprehend him, an thou dost me love.

  FLUELLEN.
 Your Grace does me as great honours as can be desir'd in
    the hearts of his subjects.

  KING HENRY.

  KING HENRY.

  FLUELLEN.
 I will fetch him.
                               Exit
  KING HENRY.

    It is the soldier's: I, by bargain, should
    Wear it myself.

Before KING HENRY'S PAVILION

Enter GOWER and WILLIAMS

  WILLIAMS.
 I warrant it is to knight you, Captain.
 God's will and his pleasure, Captain, I beseech you now,
    come apace to the King: there is more good toward you
    peradventure than is in your knowledge to dream of.
 Sir, know you this glove?
  FLUELLEN.
 Know the glove? I know the glove is a glove.

  WILLIAMS.
 I know this; and thus I challenge it.
  [Strikes him]
  FLUELLEN.
 'Sblood, an arrant traitor as any's in the universal
    world, or in France, or in England!
  GOWER.
 How now, sir! you villain!
  WILLIAMS.
 Do you think I'll be forsworn?
  FLUELLEN.

  WILLIAMS.
  
  FLUELLEN.
 That's a lie in thy throat.


                  Enter WARWICK and GLOUCESTER

  WARWICK.
 My Lord of Warwick, here is- praised be God for it!- a
    most contagious treason come to light, look you, as you shall
    desire in a summer's day.
 Here is his Majesty.


                  Enter the KING and EXETER

  KING HENRY.
 My liege, this was my glove: here is the fellow of it;
    and he that I gave it to in change promis'd to wear it in his
    cap; I promis'd to strike him if he did; I met this man with my
    glove in his cap, and I have been as good as my word.
  
  FLUELLEN.
 Your Majesty hear now, saving your Majesty's manhood,
    what an arrant, rascally, beggarly, lousy knave it is; I hope
    your Majesty is pear me testimony and witness, and will
    avouchment, that this is the glove of Alencon that your Majesty
    is give me; in your conscience, now.

  KING HENRY.

  FLUELLEN.
 An please your Majesty, let his neck answer for it, if
    there is any martial law in the world.

  KING HENRY.
 How canst thou make me satisfaction?
  WILLIAMS.
 All offences, my lord, come from the heart; never came
    any from mine that might offend your Majesty.

  KING HENRY.
 It was ourself thou didst abuse.

  WILLIAMS.
 Your Majesty came not like yourself: you appear'd to me
    but as a common man; witness the night, your garments, your
    lowliness; and what your Highness suffer'd under that shape I
    beseech you take it for your own fault, and not mine; for had you
    been as I took you for, I made no offence; therefore, I beseech  
    your Highness pardon me.

  FLUELLEN.
 By this day and this light, the fellow has mettle enough
    in his belly: hold, there is twelve pence for you; and I pray you
    to serve God, and keep you out of prawls, and prabbles, and
    quarrels, and dissensions, and, I warrant you, it is the better
    for you.
 I will none of your money.

  FLUELLEN.
 It is with a good will; I can tell you it will serve you
    to mend your shoes.
 Come, wherefore should you be so pashful?
    Your shoes is not so good.


                      Enter an ENGLISH HERALD

  KING HENRY.
 What prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?
  EXETER.
 Charles Duke of Orleans, nephew to the King;
    John Duke of Bourbon, and Lord Bouciqualt;
    Of other lords and barons, knights and squires,
    Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.

  KING HENRY.
 This note doth tell me of ten thousand French
    That in the field lie slain; of princes in this number,
    And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead
    One hundred twenty-six; added to these,
    Of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen,
    Eight thousand and four hundred; of the which
    Five hundred were but yesterday dubb'd knights.

    So that, in these ten thousand they have lost,
    There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries;
    The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires,
    And gentlemen of blood and quality.

    The names of those their nobles that lie dead:
    Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;  
    Jaques of Chatillon, Admiral of France;
    The master of the cross-bows, Lord Rambures;
    Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dolphin;
    John Duke of Alencon; Antony Duke of Brabant,
    The brother to the Duke of Burgundy;
    And Edward Duke of Bar.
 Of lusty earls,
    Grandpre and Roussi, Fauconbridge and Foix,
    Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrake.

    Here was a royal fellowship of death!
    Where is the number of our English dead?
                                 [HERALD presents another paper]
    Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,
    Sir Richard Kikely, Davy Gam, Esquire;
    None else of name; and of all other men
    But five and twenty.
 O God, thy arm was here!
    And not to us, but to thy arm alone,
    Ascribe we all.

  EXETER.
 'Tis wonderful!
  KING HENRY.
 Come, go we in procession to the village;
    And be it death proclaimed through our host
    To boast of this or take that praise from God
    Which is his only.
 Is it not lawful, an please your Majesty, to tell how
    many is kill'd?
  KING HENRY.
 Yes, Captain; but with this acknowledgment,
    That God fought for us.
 Yes, my conscience, he did us great good.
       Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>



ACT V.
 PROLOGUE.
 Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story
    That I may prompt them; and of such as have,
    I humbly pray them to admit th' excuse
    Of time, of numbers, and due course of things,
    Which cannot in their huge and proper life
    Be here presented.
 Now we bear the King
    Toward Calais.
 Behold, the English beach
    Pales in the flood with men, with wives, and boys,
    Whose shouts and claps out-voice the deep-mouth'd sea,
    Which, like a mighty whiffler, fore the King
    Seems to prepare his way.
 So let him land,
    And solemnly see him set on to London.
 He forbids it,
    Being free from vainness and self-glorious pride;
    Giving full trophy, signal, and ostent,
    Quite from himself to God.
 But now behold
    In the quick forge and working-house of thought,
    How London doth pour out her citizens!
    The mayor and all his brethren in best sort-
    Like to the senators of th' antique Rome,
    With the plebeians swarming at their heels-
    Go forth and fetch their conqu'ring Caesar in;
    As, by a lower but loving likelihood,
    Were now the General of our gracious Empress-
    As in good time he may- from Ireland coming,
    Bringing rebellion broached on his sword,
    How many would the peaceful city quit
    To welcome him! Much more, and much more cause,
    Did they this Harry.
 Now in London place him-
    As yet the lamentation of the French
    Invites the King of England's stay at home;
    The Emperor's coming in behalf of France  
    To order peace between them; and omit
    All the occurrences, whatever chanc'd,
    Till Harry's back-return again to France.

    There must we bring him; and myself have play'd
    The interim, by rememb'ring you 'tis past.
     Exit




SCENE I.
  The English camp

Enter FLUELLEN and GOWER

  GOWER.
 Nay, that's right; but why wear you your leek to-day? Saint
    Davy's day is past.

  FLUELLEN.
 I will tell you, ass my friend, Captain Gower: the
    rascally, scald, beggarly, lousy, pragging knave, Pistol- which
    you and yourself and all the world know to be no petter than a
    fellow, look you now, of no merits- he is come to me, and prings
    me pread and salt yesterday, look you, and bid me eat my leek; it
    was in a place where I could not breed no contendon with him; but
    I will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till I see him once
    again, and then I will tell him a little piece of my desires.


                          Enter PISTOL

  GOWER.

  FLUELLEN.
 Ha! art thou bedlam? Dost thou thirst, base Troyan,
    To have me fold up Parca's fatal web?
    Hence! I am qualmish at the smell of leek.
 I peseech you heartily, scurvy, lousy knave, at my
    desires, and my requests, and my petitions, to eat, look you,
    this leek; because, look you, you do not love it, nor your
    affections, and your appetites, and your digestions, does not
    agree with it, I would desire you to eat it.

  PISTOL.
 Not for Cadwallader and all his goats.

  FLUELLEN.
 There is one goat for you.
 Base Troyan, thou shalt die.
  [Striking him again]  You call'd me
    yesterday mountain-squire; but I will make you to-day a squire of
    low degree.
 I pray you fall to; if you can mock a leek, you can
    eat a leek.

  GOWER.
  
  FLUELLEN.
 I say I will make him eat some part of my leek, or I will
    peat his pate four days.
 Bite, I pray you, it is good for your
    green wound and your ploody coxcomb.

  PISTOL.
 By this leek, I will most horribly revenge- I eat and eat,
    I swear-
  FLUELLEN.
 Eat, I pray you; will you have some more sauce to your
    leek? There is not enough leek to swear by.

  PISTOL.
 Nay, pray you
    throw none away; the skin is good for your broken coxcomb.
 When
    you take occasions to see leeks hereafter, I pray you mock at
    'em; that is all.

  PISTOL.
 Good.

  FLUELLEN.
 Ay, leeks is good.
 Hold you, there is a groat to heal
    your pate.

  PISTOL.

  PISTOL.

  FLUELLEN.

 Exit
  PISTOL.
 All hell shall stir for this.

  GOWER.
 Fare ye well.
                                Exit
  PISTOL.
  
    Old I do wax; and from my weary limbs
    Honour is cudgell'd.
 Well, bawd I'll turn,
    And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand.

    To England will I steal, and there I'll steal;
    And patches will I get unto these cudgell'd scars,
    And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.

France.
 The FRENCH KING'S palace

Enter at one door, KING HENRY, EXETER, BEDFORD, GLOUCESTER, WARWICK,
WESTMORELAND, and other LORDS; at another, the FRENCH KING, QUEEN ISABEL,
the PRINCESS KATHERINE, ALICE, and other LADIES; the DUKE OF BURGUNDY,
and his train

  KING HENRY.
 Peace to this meeting, wherefore we are met!
    Unto our brother France, and to our sister,
    Health and fair time of day; joy and good wishes
    To our most fair and princely cousin Katherine.

    And, as a branch and member of this royalty,
    By whom this great assembly is contriv'd,
    We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy.

    And, princes French, and peers, health to you all!
  FRENCH KING.

  QUEEN ISABEL.
 So happy be the issue, brother England,
    Of this good day and of this gracious meeting  
    As we are now glad to behold your eyes-
    Your eyes, which hitherto have home in them,
    Against the French that met them in their bent,
    The fatal balls of murdering basilisks;
    The venom of such looks, we fairly hope,
    Have lost their quality; and that this day
    Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.
 To cry amen to that, thus we appear.

  QUEEN ISABEL.
 You English princes an, I do salute you.
 My duty to you both, on equal love,
    Great Kings of France and England! That I have labour'd
    With all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavours,
    To bring your most imperial Majesties
    Unto this bar and royal interview,
    Your mightiness on both parts best can witness.

    Since then my office hath so far prevail'd
    That face to face and royal eye to eye
    You have congreeted, let it not disgrace me
    If I demand, before this royal view,
    What rub or what impediment there is  
    Why that the naked, poor, and mangled Peace,
    Dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births,
    Should not in this best garden of the world,
    Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage?
    Alas, she hath from France too long been chas'd!
    And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps,
    Corrupting in it own fertility.

    Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart,
    Unpruned dies; her hedges even-pleach'd,
    Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair,
    Put forth disorder'd twigs; her fallow leas
    The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory,
    Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts
    That should deracinate such savagery;
    The even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth
    The freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover,
    Wanting the scythe, all uncorrected, rank,
    Conceives by idleness, and nothing teems
    But hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burs,
    Losing both beauty and utility.
  
    And as our vineyards, fallows, meads, and hedges,
    Defective in their natures, grow to wildness;
    Even so our houses and ourselves and children
    Have lost, or do not learn for want of time,
    The sciences that should become our country;
    But grow, like savages- as soldiers will,
    That nothing do but meditate on blood-
    To swearing and stern looks, diffus'd attire,
    And everything that seems unnatural.

    Which to reduce into our former favout
    You are assembled; and my speech entreats
    That I may know the let why gentle Peace
    Should not expel these inconveniences
    And bless us with her former qualities.

  KING HENRY.
  
  BURGUNDY.
 The King hath heard them; to the which as yet
    There is no answer made.
 I have but with a cursorary eye
    O'erglanced the articles; pleaseth your Grace
    To appoint some of your council presently
    To sit with us once more, with better heed
    To re-survey them, we will suddenly
    Pass our accept and peremptory answer.
 Brother, we shall.
 Go, uncle Exeter,
    And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester,
    Warwick, and Huntington, go with the King;
    And take with you free power to ratify,
    Augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best
    Shall see advantageable for our dignity,
    Any thing in or out of our demands;
    And we'll consign thereto.
 Will you, fair sister,
    Go with the princes or stay here with us?
  QUEEN ISABEL.
 Our gracious brother, I will go with them;  
    Haply a woman's voice may do some good,
    When articles too nicely urg'd be stood on.

  KING HENRY.
 Yet leave our cousin Katherine here with us;
    She is our capital demand, compris'd
    Within the fore-rank of our articles.

  QUEEN ISABEL.
 She hath good leave.

                   Exeunt all but the KING, KATHERINE, and ALICE
  KING HENRY.
 Fair Katherine, and most fair,
    Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms
    Such as will enter at a lady's ear,
    And plead his love-suit to her gentle heart?
  KATHERINE.
 Your Majesty shall mock me; I cannot speak your England.
 O fair Katherine, if you will love me soundly with your
    French heart, I will be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with
    your English tongue.
 Do you like me, Kate?
  KATHERINE.
 Pardonnez-moi, I cannot tell vat is like me.
 An angel is like you, Kate, and you are like an angel.

  KATHERINE.
 I said so, dear Katherine, and I must not blush to  
    affirm it.
 O bon Dieu! les langues des hommes sont pleines de
    tromperies.

  KING HENRY.
 Oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits- dat is
    de Princess.

  KING HENRY.
 I' faith,
    Kate, my wooing is fit for thy understanding: I am glad thou
    canst speak no better English; for if thou couldst, thou wouldst
    find me such a plain king that thou wouldst think I had sold my
    farm to buy my crown.
 I know no ways to mince it in love, but
    directly to say 'I love you.
' Then, if you urge me farther than
    to say 'Do you in faith?' I wear out my suit.
 Give me your
    answer; i' faith, do; and so clap hands and a bargain.
 How say
    you, lady?
  KATHERINE.
 Sauf votre honneur, me understand well.

  KING HENRY.
 Marry, if you would put me to verses or to dance for
    your sake, Kate, why you undid me; for the one I have neither
    words nor measure, and for the other I have no strength in  
    measure, yet a reasonable measure in strength.
 If I could win a
    lady at leap-frog, or by vaulting into my saddle with my armour
    on my back, under the correction of bragging be it spoken, I
    should quickly leap into wife.
 Or if I might buffet for my love,
    or bound my horse for her favours, I could lay on like a butcher,
    and sit like a jack-an-apes, never off.
 If thou canst love a
    fellow of this temper, Kate, whose face is not worth sunburning,
    that never looks in his glass for love of anything he sees there,
    let thine eye be thy cook.
 I speak to thee plain soldier.
 And while thou liv'st, dear Kate, take a fellow of
    plain and uncoined constancy; for he perforce must do thee right,
    because he hath not the gift to woo in other places; for these
    fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme themselves into
    ladies' favours, they do always reason themselves out again.
 A good  
    leg will fall; a straight back will stoop; a black beard will
    turn white; a curl'd pate will grow bald; a fair face will
    wither; a full eye will wax hollow.
 But a good heart, Kate, is
    the sun and the moon; or, rather, the sun, and not the moon- for
    it shines bright and never changes, but keeps his course truly.

    If thou would have such a one, take me; and take me, take a
    soldier; take a soldier, take a king.
 And what say'st thou, then,
    to my love? Speak, my fair, and fairly, I pray thee.
 Is it possible dat I sould love de enemy of France?
  KING HENRY.
 No, it is not possible you should love the enemy of
    France, Kate, but in loving me you should love the friend of
    France; for I love France so well that I will not part with a
    village of it; I will have it all mine.
 And, Kate, when France is
    mine and I am yours, then yours is France and you are mine.
 I cannot tell vat is dat.

  KING HENRY.
 It is as easy for me, Kate, to
    conquer the kingdom as to speak so much more French: I shall
    never move thee in French, unless it be to laugh at me.

  KATHERINE.
 Sauf votre honneur, le Francais que vous parlez, il est
    meilleur que l'Anglais lequel je parle.
 But, Kate, dost thou understand thus much
    English- Canst thou love me?
  KATHERINE.
 Can any of your neighbours tell, Kate? I'll ask them.

    Come, I know thou lovest me; and at night, when you come into
    your closet, you'll question this gentlewoman about me; and I
    know, Kate, you will to her dispraise those parts in me that you
    love with your heart.
 If ever
    thou beest mine, Kate, as I have a saving faith within me tells
    me thou shalt, I get thee with scambling, and thou must therefore
    needs prove a good soldier-breeder.
 Shall not thou and I, between
    Saint Denis and Saint George, compound a boy, half French, half  
    English, that shall go to Constantinople and take the Turk by the
    beard? Shall we not? What say'st thou, my fair flower-de-luce?
  KATHERINE.
 I do not know dat.

  KING HENRY.
 Your Majestee ave fausse French enough to deceive de
    most sage damoiselle dat is en France.

  KING HENRY.
 Now, fie upon my false French! By mine honour, in true
    English, I love thee, Kate; by which honour I dare not swear thou
    lovest me; yet my blood begins to flatter me that thou dost,
    notwithstanding the poor and untempering effect of my visage.
 Now
    beshrew my father's ambition! He was thinking of civil wars when
    he got me; therefore was I created with a stubborn outside, with
    an aspect of iron, that when I come to woo ladies I fright them.

    But, in faith, Kate, the elder I wax, the better I shall appear:
    my comfort is, that old age, that in layer-up of beauty, can do
    no more spoil upon my face; thou hast me, if thou hast me, at the  
    worst; and thou shalt wear me, if thou wear me, better and
    better.
 And therefore tell me, most fair Katherine, will you have
    me? Put off your maiden blushes; avouch the thoughts of your
    heart with the looks of an empress; take me by the hand and say
    'Harry of England, I am thine.
 Come, your answer in broken music- for thy voice is
    music and thy English broken; therefore, Queen of all, Katherine,
    break thy mind to me in broken English, wilt thou have me?
  KATHERINE.

  KING HENRY.
 Nay, it will please him well, Kate- it shall please
    him, Kate.
 Den it sall also content me.
 Upon that I kiss your hand, and I can you my queen.
 Laissez, mon seigneur, laissez, laissez! Ma foi, je ne
    veux point que vous abaissiez votre grandeur en baisant la main
    d'une, notre seigneur, indigne serviteur; excusez-moi, je vous  
    supplie, mon tres puissant seigneur.

  KING HENRY.
 Then I will kiss your lips, Kate.

  KATHERINE.
 Les dames et demoiselles pour etre baisees devant leur
    noces, il n'est pas la coutume de France.

  KING HENRY.
 Dat it is not be de fashion pour le ladies of France- I
    cannot tell vat is baiser en Anglish.
 To kiss.
 Your Majestee entendre bettre que moi.

  KING HENRY.
 It is not a fashion for the maids in France to kiss
    before they are married, would she say?
  ALICE.
 Oui, vraiment.
 Dear Kate,
    you and I cannot be confin'd within the weak list of a country's
    fashion; we are the makers of manners, Kate; and the liberty that
    follows our places stops the mouth of all find-faults- as I will
    do yours for upholding the nice fashion of your country in
    denying me a kiss; therefore, patiently and yielding.
  [Kissing
    her]  You have witchcraft in your lips, Kate: there is more
    eloquence in a sugar touch of them than in the tongues of the  
    French council; and they should sooner persuade Henry of England
    than a general petition of monarchs.
 Here comes your father.
 Our tongue is rough, coz, and my condition is not
    smooth; so that, having neither the voice nor the heart of
    flattery about me, I cannot so conjure up the spirit of love in
    her that he will appear in his true likeness.

  BURGUNDY.
 Pardon the frankness of my mirth, if I answer you for
    that.

  KING HENRY.
 Yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and
    enforces.

  BURGUNDY.
 They are then excus'd, my lord, when they see not what
    they do.
 I will wink on her to consent, my lord, if you will teach
    her to know my meaning; for maids well summer'd and warm kept are
    like flies at Bartholomew-tide, blind, though they have their
    eyes; and then they will endure handling, which before would not
    abide looking on.

  BURGUNDY.
 As love is, my lord, before it loves.

  KING HENRY.
 It is so; and you may, some of you, thank love for my
    blindness, who cannot see many a fair French city for one fair
    French maid that stands in my way.

  FRENCH KING.

  KING HENRY.
 Shall Kate be my wife?
  FRENCH KING.
 I am content, so the maiden cities you talk of may wait
    on her; so the maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show
    me the way to my will.

  KING HENRY.
 Is't so, my lords of England?
  WESTMORELAND.
 The king hath granted every article:
    His daughter first; and then in sequel, all,
    According to their firm proposed natures.

  EXETER.
 Only he hath not yet subscribed this:
      Where your Majesty demands that the King of France, having any
    occasion to write for matter of grant, shall name your Highness
    in this form and with this addition, in French, Notre tres cher
    fils Henri, Roi d'Angleterre, Heritier de France; and thus in
    Latin, Praeclarissimus filius noster Henricus, Rex Angliae et
    Haeres Franciae.
 Nor this I have not, brother, so denied  
    But our request shall make me let it pass.

  KING HENRY.
 I pray you, then, in love and dear alliance,
    Let that one article rank with the rest;
    And thereupon give me your daughter.
 Take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up
    Issue to me; that the contending kingdoms
    Of France and England, whose very shores look pale
    With envy of each other's happiness,
    May cease their hatred; and this dear conjunction
    Plant neighbourhood and Christian-like accord
    In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance
    His bleeding sword 'twixt England and fair France.

  LORDS.
 Amen!
  KING HENRY.
       [Floulish]
  QUEEN ISABEL.
 God, the best maker of all marriages,
    Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one!
    As man and wife, being two, are one in love,
    So be there 'twixt your kingdoms such a spousal
    That never may ill office or fell jealousy,  
    Which troubles oft the bed of blessed marriage,
    Thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms,
    To make divorce of their incorporate league;
    That English may as French, French Englishmen,
    Receive each other.
 God speak this Amen!
  ALL.
 Amen!
  KING HENRY.
 Prepare we for our marriage; on which day,
    My Lord of Burgundy, we'll take your oath,
    And all the peers', for surety of our leagues.
 Exeunt

EPILOGUE
                           EPILOGUE.
 Thus far, with rough and all-unable pen,
    Our bending author hath pursu'd the story,
    In little room confining mighty men,
    Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.

    Small time, but, in that small, most greatly lived
    This star of England.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>





1592

THE FIRST PART OF HENRY THE SIXTH

by William Shakespeare


Dramatis Personae

  KING HENRY THE SIXTH
  DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, uncle to the King, and Protector
  DUKE OF BEDFORD, uncle to the King, and Regent of France
  THOMAS BEAUFORT, DUKE OF EXETER, great-uncle to the king
  HENRY BEAUFORT, great-uncle to the King, BISHOP OF WINCHESTER,
     and afterwards CARDINAL
  JOHN BEAUFORT, EARL OF SOMERSET, afterwards Duke
  RICHARD PLANTAGENET, son of Richard late Earl of Cambridge,
    afterwards DUKE OF YORK
  EARL OF WARWICK
  EARL OF SALISBURY
  EARL OF SUFFOLK
  LORD TALBOT, afterwards EARL OF SHREWSBURY
  JOHN TALBOT, his son
  EDMUND MORTIMER, EARL OF MARCH
  SIR JOHN FASTOLFE
  SIR WILLIAM LUCY
  SIR WILLIAM GLANSDALE
  SIR THOMAS GARGRAVE
  MAYOR of LONDON  
  WOODVILLE, Lieutenant of the Tower
  VERNON, of the White Rose or York faction
  BASSET, of the Red Rose or Lancaster faction
  A LAWYER
  GAOLERS, to Mortimer
  CHARLES, Dauphin, and afterwards King of France
  REIGNIER, DUKE OF ANJOU, and titular King of Naples
  DUKE OF BURGUNDY
  DUKE OF ALENCON
  BASTARD OF ORLEANS
  GOVERNOR OF PARIS
  MASTER-GUNNER OF ORLEANS, and his SON
  GENERAL OF THE FRENCH FORCES in Bordeaux
  A FRENCH SERGEANT
  A PORTER
  AN OLD SHEPHERD, father to Joan la Pucelle
  MARGARET, daughter to Reignier, afterwards married to
    King Henry
  COUNTESS OF AUVERGNE
  JOAN LA PUCELLE, Commonly called JOAN OF ARC  

  Lords, Warders of the Tower, Heralds, Officers, Soldiers,
  Messengers, English and French Attendants.
 Fiends appearing
    to La Pucelle




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



SCENE:
England and France




The First Part of King Henry the Sixth


ACT I.
 SCENE 1.


Westminster Abbey

Dead March.
 Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to
    night! Comets, importing change of times and states,
    Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky
    And with them scourge the bad revolting stars
    That have consented unto Henry's death!
    King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long!
    England ne'er lost a king of so much worth.
 England ne'er had a king until his time.

    Virtue he had, deserving to command;
    His brandish'd sword did blind men with his beams;  
    His arms spread wider than a dragon's wings;
    His sparkling eyes, replete with wrathful fire,
    More dazzled and drove back his enemies
    Than mid-day sun fierce bent against their faces.

  EXETER.
 We mourn in black; why mourn we not in blood?
    Henry is dead and never shall revive.

    Upon a wooden coffin we attend;
    And death's dishonourable victory
    We with our stately presence glorify,
    Like captives bound to a triumphant car.
 He was a king bless'd of the King of kings;
    Unto the French the dreadful judgment-day
    So dreadful will not be as was his sight.
  
    The battles of the Lord of Hosts he fought;
    The Church's prayers made him so prosperous.
 The Church! Where is it? Had not churchmen
    pray'd,
    His thread of life had not so soon decay'd.

    None do you like but an effeminate prince,
    Whom like a school-boy you may overawe.

  WINCHESTER.
 Gloucester, whate'er we like, thou art
    Protector
    And lookest to command the Prince and realm.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Name not religion, for thou lov'st the flesh;
    And ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'st,
    Except it be to pray against thy foes.
 Cease, cease these jars and rest your minds in peace;
    Let's to the altar.

    Posterity, await for wretched years,  
    When at their mothers' moist'ned eyes babes shall suck,
    Our isle be made a nourish of salt tears,
    And none but women left to wail the dead.

  HENRY the Fifth, thy ghost I invocate:
    Prosper this realm, keep it from civil broils,
    Combat with adverse planets in the heavens.

    A far more glorious star thy soul will make
    Than Julius Caesar or bright

                          Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER.
 My honourable lords, health to you all!
    Sad tidings bring I to you out of France,
    Of loss, of slaughter, and discomfiture:
    Guienne, Champagne, Rheims, Orleans,
    Paris, Guysors, Poictiers, are all quite lost.

  BEDFORD.
 What say'st thou, man, before dead Henry's corse?
    Speak softly, or the loss of those great towns
    Will make him burst his lead and rise from death.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Is Paris lost? Is Rouen yielded up?  
    If Henry were recall'd to life again,
    These news would cause him once more yield the ghost.

  EXETER.

    Amongst the soldiers this is muttered
    That here you maintain several factions;
    And whilst a field should be dispatch'd and fought,
    You are disputing of your generals:
    One would have ling'ring wars, with little cost;
    Another would fly swift, but wanteth wings;
    A third thinks, without expense at all,
    By guileful fair words peace may be obtain'd.

    Awake, awake, English nobility!
    Let not sloth dim your honours, new-begot.

    Cropp'd are the flower-de-luces in your arms;
    Of England's coat one half is cut away.

  EXETER.
 Were our tears wanting to this funeral,
    These tidings would call forth their flowing tides.

  BEDFORD.

    Give me my steeled coat; I'll fight for France.
  
    Away with these disgraceful wailing robes!
    Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes,
    To weep their intermissive miseries.


                   Enter a second MESSENGER

  SECOND MESSENGER.

    France is revolted from the English quite,
    Except some petty towns of no import.

    The Dauphin Charles is crowned king in Rheims;
    The Bastard of Orleans with him is join'd;
    Reignier, Duke of Anjou, doth take his part;
    The Duke of Alencon flieth to his side.

  EXETER.
 The Dauphin crowned king! all fly to him!
    O, whither shall we fly from this reproach?
  GLOUCESTER.
 We will not fly but to our enemies' throats.

    Bedford, if thou be slack I'll fight it out.
 Gloucester, why doubt'st thou of my forwardness?
    An army have I muster'd in my thoughts,  
    Wherewith already France is overrun.
 What! Wherein Talbot overcame? Is't so?
  THIRD MESSENGER.

    The tenth of August last this dreadful lord,
    Retiring from the siege of Orleans,
    Having full scarce six thousand in his troop,
    By three and twenty thousand of the French
    Was round encompassed and set upon.

    No leisure had he to enrank his men;
    He wanted pikes to set before his archers;  
    Instead whereof sharp stakes pluck'd out of hedges
    They pitched in the ground confusedly
    To keep the horsemen off from breaking in.

    His soldiers, spying his undaunted spirit,
    'A Talbot! a Talbot!' cried out amain,
    And rush'd into the bowels of the battle.

    Here had the conquest fully been seal'd up
    If Sir John Fastolfe had not play'd the coward.

    He, being in the vaward plac'd behind
    With purpose to relieve and follow them-
    Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke;
    Hence grew the general wreck and massacre.

    Enclosed were they with their enemies.
  
    A base Walloon, to win the Dauphin's grace,
    Thrust Talbot with a spear into the back;
    Whom all France, with their chief assembled strength,
    Durst not presume to look once in the face.

  BEDFORD.
 O no, he lives, but is took prisoner,
    And Lord Scales with him, and Lord Hungerford;
    Most of the rest slaughter'd or took likewise.

  BEDFORD.

    I'll hale the Dauphin headlong from his throne;
    His crown shall be the ransom of my friend;
    Four of their lords I'll change for one of ours.
 So you had need; for Orleans is besieg'd;
    The English army is grown weak and faint;
    The Earl of Salisbury craveth supply
    And hardly keeps his men from mutiny,
    Since they, so few, watch such a multitude.

  EXETER.

  BEDFORD.
 I do remember it, and here take my leave
    To go about my preparation.
                             Exit
  GLOUCESTER.
 I'll to the Tower with all the haste I can
    To view th' artillery and munition;
    And then I will proclaim young Henry king.
  
    The King from Eltham I intend to steal,
    And sit at chiefest stern of public weal.
             Exeunt




                          SCENE 2.
 Enter CHARLES THE DAUPHIN, ALENCON,
           and REIGNIER, marching with drum and soldiers

  CHARLES.
 Mars his true moving, even as in the heavens
    So in the earth, to this day is not known.

    Late did he shine upon the English side;
    Now we are victors, upon us he smiles.

    What towns of any moment but we have?
    At pleasure here we lie near Orleans;
    Otherwhiles the famish'd English, like pale ghosts,
    Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.

  ALENCON.
 They want their porridge and their fat bull
    beeves.

    Either they must be dieted like mules
    And have their provender tied to their mouths,
    Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.

  REIGNIER.
 Sound, sound alarum; we will rush on them.
             Exeunt

       Here alarum.
 They are beaten hack by the English, with
         great loss.
 Re-enter CHARLES, ALENCON, and REIGNIER

  CHARLES.
 Salisbury is a desperate homicide;
    He fighteth as one weary of his life.

    The other lords, like lions wanting food,
    Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.
 Froissart, a countryman of ours, records
    England all Olivers and Rowlands bred  
    During the time Edward the Third did reign.

    More truly now may this be verified;
    For none but Samsons and Goliases
    It sendeth forth to skirmish.
 One to ten!
    Lean raw-bon'd rascals! Who would e'er suppose
    They had such courage and audacity?
  CHARLES.
 Let's leave this town; for they are hare-brain'd
    slaves,
    And hunger will enforce them to be more eager.

  REIGNIER.
 I think by some odd gimmers or device
    Their arms are set, like clocks, still to strike on;
    Else ne'er could they hold out so as they do.

  ALENCON.
 Be it so.


                   Enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS

  BASTARD.

  BASTARD.
 Methinks your looks are sad, your cheer appall'd.

    Hath the late overthrow wrought this offence?
    Be not dismay'd, for succour is at hand.

  CHARLES.

    Be not amaz'd, there's nothing hid from me.

    In private will I talk with thee apart.

  REIGNIER.

    Heaven and our Lady gracious hath it pleas'd
    To shine on my contemptible estate.

    Lo, whilst I waited on my tender lambs
    And to sun's parching heat display'd my cheeks,
    God's Mother deigned to appear to me,
    And in a vision full of majesty
    Will'd me to leave my base vocation
    And free my country from calamity  
    Her aid she promis'd and assur'd success.

    In complete glory she reveal'd herself;
    And whereas I was black and swart before,
    With those clear rays which she infus'd on me
    That beauty am I bless'd with which you may see.

    My courage try by combat if thou dar'st,
    And thou shalt find that I exceed my sex.

    Resolve on this: thou shalt be fortunate
    If thou receive me for thy warlike mate.

  CHARLES.
 Thou hast astonish'd me with thy high terms.
 I am prepar'd; here is my keen-edg'd sword,
    Deck'd with five flower-de-luces on each side,
    The which at Touraine, in Saint Katherine's churchyard,
    Out of a great deal of old iron I chose forth.

                 [Here they fight and JOAN LA PUCELLE overcomes]
  CHARLES.
 Stay, stay thy hands; thou art an Amazon,
    And fightest with the sword of Deborah.

  PUCELLE.
 Christ's Mother helps me, else I were too weak.

  CHARLES.
 Whoe'er helps thee, 'tis thou that must help me.

    Impatiently I burn with thy desire;
    My heart and hands thou hast at once subdu'd.

    Excellent Pucelle, if thy name be so,
    Let me thy servant and not sovereign be.

  PUCELLE.
 I must not yield to any rites of love,
    For my profession's sacred from above.

    When I have chased all thy foes from hence,
    Then will I think upon a recompense.

  REIGNIER.
 My lord, methinks, is very long in talk.
  
  REIGNIER.

  REIGNIER.
 Why, no, I say; distrustful recreants!
    Fight till the last gasp; I will be your guard.

  CHARLES.
 What she says I'll confirm; we'll fight it out.
 Assign'd am I to be the English scourge.

    With Henry's death the English circle ends;
    Dispersed are the glories it included.

    Now am I like that proud insulting ship
    Which Caesar and his fortune bare at once.

  CHARLES.

    Helen, the mother of great Constantine,
    Nor yet Saint Philip's daughters were like thee.
 Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.

  REIGNIER.

  CHARLES.
 Presently we'll try.
           Exeunt




                          SCENE 3.


                London.
 Before the Tower gates

       Enter the DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, with his serving-men
                       in blue coats

  GLOUCESTER.
 I am come to survey the Tower this day;
    Since Henry's death, I fear, there is conveyance.

    Where be these warders that they wait not here?
    Open the gates; 'tis Gloucester that calls.

  FIRST WARDER.
  [Within]  Whoe'er he be, you may not be
    let in.
 Villains, answer you so the Lord
    Protector?
  FIRST WARDER.
 Who willed you, or whose will stands but  
    mine?
    There's none Protector of the realm but I.

    Break up the gates, I'll be your warrantize.

    Shall I be flouted thus by dunghill grooms?
                  [GLOUCESTER'S men rush at the Tower gates, and
                         WOODVILLE the Lieutenant speaks within]
  WOODVILLE.
 Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?
    Open the gates; here's Gloucester that would enter.

  WOODVILLE.
  [Within]  Have patience, noble Duke, I may
    not open;
    The Cardinal of Winchester forbids.
 Faint-hearted Woodville, prizest him fore me?
    Arrogant Winchester, that haughty prelate
    Whom Henry, our late sovereign, ne'er could brook!
    Thou art no friend to God or to the King.

    Open the gates, or I'll shut thee out shortly.


       Enter to the PROTECTOR at the Tower gates WINCHESTER
                   and his men in tawny coats

  WINCHESTER.
 Peel'd priest, dost thou command me to be
    shut out?
  WINCHESTER.

  GLOUCESTER.

  WINCHESTER.

    This be Damascus; be thou cursed Cain,
    To slay thy brother Abel, if thou wilt.

    Thy scarlet robes as a child's bearing-cloth
    I'll use to carry thee out of this place.
 What! am I dar'd and bearded to my face?
    Draw, men, for all this privileged place
    Blue-coats to tawny-coats.
 Priest, beware your beard;
    I mean to tug it, and to cuff you soundly;
    Under my feet I stamp thy cardinal's hat;
    In spite of Pope or dignities of church,
    Here by the cheeks I'll drag thee up and down.

  WINCHESTER.
 Gloucester, thou wilt answer this before the
    Pope.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Winchester goose! I cry 'A rope, a rope!'
    Now beat them hence; why do you let them stay?
    Thee I'll chase hence, thou wolf in sheep's array.
 Fie, lords! that you, being supreme magistrates,
    Thus contumeliously should break the peace!
  GLOUCESTER.
 Peace, Mayor! thou know'st little of my wrongs:
    Here's Beaufort, that regards nor God nor King,
    Hath here distrain'd the Tower to his use.

  GLOUCESTER.
 I Will not answer thee with words, but blows.

                                      [Here they skirmish again]
  MAYOR.
 Nought rests for me in this tumultuous strife
    But to make open proclamation.
  [Cries]  All manner of men assembled here in arms
    this day against God's peace and the King's, we charge
    and command you, in his Highness' name, to repair to
    your several dwelling-places; and not to wear, handle, or
    use, any sword, weapon, or dagger, henceforward, upon
    pain of death.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Gloucester, we'll meet to thy cost, be sure;
    Thy heart-blood I will have for this day's work.
 I'll call for clubs if you will not away.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Abominable Gloucester, guard thy head,
    For I intend to have it ere long.

                    Exeunt, severally, GLOUCESTER and WINCHESTER
                                             with their servants
  MAYOR.

    Good God, these nobles should such stomachs bear!  
    I myself fight not once in forty year.
                Exeunt




                               SCENE 4.


                        France.
 Sirrah, thou know'st how Orleans is
    besieg'd,
    And how the English have the suburbs won.

  BOY.
 But now thou shalt not.
 Be thou rul'd
    by me.

    Chief master-gunner am I of this town;
    Something I must do to procure me grace.

    The Prince's espials have informed me
    How the English, in the suburbs close intrench'd,
    Wont, through a secret grate of iron bars
    In yonder tower, to overpeer the city,
    And thence discover how with most advantage
    They may vex us with shot or with assault.
  
    To intercept this inconvenience,
    A piece of ordnance 'gainst it I have plac'd;
    And even these three days have I watch'd
    If I could see them.
 Now do thou watch,
    For I can stay no longer.
               Exit
  BOY.
 The Earl of Bedford had a prisoner
    Call'd the brave Lord Ponton de Santrailles;  
    For him was I exchang'd and ransomed.

    But with a baser man of arms by far
    Once, in contempt, they would have barter'd me;
    Which I disdaining scorn'd, and craved death
    Rather than I would be so vile esteem'd.

    In fine, redeem'd I was as I desir'd.

    But, O! the treacherous Fastolfe wounds my heart
    Whom with my bare fists I would execute,
    If I now had him brought into my power.

  SALISBURY.

  TALBOT.
 With scoffs, and scorns, and contumelious taunts,
    In open market-place produc'd they me
    To be a public spectacle to all;
    Here, said they, is the terror of the French,
    The scarecrow that affrights our children so.
  
    In iron walls they deem'd me not secure;
    So great fear of my name 'mongst them was spread
    That they suppos'd I could rend bars of steel
    And spurn in pieces posts of adamant;
    Wherefore a guard of chosen shot I had
    That walk'd about me every minute-while;
    And if I did but stir out of my bed,
    Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.


                Enter the BOY with a linstock

  SALISBURY.
 I grieve to hear what torments you endur'd;
    But we will be reveng'd sufficiently.

    Now it is supper-time in Orleans:
    Here, through this grate, I count each one
    And view the Frenchmen how they fortify.

    Sir Thomas Gargrave and Sir William Glansdale,
    Let me have your express opinions
    Where is best place to make our batt'ry next.
  
  GARGRAVE.
 I think at the North Gate; for there stand lords.

  GLANSDALE.
 And I here, at the bulwark of the bridge.

  TALBOT.
 For aught I see, this city must be famish'd,
    Or with light skirmishes enfeebled.

                     [Here they shoot and SALISBURY and GARGRAVE
                                                      fall down]
  SALISBURY.
 O Lord, have mercy on us, wretched sinners!
  GARGRAVE.
 O Lord, have mercy on me, woeful man!
  TALBOT.

    Heaven, be thou gracious to none alive
    If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands!
    Bear hence his body; I will help to bury it.

    Sir Thomas Gargrave, hast thou any life?
    Speak unto Talbot; nay, look up to him.

    Salisbury, cheer thy spirit with this comfort,
    Thou shalt not die whiles
    He beckons with his hand and smiles on me,
    As who should say 'When I am dead and gone,
    Remember to avenge me on the French.

                  [Here an alarum, and it thunders and lightens]
    What stir is this? What tumult's in the heavens?
    Whence cometh this alarum and the noise?

                          Enter a MESSENGER
  
  MESSENGER.
 My lord, my lord, the French have gather'd
    head
    The Dauphin, with one Joan la Pucelle join'd,
    A holy prophetess new risen up,
    Is come with a great power to raise the siege.

    It irks his heart he cannot be reveng'd.

    Pucelle or puzzel, dolphin or dogfish,
    Your hearts I'll stamp out with my horse's heels
    And make a quagmire of your mingled brains.

                                                  Alarum.
 Exeunt




                             SCENE 5.


                          Before Orleans

         Here an alarum again, and TALBOT pursueth the
      DAUPHIN and driveth him.
 Where is my strength, my valour, and my force?
    Our English troops retire, I cannot stay them;
    A woman clad in armour chaseth them.


                          Enter LA PUCELLE

    Here, here she comes.
 I'll have a bout with thee.

    Devil or devil's dam, I'll conjure thee;
    Blood will I draw on thee-thou art a witch
    And straightway give thy soul to him thou serv'st.
 Come, come, 'tis only I that must disgrace thee.

                                               [Here they fight]
  TALBOT.
  
    And from my shoulders crack my arms asunder,
    But I will chastise this high minded strumpet.
 Talbot, farewell; thy hour is not yet come.

    I must go victual Orleans forthwith.

    This day is ours, as many more shall be.
                Exit
  TALBOT.

    A witch by fear, not force, like Hannibal,
    Drives back our troops and conquers as she lists.

    So bees with smoke and doves with noisome stench
    Are from their hives and houses driven away.

    They call'd us, for our fierceness, English dogs;
    Now like to whelps we crying run away.

                                                [A short alarum]
    Hark, countrymen! Either renew the fight  
    Or tear the lions out of England's coat;
    Renounce your soil, give sheep in lions' stead:
    Sheep run not half so treacherous from the wolf,
    Or horse or oxen from the leopard,
    As you fly from your oft subdued slaves.

    You all consented unto Salisbury's death,
    For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.

    Pucelle is ent'red into Orleans
    In spite of us or aught that we could do.

                                    Exit TALBOT.


                              ORLEANS

        Flourish.
 Enter on the walls, LA PUCELLE, CHARLES,
                REIGNIER, ALENCON, and soldiers

  PUCELLE.

    Thus Joan la Pucelle hath perform'd her word.

    France, triumph in thy glorious prophetess.

  REIGNIER.
 Why ring not out the bells aloud throughout the
    town?
    Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfires
    And feast and banquet in the open streets
    To celebrate the joy that God hath given us.
 All France will be replete with mirth and joy
    When they shall hear how we have play'd the men.

  CHARLES.
 'Tis Joan, not we, by whom the day is won;
    For which I will divide my crown with her;
    And all the priests and friars in my realm
    Shall in procession sing her endless praise.

    In memory of her, when she is dead,
    Her ashes, in an urn more precious
    Than the rich jewel'd coffer of Darius,
    Transported shall be at high festivals
    Before the kings and queens of France.

    No longer on Saint Denis will we cry,
    But Joan la Pucelle shall be France's saint.

    Come in, and let us banquet royally
    After this golden day of victory.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.
 SCENE 1.


Before Orleans

Enter a FRENCH SERGEANT and two SENTINELS

  SERGEANT.
 Sirs, take your places and be vigilant.

    If any noise or soldier you perceive
    Near to the walls, by some apparent sign
    Let us have knowledge at the court of guard.

  FIRST SENTINEL.


             Enter TALBOT, BEDFORD, BURGUNDY, and forces,
          with scaling-ladders; their drums beating a dead
                              march

  TALBOT.
 Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy,
    By whose approach the regions of Artois,
    Wallon, and Picardy, are friends to us,  
    This happy night the Frenchmen are secure,
    Having all day carous'd and banqueted;
    Embrace we then this opportunity,
    As fitting best to quittance their deceit,
    Contriv'd by art and baleful sorcery.

  BEDFORD.

    But what's that Pucelle whom they term so pure?
  TALBOT.

  BEDFORD.
 A maid! and be so martial!
  BURGUNDY.
 Pray God she prove not masculine ere long,
    If underneath the standard of the French
    She carry armour as she hath begun.

  TALBOT.
 Ascend, brave Talbot; we will follow thee.

  TALBOT.
 Not all together; better far, I guess,  
    That we do make our entrance several ways;
    That if it chance the one of us do fail
    The other yet may rise against their force.
 And I to this.
 And here will Talbot mount or make his grave.

             [The English scale the walls and cry 'Saint George!
                                                     a Talbot!']
    SENTINEL.
 Arm! arm! The enemy doth make assault.
 How now, my lords? What, all unready so?
  BASTARD.

  REIGNIER.
 'Twas time, I trow, to wake and leave our beds,  
    Hearing alarums at our chamber doors.

  ALENCON.
 Of all exploits since first I follow'd arms
    Ne'er heard I of a warlike enterprise
    More venturous or desperate than this.

  BASTARD.

  REIGNIER.
 If not of hell, the heavens, sure, favour him
  ALENCON.
 Here cometh Charles; I marvel how he sped.


                    Enter CHARLES and LA PUCELLE

  BASTARD.
 Tut! holy Joan was his defensive guard.

  CHARLES.
 Is this thy cunning, thou deceitful dame?
    Didst thou at first, to flatter us withal,
    Make us partakers of a little gain
    That now our loss might be ten times so much?
  PUCELLE.

  CHARLES.
 Duke of Alencon, this was your default
    That, being captain of the watch to-night,
    Did look no better to that weighty charge.

  ALENCON.
 And so was mine, my lord.

  CHARLES.
 And, for myself, most part of all this night,
    Within her quarter and mine own precinct
    I was employ'd in passing to and fro
    About relieving of the sentinels.

    Then how or which way should they first break in?
  PUCELLE.

    And now there rests no other shift but this
    To gather our soldiers, scatter'd and dispers'd,
    And lay new platforms to endamage them.
  

               Alarum.
 Enter an ENGLISH SOLDIER, crying
            'A Talbot! A Talbot!' They fly, leaving their
                           clothes behind

  SOLDIER.

    The cry of Talbot serves me for a sword;
    For I have loaden me with many spoils,
    Using no other weapon but his name.
                     Exit




                             SCENE 2.
 Within the town

            Enter TALBOT, BEDFORD, BURGUNDY, a CAPTAIN,
                           and others

  BEDFORD.
 The day begins to break, and night is fled
    Whose pitchy mantle over-veil'd the earth.

    Here sound retreat and cease our hot pursuit.

                                               [Retreat sounded]
  TALBOT.
 Bring forth the body of old Salisbury
    And here advance it in the market-place,
    The middle centre of this cursed town.

    Now have I paid my vow unto his soul;
    For every drop of blood was drawn from him
    There hath at least five Frenchmen died to-night.

    And that hereafter ages may behold
    What ruin happened in revenge of him,
    Within their chiefest temple I'll erect
    A tomb, wherein his corpse shall be interr'd;
    Upon the which, that every one may read,  
    Shall be engrav'd the sack of Orleans,
    The treacherous manner of his mournful death,
    And what a terror he had been to France.

    But, lords, in all our bloody massacre,
    I muse we met not with the Dauphin's grace,
    His new-come champion, virtuous Joan of Arc,
    Nor any of his false confederates.

  BEDFORD.
 Myself, as far as I could well discern
    For smoke and dusky vapours of the night,
    Am sure I scar'd the Dauphin and his trull,
    When arm in arm they both came swiftly running,
    Like to a pair of loving turtle-doves
    That could not live asunder day or night.

    After that things are set in order here,
    We'll follow them with all the power we have.
 All hail, my lords! Which of this princely train
    Call ye the warlike Talbot, for his acts
    So much applauded through the realm of France?
  TALBOT.
 The virtuous lady, Countess of Auvergne,
    With modesty admiring thy renown,
    By me entreats, great lord, thou wouldst vouchsafe
    To visit her poor castle where she lies,
    That she may boast she hath beheld the man
    Whose glory fills the world with loud report.

  BURGUNDY.

    You may not, my lord, despise her gentle suit.

  TALBOT.

    Will not your honours bear me company?
  BEDFORD.
 No, truly; 'tis more than manners will;
    And I have heard it said unbidden guests
    Are often welcomest when they are gone.

  TALBOT.
 Well then, alone, since there's no remedy,
    I mean to prove this lady's courtesy.
 I do, my lord, and mean accordingly.


                      AUVERGNE.
 The Castle

               Enter the COUNTESS and her PORTER

  COUNTESS.
 Porter, remember what I gave in charge;
    And when you have done so, bring the keys to me.
 Madam, I will.

  COUNTESS.
 The plot is laid; if all things fall out right,
    I shall as famous be by this exploit.

    As Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus' death.

    Great is the rumour of this dreadful knight,
    And his achievements of no less account.


  MESSENGER.
 Madam, according as your ladyship desir'd,
    By message crav'd, so is Lord Talbot come.

  COUNTESS.
 And he is welcome.
 Madam, it is.
 Is this the scourge of France?
    Is this Talbot, so much fear'd abroad
    That with his name the mothers still their babes?
    I see report is fabulous and false.

    I thought I should have seen some Hercules,
    A second Hector, for his grim aspect
    And large proportion of his strong-knit limbs.
 Madam, I have been bold to trouble you;
    But since your ladyship is not at leisure,
    I'll sort some other time to visit you.
              [Going]
  COUNTESS.
 What means he now? Go ask him whither he
    goes.
 If thou be he, then art thou prisoner.

  TALBOT.
 Prisoner! To whom?
  COUNTESS.
 To me, blood-thirsty lord
    And for that cause I train'd thee to my house.

    Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me,
    For in my gallery thy picture hangs;
    But now the substance shall endure the like
    And I will chain these legs and arms of thine
    That hast by tyranny these many years
    Wasted our country, slain our citizens,
    And sent our sons and husbands captivate.

  TALBOT.
 Ha, ha, ha!
  COUNTESS.

  TALBOT.
 I laugh to see your ladyship so fond
    To think that you have aught but Talbot's shadow
    Whereon to practise your severity.
 Why, art not thou the man?
  TALBOT.
 I am indeed.
 Then have I substance too.

  TALBOT.
 No, no, I am but shadow of myself.

    You are deceiv'd, my substance is not here;
    For what you see is but the smallest part
    And least proportion of humanity.

    I tell you, madam, were the whole frame here,
    It is of such a spacious lofty pitch
    Your roof were not sufficient to contain 't.
 This is a riddling merchant for the nonce;
    He will be here, and yet he is not here.

    How can these contrarieties agree?
  TALBOT.
 That will I show you presently.


                   Winds his horn; drums strike up;
                  a peal of ordnance.

  COUNTESS.
 Victorious Talbot! pardon my abuse.

    I find thou art no less than fame hath bruited,
    And more than may be gathered by thy shape.

    Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath,
    For I am sorry that with reverence
    I did not entertain thee as thou art.

  TALBOT.

    Nor other satisfaction do I crave
    But only, with your patience, that we may
    Taste of your wine and see what cates you have,
    For soldiers' stomachs always serve them well.

  COUNTESS.
 With all my heart, and think me honoured
    To feast so great a warrior in my house.
              Exeunt  




                            SCENE 4.
 The Temple garden

         Enter the EARLS OF SOMERSET, SUFFOLK, and WARWICK;
           RICHARD PLANTAGENET, VERNON, and another LAWYER

  PLANTAGENET.
 Then say at once if I maintain'd the truth;
    Or else was wrangling Somerset in th' error?
  SUFFOLK.

  SOMERSET.
 Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then, between us.
 Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch;
    Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth;
    Between two blades, which bears the better temper;
    Between two horses, which doth bear him best;  
    Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye
    I have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgment;
    But in these nice sharp quillets of the law,
    Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.

  PLANTAGENET.

  SOMERSET.
 And on my side it is so well apparell'd,
    So clear, so shining, and so evident,
    That it will glimmer through a blind man's eye.

  PLANTAGENET.

    Let him that is a true-born gentleman
    And stands upon the honour of his birth,
    If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,
    From off this brier pluck a white rose with me.

  SOMERSET.
 Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer,
    But dare maintain the party of the truth,
    Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.

  WARWICK.
 I love no colours; and, without all colour  
    Of base insinuating flattery,
    I pluck this white rose with Plantagenet.

  SUFFOLK.
 Good Master Vernon, it is well objected;
    If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.
 And I.

  VERNON.
 Then, for the truth and plainness of the case,
    I pluck this pale and maiden blossom here,
    Giving my verdict on the white rose side.
 Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,
    Lest, bleeding, you do paint the white rose red,
    And fall on my side so, against your will.

  VERNON.
  
  SOMERSET.
 Well, well, come on; who else?
  LAWYER.
  [To Somerset]  Unless my study and my books be
    false,
    The argument you held was wrong in you;
    In sign whereof I pluck a white rose too.

  PLANTAGENET.
 Here in my scabbard, meditating that
    Shall dye your white rose in a bloody red.

  PLANTAGENET.

  PLANTAGENET.
 Hath not thy rose a canker, Somerset?
  SOMERSET.
  
  SOMERSET.

  PLANTAGENET.

  SUFFOLK.

  SUFFOLK.
 Away, away, good William de la Pole!
    We grace the yeoman by conversing with him.

  WARWICK.
 Now, by God's will, thou wrong'st him, Somerset;
    His grandfather was Lionel Duke of Clarence,
    Third son to the third Edward, King of England.

    Spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root?
  PLANTAGENET.
 He bears him on the place's privilege,
    Or durst not for his craven heart say thus.

    Was not thy father, Richard Earl of Cambridge,  
    For treason executed in our late king's days?
    And by his treason stand'st not thou attainted,
    Corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry?
    His trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood;
    And till thou be restor'd thou art a yeoman.

  PLANTAGENET.

    For your partaker Pole, and you yourself,
    I'll note you in my book of memory
    To scourge you for this apprehension.

    Look to it well, and say you are well warn'd.

  PLANTAGENET.
 And, by my soul, this pale and angry rose,
    As cognizance of my blood-drinking hate,
    Will I for ever, and my faction, wear,
    Until it wither with me to my grave,  
    Or flourish to the height of my degree.
                 Exit
  SOMERSET.
 Farewell, ambitious
    Richard.
                                                Exit
  PLANTAGENET.

  VERNON.

  LAWYER.
 And so will I.
 Thanks, gentle sir.

    Even like a man new haled from the rack,
    So fare my limbs with long imprisonment;
    And these grey locks, the pursuivants of death,
    Nestor-like aged in an age of care,
    Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer.

    Yet are these feet, whose strengthless stay is numb,
    Unable to support this lump of clay,
    Swift-winged with desire to get a grave,
    As witting I no other comfort have.
 Richard Plantagenet, my lord, will come.

    We sent unto the Temple, unto his chamber;
    And answer was return'd that he will come.

    Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign,
    Before whose glory I was great in arms,
    This loathsome sequestration have I had;
    And even since then hath Richard been obscur'd,
    Depriv'd of honour and inheritance.

    I would his troubles likewise were expir'd,
    That so he might recover what was lost.
 My lord, your loving nephew now is come.
  
  MORTIMER.
 Ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly us'd,
    Your nephew, late despised Richard, comes.

  MORTIMER.
 Direct mine arms I may embrace his neck
    And in his bosom spend my latter gasp.

    O, tell me when my lips do touch his cheeks,
    That I may kindly give one fainting kiss.
 First, lean thine aged back against mine arm;
    And, in that ease, I'll tell thee my disease.

  MORTIMER.
 That cause, fair nephew, that imprison'd me
    And hath detain'd me all my flow'ring youth
    Within a loathsome dungeon, there to pine,
    Was cursed instrument of his decease.

  MORTIMER.
 I will, if that my fading breath permit
    And death approach not ere my tale be done.

    Henry the Fourth, grandfather to this king,
    Depos'd his nephew Richard, Edward's son,
    The first-begotten and the lawful heir
    Of Edward king, the third of that descent;
    During whose reign the Percies of the north,
    Finding his usurpation most unjust,
    Endeavour'd my advancement to the throne.

    But mark: as in this haughty great attempt
    They laboured to plant the rightful heir,
    I lost my liberty, and they their lives.
 Thus the Mortimers,
    In whom the title rested, were suppress'd.

  PLANTAGENET.
 True; and thou seest that I no issue have,
    And that my fainting words do warrant death.

  PLANTAGENET.

    But yet methinks my father's execution
    Was nothing less than bloody tyranny.

  PLANTAGENET.
 O uncle, would some part of my young years
    Might but redeem the passage of your age!
  MORTIMER.
 Thou dost then wrong me, as that slaughterer
    doth
    Which giveth many wounds when one will kill.

    Mourn not, except thou sorrow for my good;
    Only give order for my funeral.
  
    And so, farewell; and fair be all thy hopes,
    And prosperous be thy life in peace and war!          [Dies]
  PLANTAGENET.
 And peace, no war, befall thy parting soul!
    In prison hast thou spent a pilgrimage,
    And like a hermit overpass'd thy days.

    Well, I will lock his counsel in my breast;
    And what I do imagine, let that rest.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
 SCENE 1.


London.
 The Parliament House

Flourish.

GLOUCESTER offers to put up a bill; WINCHESTER snatches it, and tears it

  WINCHESTER.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Presumptuous priest, this place commands my
    patience,
    Or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonour'd me.

    Think not, although in writing I preferr'd
    The manner of thy vile outrageous crimes,  
    That therefore I have forg'd, or am not able
    Verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen.

    No, prelate; such is thy audacious wickedness,
    Thy lewd, pestiferous, and dissentious pranks,
    As very infants prattle of thy pride.

  WINCHESTER.
 Gloucester, I do defy thee.
 Lords, vouchsafe
    To give me hearing what I shall reply.

    But he shall know I am as good
  GLOUCESTER.
 As good!
    Thou bastard of my grandfather!
  WINCHESTER.
 Ay, lordly sir; for what are you, I pray,
    But one imperious in another's throne?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Am I not Protector, saucy priest?
  WINCHESTER.
 And am not I a prelate of the church?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Yes, as an outlaw in a castle keeps,
    And useth it to patronage his theft.

  WINCHESTER.
 Unreverent Gloucester!
  GLOUCESTER.
 Thou art reverend  
    Touching thy spiritual function, not thy life.

  WARWICK.
 Ay, see the bishop be not overborne.

  SOMERSET.
 Methinks my lord should be religious,
    And know the office that belongs to such.
 Methinks his lordship should be humbler;
    It fitteth not a prelate so to plead.

  WARWICK.
 State holy or unhallow'd, what of that?
    Is not his Grace Protector to the King?
  PLANTAGENET.
  [Aside]  Plantagenet, I see, must hold his
    tongue,
    Lest it be said 'Speak, sirrah, when you should;
    Must your bold verdict enter talk with lords?'
    Else would I have a fling at Winchester.
 Uncles of Gloucester and of Winchester,
    The special watchmen of our English weal,
    I would prevail, if prayers might prevail  
    To join your hearts in love and amity.

    O, what a scandal is it to our crown
    That two such noble peers as ye should jar!
    Believe me, lords, my tender years can tell
    Civil dissension is a viperous worm
    That gnaws the bowels of the commonwealth.

                              [A noise again: 'Stones! Stones!']

                Enter the MAYOR OF LONDON, attended

  MAYOR.

    Our windows are broke down in every street,
    And we for fear compell'd to shut our shops.

    Pray, uncle Gloucester, mitigate this strife.
 Nay, if we be forbidden stones, we'll
    fall to it with our teeth.

  SECOND SERVING-MAN.
 Do what ye dare, we are as resolute.

                                                [Skirmish again]
  GLOUCESTER.
 You of my household, leave this peevish broil,
    And set this unaccustom'd fight aside.

  THIRD SERVING-MAN.

  FIRST SERVING-MAN.
 Stay, stay, I say!
    And if you love me, as you say you do,
    Let me persuade you to forbear awhile.

  KING HENRY.
 O, how this discord doth afflict my soul!
    Can you, my Lord of Winchester, behold
    My sighs and tears and will not once relent?
    Who should be pitiful, if you be not?
    Or who should study to prefer a peace,
    If holy churchmen take delight in broils?
  WARWICK.
 Yield, my Lord Protector; yield, Winchester;
    Except you mean with obstinate repulse
    To slay your sovereign and destroy the realm.

  WINCHESTER.
 He shall submit, or I will never yield.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Compassion on the King commands me stoop,
    Or I would see his heart out ere the priest
    Should ever get that privilege of me.

  WARWICK.
 Behold, my Lord of Winchester, the Duke
    Hath banish'd moody discontented fury,
    As by his smoothed brows it doth appear;
    Why look you still so stem and tragical?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Here, Winchester, I offer thee my hand.

  KING HENRY.
 Fie, uncle Beaufort! I have heard you preach
    That malice was a great and grievous sin;
    And will not you maintain the thing you teach,
    But prove a chief offender in the same?
  WARWICK.
 Sweet King! The Bishop hath a kindly gird.
 Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee;  
    Love for thy love and hand for hand I give.

  GLOUCESTER  [Aside]  Ay, but, I fear me, with a hollow
    heart.

    See here, my friends and loving countrymen:
    This token serveth for a flag of truce
    Betwixt ourselves and all our followers.
 O loving uncle, kind Duke of Gloucester,
    How joyful am I made by this contract!
    Away, my masters! trouble us no more;
    But join in friendship, as your lords have done.

  FIRST SERVING-MAN.
 Content: I'll to the surgeon's.

  SECOND SERVING-MAN.
 And so will I.
                         Exeunt servants, MAYOR, &C.
 Accept this scroll, most gracious sovereign;
    Which in the right of Richard Plantagenet
    We do exhibit to your Majesty.

  GLOUCESTER.

  KING HENRY.
 And those occasions, uncle, were of force;
    Therefore, my loving lords, our pleasure is
    That Richard be restored to his blood.

  WARWICK.
 As will the rest, so willeth Winchester.

  PLANTAGENET.
 Thy humble servant vows obedience
    And humble service till the point of death.

  KING HENRY.
 Stoop then and set your knee against my foot;
    And in reguerdon of that duty done
    I girt thee with the valiant sword of York.
 Now will it best avail your Majesty
    To cross the seas and to be crown'd in France:
    The presence of a king engenders love
    Amongst his subjects and his loyal friends,
    As it disanimates his enemies.
 When Gloucester says the word, King Henry
    goes;
    For friendly counsel cuts off many foes.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Your ships already are in readiness.

                         Sennet.
 Flourish.
 Exeunt all but EXETER
  EXETER.
 Ay, we may march in England or in France,
    Not seeing what is likely to ensue.
  
    This late dissension grown betwixt the peers
    Burns under feigned ashes of forg'd love
    And will at last break out into a flame;
    As fest'red members rot but by degree
    Till bones and flesh and sinews fall away,
    So will this base and envious discord breed.
              Exit




                             SCENE 2.
 Before Rouen

       Enter LA PUCELLE disguis'd, with four soldiers dressed
            like countrymen, with sacks upon their backs

  PUCELLE.

    Take heed, be wary how you place your words;
    Talk like the vulgar sort of market-men
    That come to gather money for their corn.
                              [Knocks]
  WATCH.
  [Within]  Qui est la?
  PUCELLE.
 Enter, go in; the market-bell is rung.


                               [LA PUCELLE, &c.
 Saint Denis bless this happy stratagem!
    And once again we'll sleep secure in Rouen.

  BASTARD.
 By thrusting out a torch from yonder tower;
    Which once discern'd shows that her meaning is
    No way to that, for weakness, which she ent'red.
 Behold, this is the happy wedding torch
    That joineth Rouen unto her countrymen,
    But burning fatal to the Talbotites.
 See, noble Charles, the beacon of our friend;
    The burning torch in yonder turret stands.
 Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends;
    Enter, and cry 'The Dauphin!' presently,
    And then do execution on the watch.
 Alarum.
 Enter TALBOT in an excursion

  TALBOT.
 France, thou shalt rue this treason with thy tears,
    If Talbot but survive thy treachery.
             Exit

        An alarum; excursions.
 BEDFORD brought in sick in  
          a chair.
 Enter TALBOT and BURGUNDY without;
         within, LA PUCELLE, CHARLES, BASTARD, ALENCON,
                 and REIGNIER, on the walls

  PUCELLE.
 Good morrow, gallants! Want ye corn for bread?
    I think the Duke of Burgundy will fast
    Before he'll buy again at such a rate.

    'Twas full of darnel-do you like the taste?
  BURGUNDY.
 Scoff on, vile fiend and shameless courtezan.

    I trust ere long to choke thee with thine own,
    And make thee curse the harvest of that corn.

  BEDFORD.
 O, let no words, but deeds, revenge this treason!
  PUCELLE.
 Foul fiend of France and hag of all despite,
    Encompass'd with thy lustful paramours,
    Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant age
    And twit with cowardice a man half dead?  
    Damsel, I'll have a bout with you again,
    Or else let Talbot perish with this shame.

  PUCELLE.
 Are ye so hot, sir? Yet, Pucelle, hold thy peace;
    If Talbot do but thunder, rain will follow.
 Dare ye come forth and meet us in the field?
  PUCELLE.
 Belike your lordship takes us then for fools,
    To try if that our own be ours or no.
 I speak not to that railing Hecate,
    But unto thee, Alencon, and the rest.
 Signior, no.
 Signior, hang! Base muleteers of France!
    Like peasant foot-boys do they keep the walls,
    And dare not take up arms like gentlemen.
 Away, captains! Let's get us from the walls;
    For Talbot means no goodness by his looks.

    God b'uy, my lord; we came but to tell you
    That we are here.
 And there will we be too, ere it be long,
    Or else reproach be Talbot's greatest fame!
    Vow, Burgundy, by honour of thy house,
    Prick'd on by public wrongs sustain'd in France,
    Either to get the town again or die;
    And I, as sure as English Henry lives
    And as his father here was conqueror,
    As sure as in this late betrayed town
    Great Coeur-de-lion's heart was buried
    So sure I swear to get the town or die.

  BURGUNDY.
 My vows are equal partners with thy vows.
 But ere we go, regard this dying prince,
    The valiant Duke of Bedford.
 Come, my lord,
    We will bestow you in some better place,
    Fitter for sickness and for crazy age.
 Lord Talbot, do not so dishonour me;
    Here will I sit before the walls of Rouen,
    And will be partner of your weal or woe.

  BURGUNDY.

    Methinks I should revive the soldiers' hearts,
    Because I ever found them as myself.
 Undaunted spirit in a dying breast!
    Then be it so.

          Exeunt against the town all but BEDFORD and attendants

           An alarum; excursions.
 Enter SIR JOHN FASTOLFE,
                           and a CAPTAIN

  CAPTAIN.
 Whither away, Sir John Fastolfe, in such haste?
  FASTOLFE.

  CAPTAIN.
 What! Will you and leave Lord Talbot?
  FASTOLFE.
          Exit  
  CAPTAIN.
 Cowardly knight! ill fortune follow thee!
                                              Exit into the town

         Retreat; excursions.
 LA PUCELLE, ALENCON,
                      and CHARLES fly

  BEDFORD.

            [BEDFORD dies and is carried in by two in his chair]

          An alarum.
 Re-enter TALBOT, BURGUNDY, and the rest

  TALBOT.
 Lost and recovered in a day again!
    This is a double honour, Burgundy.
 Warlike and martial Talbot, Burgundy
    Enshrines thee in his heart, and there erects  
    Thy noble deeds as valour's monuments.
 Thanks, gentle Duke.

    Now where's the Bastard's braves, and Charles his gleeks?
    What, all amort? Rouen hangs her head for grief
    That such a valiant company are fled.

    Now will we take some order in the town,
    Placing therein some expert officers;
    And then depart to Paris to the King,
    For there young Henry with his nobles lie.

  BURGUNDY.

  TALBOT.
                   Exeunt




                             SCENE 3.


                      The plains near Rouen

        Enter CHARLES, the BASTARD, ALENCON, LA PUCELLE,
                          and forces

  PUCELLE.
 Dismay not, Princes, at this accident,
    Nor grieve that Rouen is so recovered.

    Care is no cure, but rather corrosive,
    For things that are not to be remedied.
 We have guided by thee hitherto,
    And of thy cunning had no diffidence;
    One sudden foil shall never breed distrust
  BASTARD.

    ALENCON.
 Then thus it must be; this doth Joan devise:
    By fair persuasions, mix'd with sug'red words,
    We will entice the Duke of Burgundy
    To leave the Talbot and to follow us.
 Ay, marry, sweeting, if we could do that,
    France were no place for Henry's warriors;
    Nor should that nation boast it so with us,
    But be extirped from our provinces.
 For ever should they be expuls'd from France,
    And not have tide of an earldom here.

  PUCELLE.

                                          [Drum sounds afar off]
    Hark! by the sound of drum you may perceive
    Their powers are marching unto Paris-ward.


          Here sound an English march.


            French march.
 Enter the DUKE OF BURGUNDY and
                         his forces

    Now in the rearward comes the Duke and his.

    Summon a parley; we will talk with him.
 A parley with the Duke of Burgundy!
  BURGUNDY.

  BURGUNDY.

  CHARLES.
 Speak, Pucelle, and enchant him with thy words.
 Speak on; but be not over-tedious.

  PUCELLE.

    O, turn thy edged sword another way;
    Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help!
    One drop of blood drawn from thy country's bosom
    Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore.

    Return thee therefore with a flood of tears,
    And wash away thy country's stained spots.

  PUCELLE.
 Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee,
    Doubting thy birth and lawful progeny.

    Who join'st thou with but with a lordly nation
    That will not trust thee but for profit's sake?
    When Talbot hath set footing once in France,  
    And fashion'd thee that instrument of ill,
    Who then but English Henry will be lord,
    And thou be thrust out like a fugitive?
    Call we to mind-and mark but this for proof:
    Was not the Duke of Orleans thy foe?
    And was he not in England prisoner?
    But when they heard he was thine enemy
    They set him free without his ransom paid,
    In spite of Burgundy and all his friends.

  BURGUNDY.

    My forces and my power of men are yours;
    So, farewell, Talbot; I'll no longer trust thee.
  
  PUCELLE.
 Done like a Frenchman-  [Aside]  turn and turn
    again.

  CHARLES.
 Welcome, brave Duke! Thy friendship makes us
    fresh.

  BASTARD.
 Pucelle hath bravely play'd her part in this,
    And doth deserve a coronet of gold.


                     Paris.
 The palace

         Enter the KING, GLOUCESTER, WINCHESTER, YORK,
             SUFFOLK, SOMERSET, WARWICK, EXETER,
           VERNON, BASSET, and others.
 To them, with
                     his soldiers, TALBOT

  TALBOT.
           [Kneels]
  KING HENRY.
 Is this the Lord Talbot, uncle Gloucester,  
    That hath so long been resident in France?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Yes, if it please your Majesty, my liege.
 Welcome, brave captain and victorious lord!
    When I was young, as yet I am not old,
    I do remember how my father said
    A stouter champion never handled sword.

    Therefore stand up; and for these good deserts
    We here create you Earl of Shrewsbury;
    And in our coronation take your place.
 Exeunt all but VERNON and BASSET
  VERNON.
 Sirrah, thy lord I honour as he is.

  BASSET.
 Hark ye: not so.

  VERNON.
 Well, miscreant, I'll be there as soon as you;
    And, after, meet you sooner than you would.
           Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE 1.


Park.
 Lord Bishop, set the crown upon his head.

  WINCHESTER.
 God save King Henry, of that name the Sixth!
  GLOUCESTER.
 Now, Governor of Paris, take your oath
                                               [GOVERNOR kneels]
    That you elect no other king but him,
    Esteem none friends but such as are his friends,
    And none your foes but such as shall pretend
    Malicious practices against his state.
 My gracious sovereign, as I rode from Calais,  
    To haste unto your coronation,
    A letter was deliver'd to my hands,
    Writ to your Grace from th' Duke of Burgundy.

  TALBOT.
 Shame to the Duke of Burgundy and thee!
    I vow'd, base knight, when I did meet thee next
    To tear the Garter from thy craven's leg,  [Plucking it off]
    Which I have done, because unworthily
    Thou wast installed in that high degree.

    Pardon me, princely Henry, and the rest:
    This dastard, at the battle of Patay,
    When but in all I was six thousand strong,
    And that the French were almost ten to one,
    Before we met or that a stroke was given,
    Like to a trusty squire did run away;
    In which assault we lost twelve hundred men;
    Myself and divers gentlemen beside
    Were there surpris'd and taken prisoners.

    Then judge, great lords, if I have done amiss,
    Or whether that such cowards ought to wear
    This ornament of knighthood-yea or no.
 To say the truth, this fact was infamous
    And ill beseeming any common man,
    Much more a knight, a captain, and a leader.

    He then that is not furnish'd in this sort
    Doth but usurp the sacred name of knight,
    Profaning this most honourable order,
    And should, if I were worthy to be judge,
    Be quite degraded, like a hedge-born swain
    That doth presume to boast of gentle blood.

  KING HENRY.
 Stain to thy countrymen, thou hear'st thy
    doom.

    Be packing, therefore, thou that wast a knight;
    Henceforth we banish thee on pain of death.

                                                   Exit FASTOLFE  
    And now, my Lord Protector, view the letter
    Sent from our uncle Duke of Burgundy.

  GLOUCESTER.
 What! Doth my uncle Burgundy revolt?
  GLOUCESTER.

  KING HENRY.

  KING HENRY.

    How say you, my lord, are you not content?
  TALBOT.

  KING HENRY.
 I go, my lord, in heart desiring still
    You may behold confusion of your foes.
                  Exit

                       Enter VERNON and BASSET

  VERNON.

  BASSET.
 And me, my lord, grant me the combat too.

  YORK.
 This is my servant: hear him, noble Prince.

  SOMERSET.
  
  KING HENRY.
 Be patient, lords, and give them leave to speak.

    Say, gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim,
    And wherefore crave you combat, or with whom?
  VERNON.
 With him, my lord; for he hath done me wrong.
 And I with him; for he hath done me wrong.
 What is that wrong whereof you both
    complain? First let me know, and then I'll answer you.

  BASSET.

  VERNON.
 And that is my petition, noble lord;  
    For though he seem with forged quaint conceit
    To set a gloss upon his bold intent,
    Yet know, my lord, I was provok'd by him,
    And he first took exceptions at this badge,
    Pronouncing that the paleness of this flower
    Bewray'd the faintness of my master's heart.

  YORK.
 Will not this malice, Somerset, be left?
  SOMERSET.

  KING HENRY.

  YORK.
 Let this dissension first be tried by fight,
    And then your Highness shall command a peace.
 The quarrel toucheth none but us alone;
    Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.

  VERNON.
 Nay, let it rest where it began at first.
  
  BASSET.
 Confirm it so, mine honourable lord.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Confirm it so? Confounded be your strife;
    And perish ye, with your audacious prate!
    Presumptuous vassals, are you not asham'd
    With this immodest clamorous outrage
    To trouble and disturb the King and us?
    And you, my lords- methinks you do not well
    To bear with their perverse objections,
    Much less to take occasion from their mouths
    To raise a mutiny betwixt yourselves.

    Let me persuade you take a better course.

  EXETER.
 Good my lords, be friends.

  KING HENRY.
 Come hither, you that would be combatants:
    Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favour,
    Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause.

    But your discretions better can persuade
    Than I am able to instruct or teach;
    And, therefore, as we hither came in peace,  
    So let us still continue peace and love.

    Cousin of York, we institute your Grace
    To be our Regent in these parts of France.

    And, good my Lord of Somerset, unite
    Your troops of horsemen with his bands of foot;
    And like true subjects, sons of your progenitors,
    Go cheerfully together and digest
    Your angry choler on your enemies.

                         Flourish.

  WARWICK.
 Tush, that was but his fancy; blame him not;  
    I dare presume, sweet prince, he thought no harm.

  YORK.

                                           Exeunt all but EXETER
  EXETER.


                        France.
 Enter, aloft, the
                 GENERAL OF THE FRENCH, and others

    English John Talbot, Captains, calls you forth,
    Servant in arms to Harry King of England;
    And thus he would open your city gates,
    Be humble to us, call my sovereignvours
    And do him homage as obedient subjects,
    And I'll withdraw me and my bloody power;
    But if you frown upon this proffer'd peace,
    You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
    Lean famine, quartering steel, and climbing fire;
    Who in a moment even with the earth  
    Shall lay your stately and air braving towers,
    If you forsake the offer of their love.

  GENERAL OF THE FRENCH.
 He fables not; I hear the enemy.

    O, negligent and heedless discipline!
    How are we park'd and bounded in a pale
    A little herd of England's timorous deer,
    Maz'd with a yelping kennel of French curs!
    If we be English deer, be then in blood;
    Not rascal-like to fall down with a pinch,
    But rather, moody-mad and desperate stags,  
    Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steel
    And make the cowards stand aloof at bay.

    God and Saint George, Talbot and England's right,
    Prosper our colours in this dangerous fight!          Exeunt




                          SCENE 3.


                      Plains in Gascony

        Enter YORK, with trumpet and many soldiers.
 A
                   MESSENGER meets him

  YORK.
 They are return'd, my lord, and give it out
    That he is march'd to Bordeaux with his power
    To fight with Talbot; as he march'd along,
    By your espials were discovered
    Two mightier troops than that the Dauphin led,
    Which join'd with him and made their march for
    Bordeaux.

  YORK.
 A plague upon that villain Somerset
    That thus delays my promised supply
    Of horsemen that were levied for this siege!
    Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid,
    And I am louted by a traitor villain
    And cannot help the noble chevalier.
 Thou princely leader of our English strength,
    Never so needful on the earth of France,
    Spur to the rescue of the noble Talbot,
    Who now is girdled with a waist of iron
    And hemm'd about with grim destruction.
 O God, that Somerset, who in proud heart
    Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbot's place!
    So should we save a valiant gentleman
    By forfeiting a traitor and a coward.

    Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep
    That thus we die while remiss traitors sleep.
 O, send some succour to the distress'd lord!
  YORK.
 Then God take mercy on brave Talbot's soul,
    And on his son, young John, who two hours since
    I met in travel toward his warlike father.

    This seven years did not Talbot see his son;
    And now they meet where both their lives are done.

  YORK.
 Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have
    To bid his young son welcome to his grave?
    Away! vexation almost stops my breath,
    That sund'red friends greet in the hour of death.

    Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours, are won away
    Long all of Somerset and his delay.
         Exit with forces
  LUCY.
 Whiles they each other cross,
    Lives, honours, lands, and all, hurry to loss.
          Exit




                             SCENE 4.
 It is too late; I cannot send them now.
 The over daring Talbot
    Hath sullied all his gloss of former honour
    By this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure.

    York set him on to fight and die in shame.

    That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.

  OFFICER.
 Here is Sir William Lucy, who with me
    Set from our o'er-match'd forces forth for aid.
 How now, Sir William! Whither were you sent?  
  LUCY.
 Whither, my lord! From bought and sold Lord
    Talbot,
    Who, ring'd about with bold adversity,
    Cries out for noble York and Somerset
    To beat assailing death from his weak legions;
    And whiles the honourable captain there
    Drops bloody sweat from his war-wearied limbs
    And, in advantage ling'ring, looks for rescue,
    You, his false hopes, the trust of England's honour,
    Keep off aloof with worthless emulation.

    Let not your private discord keep away
    The levied succours that should lend him aid,
    While he, renowned noble gentleman,
    Yield up his life unto a world of odds.
 York set him on; York should have sent him aid.

  LUCY.
 The fraud of England, not the force of France,
    Hath now entrapp'd the noble minded Talbot.

    Never to England shall he bear his life,
    But dies betray'd to fortune by your strife.

  SOMERSET.
 Come, go; I will dispatch the horsemen straight;
    Within six hours they will be at his aid.

  LUCY.
 If he be dead, brave Talbot, then, adieu!
  LUCY.
 His fame lives in the world, his shame in you.


                   The English camp near Bordeaux

                    Enter TALBOT and JOHN his son

  TALBOT.

    But, O malignant and ill-boding stars!
    Now thou art come unto a feast of death,
    A terrible and unavoided danger;
    Therefore, dear boy, mount on my swiftest horse,
    And I'll direct thee how thou shalt escape
    By sudden flight.
 Come, dally not, be gone.

  JOHN.
 Is my name Talbot, and am I your son?
    And shall I fly? O, if you love my mother,
    Dishonour not her honourable name,
    To make a bastard and a slave of me!
    The world will say he is not Talbot's blood  
    That basely fled when noble Talbot stood.

  TALBOT.
 He that flies so will ne'er return again.

  TALBOT.
 If we both stay, we both are sure to die.

    Your loss is great, so your regard should be;
    My worth unknown, no loss is known in me;
    Upon my death the French can little boast;
    In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.

    Flight cannot stain the honour you have won;
    But mine it will, that no exploit have done;
    You fled for vantage, every one will swear;
    But if I bow, they'll say it was for fear.

    Here, on my knee, I beg mortality,
    Rather than life preserv'd with infamy.
 Shall all thy mother's hopes lie in one tomb?
  JOHN.

  TALBOT.
 To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.
 Part of thy father may be sav'd in thee.

  JOHN.
 No part of him but will be shame in me.

  TALBOT.
 Thou never hadst renown, nor canst not lose it.
 Yes, your renowned name; shall flight abuse it?
  TALBOT.
 Thy father's charge shall clear thee from that stain.
 You cannot witness for me, being slain.

  TALBOT.
 And leave my followers here to fight and die?
    My age was never tainted with such shame.

  JOHN.

    Stay, go, do what you will, the like do I;
    For live I will not if my father die.
 Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son,
    Born to eclipse thy life this afternoon.
 Saint George and victory! Fight, soldiers, fight.

    Where is John Talbot? Pause and take thy breath;
    I gave thee life and rescu'd thee from death.

  JOHN.
 O, twice my father, twice am I thy son!
    The life thou gav'st me first was lost and done
    Till with thy warlike sword, despite of fate,
    To my determin'd time thou gav'st new date.

  TALBOT.
 Then leaden age,
    Quicken'd with youthful spleen and warlike rage,
    Beat down Alencon, Orleans, Burgundy,  
    And from the pride of Gallia rescued thee.

    The ireful bastard Orleans, that drew blood
    From thee, my boy, and had the maidenhood
    Of thy first fight, I soon encountered
    And, interchanging blows, I quickly shed
    Some of his bastard blood; and in disgrace
    Bespoke him thus: 'Contaminated, base,
    And misbegotten blood I spill of thine,
    Mean and right poor, for that pure blood of mine
    Which thou didst force from Talbot, my brave boy.
'
    Here purposing the Bastard to destroy,
    Came in strong rescue.
 Speak, thy father's care;
    Art thou not weary, John? How dost thou fare?
    Wilt thou yet leave the battle, boy, and fly,
    Now thou art seal'd the son of chivalry?
    Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead:
    The help of one stands me in little stead.

    By me they nothing gain an if I stay:
    'Tis but the short'ning of my life one day.

    In thee thy mother dies, our household's name,
    My death's revenge, thy youth, and England's fame.

    All these and more we hazard by thy stay;
    All these are sav'd if thou wilt fly away.

  JOHN.
 The sword of Orleans hath not made me smart;
    These words of yours draw life-blood from my heart.
 Then follow thou thy desp'rate sire of Crete,  
    Thou Icarus; thy life to me is sweet.

    If thou wilt fight, fight by thy father's side;
    And, commendable prov'd, let's die in pride.

    O, where's young Talbot? Where is valiant John?
    Triumphant death, smear'd with captivity,
    Young Talbot's valour makes me smile at thee.
  

         Enter soldiers, bearing the body of JOHN TALBOT

  SERVANT.
 Thou antic Death, which laugh'st us here to scorn,
    Anon, from thy insulting tyranny,
    Coupled in bonds of perpetuity,
    Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky,
    In thy despite shall scape mortality.

    Poor boy! he smiles, methinks, as who should say,
    Had Death been French, then Death had died to-day.

    Come, come, and lay him in his father's arms.

    My spirit can no longer bear these harms.
        [Dies]
  
            Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, BURGUNDY, BASTARD,
                     LA PUCELLE, and forces

  CHARLES.

  BASTARD.
 How the young whelp of Talbot's, raging wood,
    Did flesh his puny sword in Frenchmen's blood!
  PUCELLE.
 Once I encount'red him, and thus I said:
    'Thou maiden youth, be vanquish'd by a maid.
'
    But with a proud majestical high scorn
    He answer'd thus: 'Young Talbot was not born
    To be the pillage of a giglot wench.
'
    So, rushing in the bowels of the French,
    He left me proudly, as unworthy fight.
 Doubtless he would have made a noble knight.

    See where he lies inhearsed in the arms
    Of the most bloody nurser of his harms!
  BASTARD.
 Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunder,
    Whose life was England's glory, Gallia's wonder.
 O, no; forbear! For that which we have fled  
    During the life, let us not wrong it dead.


            Enter SIR WILLIAM Lucy, attended; a FRENCH
                         HERALD preceding

  LUCY.
 On what submissive message art thou sent?
  LUCY.
 Submission, Dauphin! 'Tis a mere French word:
    We English warriors wot not what it means.

  CHARLES.

  LUCY.
 But where's the great Alcides of the field,
    Valiant Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury,
    Created for his rare success in arms
    Great Earl of Washford, Waterford, and Valence,
    Lord Talbot of Goodrig and Urchinfield,
    Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdun of Alton,  
    Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Furnival of Sheffield,
    The thrice victorious Lord of Falconbridge,
    Knight of the noble order of Saint George,
    Worthy Saint Michael, and the Golden Fleece,
    Great Marshal to Henry the Sixth
    Of all his wars within the realm of France?
  PUCELLE.

  LUCY.
 Is Talbot slain-the Frenchmen's only scourge,
    Your kingdom's terror and black Nemesis?
    O, were mine eye-bans into bullets turn'd,
    That I in rage might shoot them at your faces!
    O that I could but can these dead to life!
    It were enough to fright the realm of France.
 I think this upstart is old Talbot's ghost,
    He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit.

  CHARLES.
 Go, take their bodies hence.

  LUCY.
 I'll bear them hence; but from their ashes shall be
    rear'd
    A phoenix that shall make all France afeard.

  CHARLES.
 So we be rid of them, do with them what thou
    wilt.

    And now to Paris in this conquering vein!
    All will be ours, now bloody Talbot's slain.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.


London.
 Enter the KING, GLOUCESTER, and EXETER

  KING HENRY.
 Have you perus'd the letters from the Pope,
    The Emperor, and the Earl of Armagnac?
  GLOUCESTER.

  KING HENRY.
 How doth your Grace affect their motion?
  GLOUCESTER.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Beside, my lord, the sooner to effect
    And surer bind this knot of amity,  
    The Earl of Armagnac, near knit to Charles,
    A man of great authority in France,
    Proffers his only daughter to your Grace
    In marriage, with a large and sumptuous dowry.

  KING HENRY.
 Marriage, uncle! Alas, my years are young
    And fitter is my study and my books
    Than wanton dalliance with a paramour.

    Yet call th' ambassadors, and, as you please,
    So let them have their answers every one.


                   Enter in Cardinal's habit
        BEAUFORT, the PAPAL LEGATE, and two AMBASSADORS

  EXETER.
'
  KING HENRY.
 My Lords Ambassadors, your several suits
    Have been consider'd and debated on.

  GLOUCESTER.

  KING HENRY.
 Stay, my Lord Legate; you shall first receive
    The sum of money which I promised
    Should be delivered to his Holiness
    For clothing me in these grave ornaments.

  LEGATE.

    I'll either make thee stoop and bend thy knee,
    Or sack this country with a mutiny.


                       France.
 These news, my lords, may cheer our drooping
    spirits:
    'Tis said the stout Parisians do revolt
    And turn again unto the warlike French.

  ALENCON.
 Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France,
    And keep not back your powers in dalliance.

  PUCELLE.
 What tidings send our scouts? I prithee speak.
 The English army, that divided was  
    Into two parties, is now conjoin'd in one,
    And means to give you battle presently.

  CHARLES.
 I trust the ghost of Talbot is not there.

    Now he is gone, my lord, you need not fear.

  PUCELLE.

    Command the conquest, Charles, it shall be thine,
    Let Henry fret and all the world repine.
 The Regent conquers and the Frenchmen fly.

    Now help, ye charming spells and periapts;
    And ye choice spirits that admonish me
    And give me signs of future accidents;             [Thunder]
    You speedy helpers that are substitutes
    Under the lordly monarch of the north,
    Appear and aid me in this enterprise!

                          Enter FIENDS

    This speedy and quick appearance argues proof
    Of your accustom'd diligence to me.

    Now, ye familiar spirits that are cull'd
    Out of the powerful regions under earth,
    Help me this once, that France may get the field.

                                       [They walk and speak not]  
    O, hold me not with silence over-long!
    Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,
    I'll lop a member off and give it you
    In earnest of a further benefit,
    So you do condescend to help me now.

                                         [They hang their heads]
    No hope to have redress? My body shall
    Pay recompense, if you will grant my suit.
 Now the time is come
    That France must vail her lofty-plumed crest
    And let her head fall into England's lap.

    My ancient incantations are too weak,
    And hell too strong for me to buckle with.
 Enter French and English, fighting.

    Unchain your spirits now with spelling charms,
    And try if they can gain your liberty.
 Chang'd to a worser shape thou canst not be.

  YORK.
 O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man:
    No shape but his can please your dainty eye.

  PUCELLE.
 Fell banning hag; enchantress, hold thy tongue.

  PUCELLE.
  
                                                          Exeunt

          Alarum.
 Be what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner.

                                                  [Gazes on her]
    O fairest beauty, do not fear nor fly!
    For I will touch thee but with reverent hands;
    I kiss these fingers for eternal peace,
    And lay them gently on thy tender side.

    Who art thou? Say, that I may honour thee.

  MARGARET.
 Margaret my name, and daughter to a king,
    The King of Naples-whosoe'er thou art.

  SUFFOLK.
 An earl I am, and Suffolk am I call'd.

    So doth the swan her downy cygnets save,
    Keeping them prisoner underneath her wings.
     [She is going]  
    O, stay!  [Aside]  I have no power to let her pass;
    My hand would free her, but my heart says no.

    As plays the sun upon the glassy streams,
    Twinkling another counterfeited beam,
    So seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes.

    Fain would I woo her, yet I dare not speak.

  MARGARET.
 Why speak'st thou not? What ransom must I
    pay?  
  SUFFOLK.
  [Aside]  She's beautiful, and therefore to be woo'd;
    She is a woman, therefore to be won.

  MARGARET.
 Wilt thou accept of ransom-yea or no?
  SUFFOLK.
  [Aside]  Fond man, remember that thou hast a
    wife;
    Then how can Margaret be thy paramour?
  MARGARET.
 I were best leave him, for he will not hear.

  SUFFOLK.

  MARGARET.
 He talks at random; sure, the man is mad.

  SUFFOLK.
  [Aside]  And yet a dispensation may be had.

  MARGARET.

  SUFFOLK.

    But there remains a scruple in that too;
    For though her father be the King of Naples,
    Duke of Anjou and Maine, yet is he poor,  
    And our nobility will scorn the match.

  MARGARET.

    Madam, I have a secret to reveal.

  SUFFOLK.

  SUFFOLK.
 Sweet madam, give me hearing in a cause
  MARGARET.
  [Aside]  Tush! women have been captivate ere
    now.

  SUFFOLK.
 I cry you mercy, 'tis but quid for quo.

  SUFFOLK.
 Say, gentle Princess, would you not suppose
    Your bondage happy, to be made a queen?
  MARGARET.
 To be a queen in bondage is more vile
    Than is a slave in base servility;  
    For princes should be free.

  SUFFOLK.

  MARGARET.
 Why, what concerns his freedom unto me?
  SUFFOLK.
 What?
  SUFFOLK.
 His love.

  MARGARET.
 I am unworthy to be Henry's wife.

    How say you, madam? Are ye so content?
  MARGARET.
 An if my father please, I am content.
 Then call our captains and our colours forth!
    And, madam, at your father's castle walls
    We'll crave a parley to confer with him.

  
           Sound a parley.
 Enter REIGNIER on the walls

    See, Reignier, see, thy daughter prisoner!
  REIGNIER.
 To whom?
  SUFFOLK.
 To me.

  REIGNIER.

  SUFFOLK.
 Yes, there is remedy enough, my lord.

    Consent, and for thy honour give consent,
    Thy daughter shall be wedded to my king,
    Whom I with pain have woo'd and won thereto;
    And this her easy-held imprisonment
    Hath gain'd thy daughter princely liberty.

  REIGNIER.
 Fair Margaret knows
    That Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or feign.

  REIGNIER.
 Upon thy princely warrant I descend
    To give thee answer of thy just demand.

                                    Exit REIGNIER from the walls  
  SUFFOLK.
 And here I will expect thy coming.


                Trumpets sound.
 Enter REIGNIER below

  REIGNIER.
 Welcome, brave Earl, into our territories;
    Command in Anjou what your Honour pleases.
 Since thou dost deign to woo her little worth
    To be the princely bride of such a lord,
    Upon condition I may quietly
    Enjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou,
    Free from oppression or the stroke of war,
    My daughter shall be Henry's, if he please.
 That is her ransom; I deliver her.

    And those two counties I will undertake
    Your Grace shall well and quietly enjoy.

  REIGNIER.

  SUFFOLK.
 Reignier of France, I give thee kingly thanks,
    Because this is in traffic of a king.
 Set this diamond safe
    In golden palaces, as it becomes.
 I do embrace thee as I would embrace
    The Christian prince, King Henry, were he here.
 Good wishes, praise, and
    prayers,
    Shall Suffolk ever have of Margaret.
 But hark you, Margaret
    No princely commendations to my king?
  MARGARET.
 Such commendations as becomes a maid,
    A virgin, and his servant, say to him.

  SUFFOLK.
 Words sweetly plac'd and modestly directed.

    But, madam, I must trouble you again  
    No loving token to his Majesty?
  MARGARET.
 And this withal.
                         [Kisses her]
  MARGARET.
 O, wert thou for myself! But, Suffolk, stay;
    Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth:
    There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk.

    Bethink thee on her virtues that surmount,
    And natural graces that extinguish art;
    Repeat their semblance often on the seas,
    That, when thou com'st to kneel at Henry's feet,
    Thou mayst bereave him of his wits with wonder.
         Exit




                               SCENE 4.
 Out, out! My lords, an please you, 'tis not so;
    I did beget her, all the parish knows.
 Graceless, wilt thou deny thy parentage?  
  YORK.
 This argues what her kind of life hath been-
    Wicked and vile; and so her death concludes.

  SHEPHERD.
 Fie, Joan, that thou wilt be so obstacle!
    God knows thou art a collop of my flesh;
    And for thy sake have I shed many a tear.

    Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Joan.

  PUCELLE.

    Kneel down and take my blessing, good my girl.

    Wilt thou not stoop? Now cursed be the time
    Of thy nativity.
 I would the milk
    Thy mother gave thee when thou suck'dst her breast
    Had been a little ratsbane for thy sake.

    Or else, when thou didst keep my lambs afield,
    I wish some ravenous wolf had eaten thee.

    Dost thou deny thy father, cursed drab?
    O, burn her, burn her! Hanging is too good.
 Take her away; for she hath liv'd too long,  
    To fill the world with vicious qualities.
 First let me tell you whom you have condemn'd:
    Not me begotten of a shepherd swain,
    But issued from the progeny of kings;
    Virtuous and holy, chosen from above
    By inspiration of celestial grace,
    To work exceeding miracles on earth.

    I never had to do with wicked spirits.

    But you, that are polluted with your lusts,
    Stain'd with the guiltless blood of innocents,
    Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices,
    Because you want the grace that others have,
    You judge it straight a thing impossible
    To compass wonders but by help of devils.

    No, misconceived! Joan of Arc hath been
    A virgin from her tender infancy,
    Chaste and immaculate in very thought;
    Whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effus'd,
    Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.

  YORK.
 And hark ye, sirs; because she is a maid,
    Spare for no fagots, let there be enow.

  PUCELLE.
 Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts?
    Then, Joan, discover thine infirmity
    That warranteth by law to be thy privilege:
    I am with child, ye bloody homicides;
    Murder not then the fruit within my womb,
    Although ye hale me to a violent death.

  YORK.
 The greatest miracle that e'er ye wrought:
    Is all your strict preciseness come to this?
  YORK.

    I did imagine what would be her refuge.

  WARWICK.
 Well, go to; we'll have no bastards live;
    Especially since Charles must father it.

  PUCELLE.

  YORK.
 Alencon, that notorious Machiavel!  
    It dies, an if it had a thousand lives.

  PUCELLE.

    'Twas neither Charles nor yet the Duke I nam'd,
    But Reignier, King of Naples, that prevail'd.

  WARWICK.
 A married man! That's most intolerable.
 Why, here's a girl! I think she knows not well
    There were so many-whom she may accuse.

  WARWICK.

  YORK.
 And yet, forsooth, she is a virgin pure.

  PUCELLE.
 Break thou in pieces and consume to ashes,  
    Thou foul accursed minister of hell!

               Enter CARDINAL BEAUFORT, attended

  CARDINAL.

    For know, my lords, the states of Christendom,
    Mov'd with remorse of these outrageous broils,
    Have earnestly implor'd a general peace
    Betwixt our nation and the aspiring French;
    And here at hand the Dauphin and his train
    Approacheth, to confer about some matter.
 Is all our travail turn'd to this effect?
    After the slaughter of so many peers,
    So many captains, gentlemen, and soldiers,
    That in this quarrel have been overthrown
    And sold their bodies for their country's benefit,
    Shall we at last conclude effeminate peace?
    Have we not lost most part of all the towns,
    By treason, falsehood, and by treachery,  
    Our great progenitors had conquered?
    O Warwick, Warwick! I foresee with grief
    The utter loss of all the realm of France.


        Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, BASTARD, REIGNIER, and others

  CHARLES.
 Since, lords of England, it is thus agreed
    That peaceful truce shall be proclaim'd in France,
    We come to be informed by yourselves
    What the conditions of that league must be.
 Speak, Winchester; for boiling choler chokes
    The hollow passage of my poison'd voice,
    By sight of these our baleful enemies.

  CARDINAL.
 Charles, and the rest, it is enacted thus:
    That, in regard King Henry gives consent,
    Of mere compassion and of lenity,
    To ease your country of distressful war,  
    An suffer you to breathe in fruitful peace,
    You shall become true liegemen to his crown;
    And, Charles, upon condition thou wilt swear
    To pay him tribute and submit thyself,
    Thou shalt be plac'd as viceroy under him,
    And still enjoy thy regal dignity.

  CHARLES.
 'Tis known already that I am possess'd
    With more than half the Gallian territories,
    And therein reverenc'd for their lawful king.

    Shall I, for lucre of the rest unvanquish'd,
    Detract so much from that prerogative
    As to be call'd but viceroy of the whole?
    No, Lord Ambassador; I'll rather keep
    That which I have than, coveting for more,
    Be cast from possibility of all.
  
  YORK.
 Insulting Charles! Hast thou by secret means
    Us'd intercession to obtain a league,
    And now the matter grows to compromise
    Stand'st thou aloof upon comparison?
    Either accept the title thou usurp'st,
    Of benefit proceeding from our king
    And not of any challenge of desert,
    Or we will plague thee with incessant wars.

  REIGNIER.
  [To CHARLES]  My lord, you do not well in
    obstinacy
    To cavil in the course of this contract.

    If once it be neglected, ten to one
    We shall not find like opportunity.

  ALENCON.

  WARWICK.
 How say'st thou, Charles? Shall our condition  
    stand?
  CHARLES.

  YORK.
 Then swear allegiance to his Majesty:
    As thou art knight, never to disobey
    Nor be rebellious to the crown of England
    Thou, nor thy nobles, to the crown of England.

                    [CHARLES and the rest give tokens of fealty]
    So, now dismiss your army when ye please;
    Hang up your ensigns, let your drums be still,
    For here we entertain a solemn peace.


                         London.
 The palace

            Enter SUFFOLK, in conference with the KING,
                     GLOUCESTER and EXETER

  KING HENRY.
 Your wondrous rare description, noble Earl,
    Of beauteous Margaret hath astonish'd me.

    Therefore, my Lord Protector, give consent
    That Margaret may be England's royal Queen.

  GLOUCESTER.
 So should I give consent to flatter sin.

    You know, my lord, your Highness is betroth'd
    Unto another lady of esteem.
 As doth a ruler with unlawful oaths;
    Or one that at a triumph, having vow'd
    To try his strength, forsaketh yet the lists
    By reason of his adversary's odds:
    A poor earl's daughter is unequal odds,
    And therefore may be broke without offence.
  
  GLOUCESTER.
 Why, what, I pray, is Margaret more than
    that?
    Her father is no better than an earl,
    Although in glorious titles he excel.

  SUFFOLK.
 Yes, my lord, her father is a king,
    The King of Naples and Jerusalem;
    And of such great authority in France
    As his alliance will confirm our peace,
    And keep the Frenchmen in allegiance.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Beside, his wealth doth warrant a liberal dower;
    Where Reignier sooner will receive than give.

  SUFFOLK.

    So worthless peasants bargain for their wives,
    As market-men for oxen, sheep, or horse.
  
    Marriage is a matter of more worth
    Than to be dealt in by attorneyship;
    Not whom we will, but whom his Grace affects,
    Must be companion of his nuptial bed.

    Whom should we match with Henry, being a king,
    But Margaret, that is daughter to a king?
    Her peerless feature, joined with her birth,
    Approves her fit for none but for a king;
    Her valiant courage and undaunted spirit,
    More than in women commonly is seen,
    Will answer our hope in issue of a king;
    For Henry, son unto a conqueror,
    Is likely to beget more conquerors,  
    If with a lady of so high resolve
    As is fair Margaret he be link'd in love.
 Whether it be through force of your report,
    My noble Lord of Suffolk, or for that
    My tender youth was never yet attaint
    With any passion of inflaming love,
    I cannot tell; but this I am assur'd,
    I feel such sharp dissension in my breast,
    Such fierce alarums both of hope and fear,
    As I am sick with working of my thoughts.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>





1591

THE SECOND PART OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  KING HENRY THE SIXTH
  HUMPHREY, DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, his uncle
  CARDINAL BEAUFORT, BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, great-uncle to the King
  RICHARD PLANTAGENET, DUKE OF YORK
  EDWARD and RICHARD, his sons
  DUKE OF SOMERSET
  DUKE OF SUFFOLK
  DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
  LORD CLIFFORD
  YOUNG CLIFFORD, his son
  EARL OF SALISBURY
  EARL OF WARWICK
  LORD SCALES
  LORD SAY
  SIR HUMPHREY STAFFORD
  WILLIAM STAFFORD, his brother
  SIR JOHN STANLEY
  VAUX
  MATTHEW GOFFE
  A LIEUTENANT, a SHIPMASTER, a MASTER'S MATE, and WALTER WHITMORE  
  TWO GENTLEMEN, prisoners with Suffolk
  JOHN HUME and JOHN SOUTHWELL, two priests
  ROGER BOLINGBROKE, a conjurer
  A SPIRIT raised by him
  THOMAS HORNER, an armourer
  PETER, his man
  CLERK OF CHATHAM
  MAYOR OF SAINT ALBANS
  SAUNDER SIMPCOX, an impostor
  ALEXANDER IDEN, a Kentish gentleman
  JACK CADE, a rebel
  GEORGE BEVIS, JOHN HOLLAND, DICK THE BUTCHER, SMITH THE WEAVER,
    MICHAEL, &c.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 Enter the KING, DUKE HUMPHREY
OF GLOUCESTER, SALISBURY, WARWICK, and CARDINAL BEAUFORT, on the one side;
the QUEEN, SUFFOLK, YORK, SOMERSET, and BUCKINGHAM, on the other

  SUFFOLK.
 As by your high imperial Majesty
    I had in charge at my depart for France,
    As procurator to your Excellence,
    To marry Princess Margaret for your Grace;
    So, in the famous ancient city Tours,
    In presence of the Kings of France and Sicil,
    The Dukes of Orleans, Calaber, Bretagne, and Alencon,
    Seven earls, twelve barons, and twenty reverend bishops,
    I have perform'd my task, and was espous'd;
    And humbly now upon my bended knee,
    In sight of England and her lordly peers,
    Deliver up my title in the Queen
    To your most gracious hands, that are the substance
    Of that great shadow I did represent:  
    The happiest gift that ever marquis gave,
    The fairest queen that ever king receiv'd.

  KING HENRY.
 Suffolk, arise.
 Welcome, Queen Margaret:
    I can express no kinder sign of love
    Than this kind kiss.
 Great King of England, and my gracious lord,
    The mutual conference that my mind hath had,
    By day, by night, waking and in my dreams,
    In courtly company or at my beads,
    With you, mine alder-liefest sovereign,
    Makes me the bolder to salute my king
    With ruder terms, such as my wit affords
    And over-joy of heart doth minister.

  KING HENRY.

    Lords, with one cheerful voice welcome my love.
 [Kneeling] Long live Queen Margaret, England's happiness!
  QUEEN.
 We thank you all.
 My Lord Protector, so it please your Grace,
    Here are the articles of contracted peace
    Between our sovereign and the French King Charles,
    For eighteen months concluded by consent.
 Uncle, how now!
  GLOUCESTER.

  KING HENRY.
 Uncle of Winchester, I pray read on.

  CARDINAL.
 [Reads] 'Item: It is further agreed between them that the
    duchies of Anjou and Maine shall be released and delivered over
    to the King her father, and she sent over of the King of
    England's own proper cost and charges, without having any dowry.
'
  KING HENRY.
 They please us well.
 Thanks, uncle Winchester,
    Gloucester, York, Buckingham, Somerset,
    Salisbury, and Warwick;
    We thank you all for this great favour done
    In entertainment to my princely queen.

    Come, let us in, and with all speed provide
    To see her coronation be perform'd.

  GLOUCESTER.

  SALISBURY.

    Anjou and Maine! myself did win them both;
    Those provinces these arms of mine did conquer;
    And are the cities that I got with wounds
    Deliver'd up again with peaceful words?
    Mort Dieu!
  YORK.
 For Suffolk's duke, may he be suffocate,
    That dims the honour of this warlike isle!
    France should have torn and rent my very heart
    Before I would have yielded to this league.

    I never read but England's kings have had
    Large sums of gold and dowries with their wives;
    And our King Henry gives away his own
    To match with her that brings no vantages.

  GLOUCESTER.
 My Lord of Gloucester, now ye grow too hot:
    It was the pleasure of my lord the King.
 My Lord of Winchester, I know your mind;
    'Tis not my speeches that you do mislike,
    But 'tis my presence that doth trouble ye.

    Lordings, farewell; and say, when I am gone,
    I prophesied France will be lost ere long.

    'Tis known to you he is mine enemy;
    Nay, more, an enemy unto you all,
    And no great friend, I fear me, to the King.

    What though the common people favour him,
    Calling him 'Humphrey, the good Duke of Gloucester,'
    Clapping their hands, and crying with loud voice
    'Jesu maintain your royal excellence!'
    With 'God preserve the good Duke Humphrey!'
    I fear me, lords, for all this flattering gloss,
    He will be found a dangerous Protector.

  BUCKINGHAM.

  CARDINAL.
 This weighty business will not brook delay;
    I'll to the Duke of Suffolk presently.
 Cousin of Buckingham, though Humphrey's pride
    And greatness of his place be grief to us,
    Yet let us watch the haughty cardinal;
    His insolence is more intolerable  
    Than all the princes in the land beside;
    If Gloucester be displac'd, he'll be Protector.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Or thou or I, Somerset, will be Protector,
    Despite Duke Humphrey or the Cardinal.
 Pride went before, ambition follows him.

    While these do labour for their own preferment,
    Behoves it us to labour for the realm.

    I never saw but Humphrey Duke of Gloucester
    Did bear him like a noble gentleman.

    Warwick my son, the comfort of my age,
    Thy deeds, thy plainness, and thy housekeeping,
    Hath won the greatest favour of the commons,
    Excepting none but good Duke Humphrey.

  WARWICK.
 And so says York- [Aside] for he hath greatest cause.
 Then let's make haste away and look unto the main.

    Main chance, father, you meant; but I meant Maine,
    Which I will win from France, or else be slain.

                                    Exeunt WARWICK and SALISBURY  
  YORK.
 Anjou and Maine are given to the French;
    Paris is lost; the state of Normandy
    Stands on a tickle point now they are gone.

    I cannot blame them all: what is't to them?
    'Tis thine they give away, and not their own.

    Pirates may make cheap pennyworths of their pillage,
    And purchase friends, and give to courtezans,
    Still revelling like lords till all be gone;
    While as the silly owner of the goods
    Weeps over them and wrings his hapless hands
    And shakes his head and trembling stands aloof,
    While all is shar'd and all is borne away,
    Ready to starve and dare not touch his own.

    So York must sit and fret and bite his tongue,
    While his own lands are bargain'd for and sold.

    Methinks the realms of England, France, and Ireland,
    Bear that proportion to my flesh and blood  
    As did the fatal brand Althaea burnt
    Unto the prince's heart of Calydon.

    Anjou and Maine both given unto the French!
    Cold news for me, for I had hope of France,
    Even as I have of fertile England's soil.

    A day will come when York shall claim his own;
    And therefore I will take the Nevils' parts,
    And make a show of love to proud Duke Humphrey,
    And when I spy advantage, claim the crown,
    For that's the golden mark I seek to hit.

    Then, York, be still awhile, till time do serve;
    Watch thou and wake, when others be asleep,
    To pry into the secrets of the state;
    Till Henry, surfeiting in joys of love
    With his new bride and England's dear-bought queen,
    And Humphrey with the peers be fall'n at jars;  
    Then will I raise aloft the milk-white rose,
    With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfum'd,
    And in my standard bear the arms of York,
    To grapple with the house of Lancaster;
    And force perforce I'll make him yield the crown,
    Whose bookish rule hath pull'd fair England down.

The DUKE OF GLOUCESTER'S house

Enter DUKE and his wife ELEANOR

  DUCHESS.
 Why droops my lord, like over-ripen'd corn
    Hanging the head at Ceres' plenteous load?
    Why doth the great Duke Humphrey knit his brows,
    As frowning at the favours of the world?
    Why are thine eyes fix'd to the sullen earth,
    Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight?
    What see'st thou there? King Henry's diadem,
    Enchas'd with all the honours of the world?
    If so, gaze on, and grovel on thy face
    Until thy head be circled with the same.

    What, is't too short? I'll lengthen it with mine;
    And having both together heav'd it up,
    We'll both together lift our heads to heaven,
    And never more abase our sight so low
    As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.

  GLOUCESTER.
 O Nell, sweet Nell, if thou dost love thy lord,  
    Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts!
    And may that thought, when I imagine ill
    Against my king and nephew, virtuous Henry,
    Be my last breathing in this mortal world!
    My troublous dreams this night doth make me sad.

  DUCHESS.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Methought this staff, mine office-badge in court,
    Was broke in twain; by whom I have forgot,
    But, as I think, it was by th' Cardinal;
    And on the pieces of the broken wand
    Were plac'd the heads of Edmund Duke of Somerset
    And William de la Pole, first Duke of Suffolk.

    This was my dream; what it doth bode God knows.
 Tut, this was nothing but an argument
    That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's grove
    Shall lose his head for his presumption.

    But list to me, my Humphrey, my sweet Duke:
    Methought I sat in seat of majesty
    In the cathedral church of Westminster,  
    And in that chair where kings and queens were crown'd;
    Where Henry and Dame Margaret kneel'd to me,
    And on my head did set the diadem.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright.
 Nay, be not angry; I am pleas'd again.


                       Enter a MESSENGER  

  MESSENGER.

  GLOUCESTER.
 I go.
 Come, Nell, thou wilt ride with us?
  DUCHESS.

                                 Exeunt GLOUCESTER and MESSENGER
    Follow I must; I cannot go before,
    While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind.

    Were I a man, a duke, and next of blood,
    I would remove these tedious stumbling-blocks
    And smooth my way upon their headless necks;
    And, being a woman, I will not be slack
    To play my part in Fortune's pageant.

    Where are you there, Sir John? Nay, fear not, man,
    We are alone; here's none but thee and I.
 But, by the grace of God and Hume's advice,
    Your Grace's title shall be multiplied.

  DUCHESS.
 What say'st thou, man? Hast thou as yet conferr'd
    With Margery Jourdain, the cunning witch of Eie,
    With Roger Bolingbroke, the conjurer?
    And will they undertake to do me good?
  HUME.
 This they have promised, to show your Highness
    A spirit rais'd from depth of underground
    That shall make answer to such questions
    As by your Grace shall be propounded him
  DUCHESS.
 It is enough; I'll think upon the questions;
    When from Saint Albans we do make return
    We'll see these things effected to the full.
            Exit
  HUME.
 But, how now, Sir John Hume!
    Seal up your lips and give no words but mum:
    The business asketh silent secrecy.
  
    Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch:
    Gold cannot come amiss were she a devil.

    Yet have I gold flies from another coast-
    I dare not say from the rich Cardinal,
    And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk;
    Yet I do find it so; for, to be plain,
    They, knowing Dame Eleanor's aspiring humour,
    Have hired me to undermine the Duchess,
    And buzz these conjurations in her brain.

    They say 'A crafty knave does need no broker';
    Yet am I Suffolk and the Cardinal's broker.

    Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go near
    To call them both a pair of crafty knaves.

    Well, so its stands; and thus, I fear, at last
    Hume's knavery will be the Duchess' wreck,
    And her attainture will be Humphrey's fall
    Sort how it will, I shall have gold for all.
            Exit




SCENE III.

London.
 The palace

Enter three or four PETITIONERS, PETER, the Armourer's man, being one

  FIRST PETITIONER.
 My masters, let's stand close; my Lord Protector
    will come this way by and by, and then we may deliver our
    supplications in the quill.

  SECOND PETITIONER.
 Here 'a comes, methinks, and the Queen with him.

    I'll be the first, sure.

  SECOND PETITIONER.
 Come back, fool; this is the Duke of Suffolk and
    not my Lord Protector.

  SUFFOLK.
 How now, fellow! Wouldst anything with me?
  FIRST PETITIONER.

  QUEEN.
 [Reads] 'To my Lord Protector!' Are your supplications to  
    his lordship? Let me see them.
 What is thine?
  FIRST PETITIONER.

  SUFFOLK.
 What's yours?
    What's here! [Reads] 'Against the Duke of Suffolk, for enclosing
    the commons of Melford.
' How now, sir knave!
  SECOND PETITIONER.
 Alas, sir, I am but a poor petitioner of our
    whole township.

  QUEEN.
 What say'st thou? Did the Duke of York say he was rightful
    heir to the crown?
  PETER.
 That my master was? No, forsooth.

  SUFFOLK.
 Who is there? [Enter servant] Take this fellow in, and
    send for his master with a pursuivant presently.
 We'll hear more
    of your matter before the King.

                                         Exit servant with PETER
  QUEEN.
 And as for you, that love to be protected  
    Under the wings of our Protector's grace,
    Begin your suits anew, and sue to him.

  ALL.
 Come, let's be gone.

  SUFFOLK.
 Madam, be patient.
 As I was cause
    Your Highness came to England, so will I
    In England work your Grace's full content.
 Beside the haughty Protector, have we Beaufort
    The imperious churchman; Somerset, Buckingham,
    And grumbling York; and not the least of these
    But can do more in England than the King.

  SUFFOLK.
  
    She sweeps it through the court with troops of ladies,
    More like an empress than Duke Humphrey's wife.

    So, let her rest.
 And, madam, list to me,
    For I am bold to counsel you in this:
    Although we fancy not the Cardinal,
    Yet must we join with him and with the lords,
    Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace.
  
    As for the Duke of York, this late complaint
    Will make but little for his benefit.

    So one by one we'll weed them all at last,
    And you yourself shall steer the happy helm.
 For my part, noble lords, I care not which:
    Or Somerset or York, all's one to me.
 If Somerset be unworthy of the place,
    Let York be Regent; I will yield to him.

  CARDINAL.

  WARWICK.
 All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick.
 Peace, son! And show some reason, Buckingham,
    Why Somerset should be preferr'd in this.

  QUEEN.
 Because the King, forsooth, will have it so.
 These are no women's matters.
 If he be old enough, what needs your Grace
    To be Protector of his Excellence?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Madam, I am Protector of the realm;
    And at his pleasure will resign my place.

  SUFFOLK.
 Resign it then, and leave thine insolence.

    Since thou wert king- as who is king but thou?-
    The commonwealth hath daily run to wrack,
    The Dauphin hath prevail'd beyond the seas,
    And all the peers and nobles of the realm
    Have been as bondmen to thy sovereignty.

  CARDINAL.

  SOMERSET.
  
  BUCKINGHAM.

                  Exit GLOUCESTER.

    Could I come near your beauty with my nails,
    I could set my ten commandments in your face.

  DUCHESS.
 Against her will, good King? Look to 't in time;
    She'll hamper thee and dandle thee like a baby.
           Exit
  BUCKINGHAM.
 Lord Cardinal, I will follow Eleanor,
    And listen after Humphrey, how he proceeds.
  
    She's tickled now; her fume needs no spurs,
    She'll gallop far enough to her destruction.
            Exit

                      Re-enter GLOUCESTER

  GLOUCESTER.
 Now, lords, my choler being overblown
    With walking once about the quadrangle,
    I come to talk of commonwealth affairs.

    As for your spiteful false objections,
    Prove them, and I lie open to the law;
    But God in mercy so deal with my soul
    As I in duty love my king and country!
    But to the matter that we have in hand:
    I say, my sovereign, York is meetest man
    To be your Regent in the realm of France.
 Before we make election, give me leave
    To show some reason, of no little force,
    That York is most unmeet of any man.

  YORK.
 I'll tell thee, Suffolk, why I am unmeet:
    First, for I cannot flatter thee in pride;  
    Next, if I be appointed for the place,
    My Lord of Somerset will keep me here
    Without discharge, money, or furniture,
    Till France be won into the Dauphin's hands.

    Last time I danc'd attendance on his will
    Till Paris was besieg'd, famish'd, and lost.

  WARWICK.
 That can I witness; and a fouler fact
    Did never traitor in the land commit.

  SUFFOLK.
 Peace, headstrong Warwick!
  WARWICK.
 Image of pride, why should I hold my peace?

        Enter HORNER, the Armourer, and his man PETER, guarded

  SUFFOLK.
 Because here is a man accus'd of treason:
    Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself!
  YORK.
 Doth any one accuse York for a traitor?
  KING HENRY.
 What mean'st thou, Suffolk? Tell me, what are these?
  SUFFOLK.
 Please it your Majesty, this is the man
    That doth accuse his master of high treason;
    His words were these: that Richard Duke of York  
    Was rightful heir unto the English crown,
    And that your Majesty was an usurper.

  KING HENRY.
 Say, man, were these thy words?
  HORNER.
 An't shall please your Majesty, I never said nor thought
    any such matter.

  PETER.
 [Holding up his hands] By these ten bones, my lords, he did
    speak them to me in the garret one night, as we were scouring my
    Lord of York's armour.

  HORNER`.
 My
    accuser is my prentice; and when I did correct him for his fault
    the other day, he did vow upon his knees he would be even with
    me.
 I have good witness of this; therefore I beseech your
    Majesty, do not cast away an honest man for a villain's
    accusation.

  KING HENRY.
 Uncle, what shall we say to this in law?  
  GLOUCESTER.
 This doom, my lord, if I may judge:
    Let Somerset be Regent o'er the French,
    Because in York this breeds suspicion;
    And let these have a day appointed them
    For single combat in convenient place,
    For he hath witness of his servant's malice.

    This is the law, and this Duke Humphrey's doom.

  SOMERSET.

  HORNER.
 And I accept the combat willingly.

  PETER.
 O Lord, have mercy upon
    me, I shall never be able to fight a blow! O Lord, my heart!
  GLOUCESTER.

  KING HENRY.
 Away with them to prison; and the day of combat shall
    be the last of the next month.

    Come, Somerset, we'll see thee sent away.

London.
 Master Hume, we are therefore provided; will her
    ladyship behold and hear our exorcisms?
  HUME.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 I have heard her reported to be a woman of an
    invincible spirit; but it shall be convenient, Master Hume, that
    you be by her aloft while we be busy below; and so I pray you go,
    in God's name, and leave us.


                 Enter DUCHESS aloft, followed by HUME

  DUCHESS.
 Well said, my masters; and welcome all.
  
  BOLINGBROKE.
 Patience, good lady; wizards know their times:
    Deep night, dark night, the silent of the night,
    The time of night when Troy was set on fire;
    The time when screech-owls cry and ban-dogs howl,
    And spirits walk and ghosts break up their graves-
    That time best fits the work we have in hand.


     [Here they do the ceremonies belonging, and make the circle;
          BOLINGBROKE or SOUTHWELL reads: 'Conjuro te,' &c.

     It thunders and lightens terribly; then the SPIRIT riseth]

  SPIRIT.
 Adsum.

  MARGERY JOURDAIN.

  SPIRIT.
 By water shall he die and take his end.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 'What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?'
  SPIRIT.
 Let him shun castles:
    Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
    Than where castles mounted stand.

    Have done, for more I hardly can endure.

  BOLINGBROKE.

    Beldam, I think we watch'd you at an inch.

    What, madam, are you there? The King and commonweal
    Are deeply indebted for this piece of pains;  
    My Lord Protector will, I doubt it not,
    See you well guerdon'd for these good deserts.

  DUCHESS.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 True, madam, none at all.
 What can you this?
    Away with them! let them be clapp'd up close,
    And kept asunder.
 You, madam, shall with us.

    Stafford, take her to thee.

    A pretty plot, well chosen to build upon!
    Now, pray, my lord, let's see the devil's writ.

    What have we here?                                   [Reads]
    'The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose;
    But him outlive, and die a violent death.
'
    'What shall betide the Duke of Somerset?'
    'Let him shun castles;
    Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains
    Than where castles mounted stand.
'
    Come, come, my lords;
    These oracles are hardly attain'd,
    And hardly understood.

    The King is now in progress towards Saint Albans,
    With him the husband of this lovely lady;
    Thither go these news as fast as horse can carry them-
    A sorry breakfast for my Lord Protector.

  BUCKINGHAM.

  YORK.
 Away!                 Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.

Saint Albans

Enter the KING, QUEEN, GLOUCESTER, CARDINAL, and SUFFOLK,
with Falconers halloing

  QUEEN.
 Believe me, lords, for flying at the brook,
    I saw not better sport these seven years' day;
    Yet, by your leave, the wind was very high,
    And ten to one old Joan had not gone out.

  SUFFOLK.

  CARDINAL.
 Thy heaven is on earth; thine eyes and thoughts
    Beat on a crown, the treasure of thy heart;
    Pernicious Protector, dangerous peer,
    That smooth'st it so with King and commonweal.

  GLOUCESTER.
 What, Cardinal, is your priesthood grown peremptory?
    Tantaene animis coelestibus irae?
    Churchmen so hot? Good uncle, hide such malice;
    With such holiness can you do it?
  SUFFOLK.

  GLOUCESTER.
 As who, my lord?
  SUFFOLK.
 Why, as you, my lord,
    An't like your lordly Lord's Protectorship.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Why, Suffolk, England knows thine insolence.

  QUEEN.

  KING HENRY.
 I prithee, peace,
    Good Queen, and whet not on these furious peers;
    For blessed are the peacemakers on earth.
 Let me be blessed for the peace I make
    Against this proud Protector with my sword!
  GLOUCESTER.
 [Aside to GLOUCESTER] Marry, when thou dar'st.

  GLOUCESTER.

  CARDINAL.
 [Aside to GLOUCESTER] Ay, where thou dar'st not peep; an
      if thou dar'st,
    This evening on the east side of the grove.

  KING HENRY.
 How now, my lords!
  CARDINAL.
 [Aside to GLOUCESTER] Come with thy
      two-hand sword.

  GLOUCESTER.

  CARDINAL.
 [Aside to GLOUCESTER] Are ye advis'd? The east side of
    the grove?
  GLOUCESTER.
  
  KING HENRY.
 Why, how now, uncle Gloucester!
  GLOUCESTER.
 Talking of hawking; nothing else, my lord.

    [Aside to CARDINAL] Now, by God's Mother, priest,
    I'll shave your crown for this,
    Or all my fence shall fail.

  CARDINAL.
 [Aside to GLOUCESTER] Medice, teipsum;
    Protector, see to't well; protect yourself.

  KING HENRY.
 The winds grow high; so do your stomachs, lords.


         Enter a TOWNSMAN of Saint Albans, crying 'A miracle!'

  GLOUCESTER.
 What means this noise?
    Fellow, what miracle dost thou proclaim?
  TOWNSMAN.

  TOWNSMAN.
 Now God be prais'd that to believing souls
    Gives light in darkness, comfort in despair!

           Enter the MAYOR OF SAINT ALBANS and his brethren,
               bearing Simpcox between two in a chair;
                 his WIFE and a multitude following

  CARDINAL.
 Here comes the townsmen on procession
    To present your Highness with the man.

  KING HENRY.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Stand by, my masters; bring him near the King;
    His Highness' pleasure is to talk with him.

  KING HENRY.

    What, hast thou been long blind and now restor'd?
  SIMPCOX.
 Ay indeed was he.

  KING HENRY.
 Where wert thou born?
  SIMPCOX.
 At Berwick in the north, an't like your Grace.

  KING HENRY.

    Let never day nor night unhallowed pass,
    But still remember what the Lord hath done.
 Tell me, good fellow, cam'st thou here by chance,
    Or of devotion, to this holy shrine?
  SIMPCOX.
 God knows, of pure devotion; being call'd
    A hundred times and oft'ner, in my sleep,
    By good Saint Alban, who said 'Simpcox, come,
    Come, offer at my shrine, and I will help thee.
'
  WIFE.

  CARDINAL.
 What, art thou lame?
  SIMPCOX.
 A fall off of a tree.
  
  WIFE.

  GLOUCESTER.
 How long hast thou been blind?
  SIMPCOX.
 O, born so, master!
  GLOUCESTER.
 But that in all my life, when I was a youth.

  WIFE.
 Too true; and bought his climbing very dear.

  GLOUCESTER.

  SIMPCOX.
 A subtle knave! But yet it shall not serve:
    Let me see thine eyes; wink now; now open them;
    In my opinion yet thou seest not well.

  SIMPCOX.
 Yes, master, clear as day, I thank God and Saint Alban.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Say'st thou me so? What colour is this cloak of?
  SIMPCOX.
 Red, master; red as blood.
 Why, that's well said.
 What colour is my gown of?
  SIMPCOX.
 Black, forsooth; coal-black as jet.

  KING HENRY.
 Why, then, thou know'st what colour jet is of?
  SUFFOLK.
 And yet, I think, jet did he never see.

  GLOUCESTER.
  
  WIFE.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Alas, master, I know not.

  GLOUCESTER.
 I know not.
 Nor his?
  SIMPCOX.
 No, indeed, master.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Then, Saunder, sit there, the lying'st knave in
    Christendom.
 Sight may distinguish of colours; but suddenly to
    nominate them all, it is impossible.
 My lords, Saint Alban here
    hath done a miracle; and would ye not think his cunning to be
    great that could restore this cripple to his legs again?
  SIMPCOX.
 My masters of Saint Albans, have you not beadles in
    your town, and things call'd whips?
  MAYOR.
 Yes, my lord, if it please your Grace.
  
  GLOUCESTER.
 Then send for one presently.
 Sirrah, go fetch the beadle hither straight.
 Now fetch me a stool hither by and by.

  SIMPCOX.
 Alas, master, I am not able to stand alone!
    You go about to torture me in vain.
 Well, sir, we must have you find your legs.

    Sirrah beadle, whip him till he leap over that same stool.

  BEADLE.
 I will, my lord.

  SIMPCOX.
 Alas, master, what shall I do? I am not able to stand.


           After the BEADLE hath hit him once, he leaps over
           the stool and runs away; and they follow and cry
                             'A miracle!'  

  KING HENRY.
 O God, seest Thou this, and bearest so long?
  QUEEN.

  GLOUCESTER.

  WIFE.
 Let them be whipp'd through every market town till they
    come to Berwick, from whence they came.

                                 Exeunt MAYOR, BEADLE, WIFE, &c.
 Duke Humphrey has done a miracle to-day.
 True; made the lame to leap and fly away.


                         Enter BUCKINGHAM

  KING HENRY.
 Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold:
    A sort of naughty persons, lewdly bent,
    Under the countenance and confederacy
    Of Lady Eleanor, the Protector's wife,  
    The ringleader and head of all this rout,
    Have practis'd dangerously against your state,
    Dealing with witches and with conjurers,
    Whom we have apprehended in the fact,
    Raising up wicked spirits from under ground,
    Demanding of King Henry's life and death
    And other of your Highness' Privy Council,
    As more at large your Grace shall understand.
 And so, my Lord Protector, by this means
    Your lady is forthcoming yet at London.

    This news, I think, hath turn'd your weapon's edge;
    'Tis like, my lord, you will not keep your hour.
 Ambitious churchman, leave to afflict my heart.

  KING HENRY.
 Madam, for myself, to heaven I do appeal
    How I have lov'd my King and commonweal;
    And for my wife I know not how it stands.

  KING HENRY.

    To-morrow toward London back again
    To look into this business thoroughly
    And call these foul offenders to their answers,
    And poise the cause in justice' equal scales,
    Whose beam stands sure, whose rightful cause prevails.
 Exeunt




SCENE II.

London.
 The DUKE OF YORK'S garden

Enter YORK, SALISBURY, and WARWICK

  YORK.
 Now, my good Lords of Salisbury and Warwick,
    Our simple supper ended, give me leave
    In this close walk to satisfy myself
    In craving your opinion of my tide,
    Which is infallible, to England's crown.

  SALISBURY.
 My lord, I long to hear it at full.

  WARWICK.
 Sweet York, begin; and if thy claim be good,
    The Nevils are thy subjects to command.
 Then thus:
    Edward the Third, my lords, had seven sons;
    The first, Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Wales;
    The second, William of Hatfield; and the third,
    Lionel Duke of Clarence; next to whom
    Was John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster;
    The fifth was Edmund Langley, Duke of York;
    The sixth was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester;
    William of Windsor was the seventh and last.
  
    Edward the Black Prince died before his father
    And left behind him Richard, his only son,
    Who, after Edward the Third's death, reign'd as king
    Till Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Lancaster,
    The eldest son and heir of John of Gaunt,
    Crown'd by the name of Henry the Fourth,
    Seiz'd on the realm, depos'd the rightful king,
    Sent his poor queen to France, from whence she came.

    And him to Pomfret, where, as all you know,
    Harmless Richard was murdered traitorously.

  WARWICK.
 Which now they hold by force, and not by right;
    For Richard, the first son's heir, being dead,
    The issue of the next son should have reign'd.
 But William of Hatfield died without an heir.

  YORK.
 The third son, Duke of Clarence, from whose line
    I claim the crown, had issue Philippe, a daughter,
    Who married Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March;
    Edmund had issue, Roger Earl of March;  
    Roger had issue, Edmund, Anne, and Eleanor.

  SALISBURY.
 This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke,
    As I have read, laid claim unto the crown;
    And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king,
    Who kept him in captivity till he died.

  YORK.
 His eldest sister, Anne,
    My mother, being heir unto the crown,
    Married Richard Earl of Cambridge, who was
    To Edmund Langley, Edward the Third's fifth son, son.
 What plain proceedings is more plain than this?
    Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt,
    The fourth son: York claims it from the third.
  
    It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee
    And in thy sons, fair slips of such a stock.
 We thank you, lords.
 But I am not your king
    Till I be crown'd, and that my sword be stain'd
    With heart-blood of the house of Lancaster;
    And that's not suddenly to be perform'd,
    But with advice and silent secrecy.
 My lord, break we off; we know your mind at full.
 My heart assures me that the Earl of Warwick
    Shall one day make the Duke of York a king.
 And, Nevil, this I do assure myself,
    Richard shall live to make the Earl of Warwick
    The greatest man in England but the King.
 A hall of justice

Sound trumpets.
 Enter the KING and State: the QUEEN, GLOUCESTER, YORK,
SUFFOLK, and SALISBURY, with guard, to banish the DUCHESS.
 Enter, guarded,
the DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER, MARGERY JOURDAIN, HUME, SOUTHWELL, and BOLINGBROKE

  KING HENRY.

    You four, from hence to prison back again;
    From thence unto the place of execution:
    The witch in Smithfield shall be burnt to ashes,
    And you three shall be strangled on the gallows.
  
  DUCHESS.
 Welcome is banishment; welcome were my death.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Eleanor, the law, thou seest, hath judged thee.

             Exeunt the DUCHESS and the other prisoners, guarded
    Mine eyes are full of tears, my heart of grief.

    Ah, Humphrey, this dishonour in thine age
    Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground!
    I beseech your Majesty give me leave to go;
    Sorrow would solace, and mine age would ease.

  KING HENRY.
 Stay, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester; ere thou go,
    Give up thy staff; Henry will to himself
    Protector be; and God shall be my hope,
    My stay, my guide, and lantern to my feet.

    And go in peace, Humphrey, no less belov'd
    Than when thou wert Protector to thy King.
 I see no reason why a king of years
    Should be to be protected like a child.

    God and King Henry govern England's realm!
    Give up your staff, sir, and the King his realm.

  GLOUCESTER.
 My staff! Here, noble Henry, is my staff.
  
    As willingly do I the same resign
    As ere thy father Henry made it mine;
    And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it
    As others would ambitiously receive it.
 Why, now is Henry King, and Margaret Queen,
    And Humphrey Duke of Gloucester scarce himself,
    That bears so shrewd a maim: two pulls at once-
    His lady banish'd and a limb lopp'd off.

  YORK.
 Lords, let him go.
 I never saw a fellow worse bested,
    Or more afraid to fight, than is the appellant,
    The servant of his armourer, my lords.


        Enter at one door, HORNER, the Armourer, and his
         NEIGHBOURS, drinking to him so much that he is
        drunk; and he enters with a drum before him and
       his staff with a sand-bag fastened to it; and at the
        other door PETER, his man, with a drum and sandbag,
                  and PRENTICES drinking to him

  FIRST NEIGHBOUR.
 Here, neighbour Horner, I drink to you in a cup of
    sack; and fear not, neighbour, you shall do well enough.

  SECOND NEIGHBOUR.
 And here, neighbour, here's a cup of charneco.

  THIRD NEIGHBOUR.
 Let it come, i' faith, and I'll pledge you all; and a fig  
    for Peter!
  FIRST PRENTICE.
 Here, Peter, I drink to thee; and be not afraid.
 Be merry, Peter, and fear not thy master: fight
    for credit of the prentices.

  PETER.
 I thank you all.
 Drink, and pray for me, I pray you; for I
    think I have taken my last draught in this world.
 Here, Robin, an
    if I die, I give thee my apron; and, Will, thou shalt have my
    hammer; and here, Tom, take all the money that I have.
 O Lord
    bless me, I pray God! for I am never able to deal with my master,
    he hath learnt so much fence already.

  SALISBURY.
 Come, leave your drinking and fall to blows.

    Sirrah, what's thy name?
  PETER.
 Peter? What more?
  PETER.
 Thump.

  SALISBURY.
 Thump? Then see thou thump thy master well.

  HORNER.
 Masters, I am come hither, as it were, upon my man's
    instigation, to prove him a knave and myself an honest man; and
    touching the Duke of York, I will take my death I never meant him
    any ill, nor the King, nor the Queen; and therefore, Peter, have  
    at thee with a down right blow!
  YORK.
 Dispatch- this knave's tongue begins to double.
 Hold, Peter, hold! I confess, I confess treason.

                                                          [Dies]
  YORK.
 Take away his weapon.
 Fellow, thank God, and the good wine in
    thy master's way.
 O God, have I overcome mine enemies in this presence? O
    Peter, thou hast prevail'd in right!
  KING HENRY.

    Come, fellow, follow us for thy reward.

                                        Sound a flourish.
 Exeunt




SCENE IV.

London.
 A street

Enter DUKE HUMPHREY and his men, in mourning cloaks

  GLOUCESTER.
 Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud,
    And after summer evermore succeeds
    Barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold;
    So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet.
 Ten is the hour that was appointed me
    To watch the coming of my punish'd duchess.
 So please your Grace, we'll take her from the sheriff.
 No, stir not for your lives; let her pass by.
 Come you, my lord, to see my open shame?
    Now thou dost penance too.
 Be patient, gentle Nell; forget this grief.
 Ah, Gloucester, teach me to forget myself!
    For whilst I think I am thy married wife
    And thou a prince, Protector of this land,
    Methinks I should not thus be led along,
    Mail'd up in shame, with papers on my back,  
    And follow'd with a rabble that rejoice
    To see my tears and hear my deep-fet groans.

    Sometimes I'll say I am Duke Humphrey's wife,
    And he a prince, and ruler of the land;
    Yet so he rul'd, and such a prince he was,
    As he stood by whilst I, his forlorn duchess,
    Was made a wonder and a pointing-stock
    To every idle rascal follower.

    But be thou mild, and blush not at my shame,
    Nor stir at nothing till the axe of death
    Hang over thee, as sure it shortly will.

    For Suffolk- he that can do all in all  
    With her that hateth thee and hates us all-
    And York, and impious Beaufort, that false priest,
    Have all lim'd bushes to betray thy wings,
    And, fly thou how thou canst, they'll tangle thee.

    But fear not thou until thy foot be snar'd,
    Nor never seek prevention of thy foes.

    Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell.

    I pray thee sort thy heart to patience;
    These few days' wonder will be quickly worn.


                          Enter a HERALD  

  HERALD.

  GLOUCESTER.
 And my consent ne'er ask'd herein before!
    This is close dealing.
    Exit HERALD
    My Nell, I take my leave- and, master sheriff,
    Let not her penance exceed the King's commission.

  SHERIFF.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Must you, Sir John, protect my lady here?
  STANLEY.

  GLOUCESTER.
 And so, Sir John, farewell.
 What, gone, my lord, and bid me not farewell!
  GLOUCESTER.
 Witness my tears, I cannot stay to speak.

                                  Exeunt GLOUCESTER and servants
  DUCHESS.
 My joy is death-
    Death, at whose name I oft have been afeard,
    Because I wish'd this world's eternity.

    Stanley, I prithee go, and take me hence;
    I care not whither, for I beg no favour,
    Only convey me where thou art commanded.

  STANLEY.
 Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man,
    There to be us'd according to your state.
 Like to a duchess and Duke Humphrey's lady;
    According to that state you shall be us'd.

  DUCHESS.
 It is my office; and, madam, pardon me.

  DUCHESS.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT III.
 SCENE I.
 Edmunds

Sound a sennet.
 Enter the KING, the QUEEN, CARDINAL, SUFFOLK, YORK,
BUCKINGHAM, SALISBURY, and WARWICK, to the Parliament

  KING HENRY.

  QUEEN.

    But meet him now and be it in the morn,
    When every one will give the time of day,
    He knits his brow and shows an angry eye
    And passeth by with stiff unbowed knee,  
    Disdaining duty that to us belongs.

    Small curs are not regarded when they grin,
    But great men tremble when the lion roars,
    And Humphrey is no little man in England.

    First note that he is near you in descent,
    And should you fall he is the next will mount;
    Me seemeth, then, it is no policy-
    Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears,
    And his advantage following your decease-
    That he should come about your royal person
    Or be admitted to your Highness' Council.

    The reverent care I bear unto my lord
    Made me collect these dangers in the Duke.

  SUFFOLK.
 Well hath your Highness seen into this duke;
    And had I first been put to speak my mind,
    I think I should have told your Grace's tale.
 My lords, at once: the care you have of us,
    To mow down thorns that would annoy our foot,
    Is worthy praise; but shall I speak my conscience?
    Our kinsman Gloucester is as innocent
    From meaning treason to our royal person
    As is the sucking lamb or harmless dove:
    The Duke is virtuous, mild, and too well given
    To dream on evil or to work my downfall.
 Ah, what's more dangerous than this fond affiance?
    Seems he a dove? His feathers are but borrow'd,
    For he's disposed as the hateful raven.

    Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit?
    Take heed, my lord; the welfare of us all
    Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.
 All health unto my gracious sovereign!
  KING HENRY.
 Welcome, Lord Somerset.
 What news from France?
  SOMERSET.
 That all your interest in those territories
    Is utterly bereft you; all is lost.
 [Aside] Cold news for me; for I had hope of France
    As firmly as I hope for fertile England.

  
                         Enter GLOUCESTER

  GLOUCESTER.

    I do arrest thee of high treason here.
 Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush
    Nor change my countenance for this arrest:
    A heart unspotted is not easily daunted.

    Who can accuse me? Wherein am I guilty?
  YORK.
 'Tis thought, my lord, that you took bribes of France
    And, being Protector, stay'd the soldiers' pay;
    By means whereof his Highness hath lost France.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Is it but thought so? What are they that think it?
    I never robb'd the soldiers of their pay
    Nor ever had one penny bribe from France.
 It serves you well, my lord, to say so much.
 In your protectorship you did devise
    Strange tortures for offenders, never heard of,
    That England was defam'd by tyranny.

  GLOUCESTER.

    Unless it were a bloody murderer,
    Or foul felonious thief that fleec'd poor passengers,
    I never gave them condign punishment.
  
    Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortur'd
    Above the felon or what trespass else.

  SUFFOLK.
 My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answer'd;
    But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge,
    Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself.

    I do arrest you in His Highness' name,
    And here commit you to my Lord Cardinal
    To keep until your further time of trial.

    My conscience tells me you are innocent.

  GLOUCESTER.
  
    But mine is made the prologue to their play;
    For thousands more that yet suspect no peril
    Will not conclude their plotted tragedy.

    And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest,
    Causeless have laid disgraces on my head,
    And with your best endeavour have stirr'd up
    My liefest liege to be mine enemy;
    Ay, all of you have laid your heads together-
    Myself had notice of your conventicles-
    And all to make away my guiltless life.

    I shall not want false witness to condemn me
    Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt.
 My liege, his railing is intolerable.
 Hath he not twit our sovereign lady here
    With ignominious words, though clerkly couch'd,
    As if she had suborned some to swear
    False allegations to o'erthrow his state?
  QUEEN.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Far truer spoke than meant: I lose indeed.

    Beshrew the winners, for they play'd me false!
    And well such losers may have leave to speak.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 He'll wrest the sense, and hold us here all day.

    Lord Cardinal, he is your prisoner.

  CARDINAL.
 Sirs, take away the Duke, and guard him sure.
 Ah, thus King Henry throws away his crutch
    Before his legs be firm to bear his body!  
    Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side,
    And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.
 My lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best
    Do or undo, as if ourself were here.
 What, will your Highness leave the Parliament?
  KING HENRY.

    What louring star now envies thy estate
    That these great lords, and Margaret our Queen,
    Do seek subversion of thy harmless life?
    Thou never didst them wrong, nor no man wrong;
    And as the butcher takes away the calf,  
    And binds the wretch, and beats it when it strays,
    Bearing it to the bloody slaughter-house,
    Even so, remorseless, have they borne him hence;
    And as the dam runs lowing up and down,
    Looking the way her harmless young one went,
    And can do nought but wail her darling's loss,
    Even so myself bewails good Gloucester's case
    With sad unhelpful tears, and with dimm'd eyes
    Look after him, and cannot do him good,
    So mighty are his vowed enemies.

    His fortunes I will weep, and 'twixt each groan
    Say 'Who's a traitor? Gloucester he is none.
'           Exit
  QUEEN.
 Free lords, cold snow melts with the sun's hot beams:
    Henry my lord is cold in great affairs,
    Too full of foolish pity; and Gloucester's show
    Beguiles him as the mournful crocodile
    With sorrow snares relenting passengers;
    Or as the snake, roll'd in a flow'ring bank,
    With shining checker'd slough, doth sting a child
    That for the beauty thinks it excellent.
  
    Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I-
    And yet herein I judge mine own wit good-
    This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world
    To rid us from the fear we have of him.

  CARDINAL.
 That he should die is worthy policy;
    But yet we want a colour for his death.

  SUFFOLK.
 But, in my mind, that were no policy:
    The King will labour still to save his life;
    The commons haply rise to save his life;
    And yet we have but trivial argument,
    More than mistrust, that shows him worthy death.

  YORK.
 So that, by this, you would not have him die.
 Ah, York, no man alive so fain as I!
  YORK.
 So the poor chicken should be sure of death.

    No; let him die, in that he is a fox,
    By nature prov'd an enemy to the flock,
    Before his chaps be stain'd with crimson blood,
    As Humphrey, prov'd by reasons, to my liege.

    And do not stand on quillets how to slay him;
    Be it by gins, by snares, by subtlety,
    Sleeping or waking, 'tis no matter how,
    So he be dead; for that is good deceit
    Which mates him first that first intends deceit.
 Thrice-noble Suffolk, 'tis resolutely spoke.
 Not resolute, except so much were done,
    For things are often spoke and seldom meant;
    But that my heart accordeth with my tongue,
    Seeing the deed is meritorious,  
    And to preserve my sovereign from his foe,
    Say but the word, and I will be his priest.
 But I would have him dead, my Lord of Suffolk,
    Ere you can take due orders for a priest;
    Say you consent and censure well the deed,
    And I'll provide his executioner-
    I tender so the safety of my liege.

  SUFFOLK.
 Here is my hand the deed is worthy doing.

  QUEEN.
 And I.


                          Enter a POST

  POST.
 Great lords, from Ireland am I come amain
    To signify that rebels there are up
    And put the Englishmen unto the sword.

    Send succours, lords, and stop the rage betime,
    Before the wound do grow uncurable;
    For, being green, there is great hope of help.
  
  CARDINAL.
 A breach that craves a quick expedient stop!
    What counsel give you in this weighty cause?
  YORK.
 If York, with all his far-fet policy,
    Had been the Regent there instead of me,
    He never would have stay'd in France so long.

  YORK.

  QUEEN.
 Nay then, this spark will prove a raging fire,
    If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with;
    No more, good York; sweet Somerset, be still.

  YORK.
 What, worse than nought? Nay, then a shame take all!  
  SOMERSET.
 My Lord of York, try what your fortune is.
 I will, my lord, so please his Majesty.

  YORK.
 I am content; provide me soldiers, lords,
    Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.

  SUFFOLK.
 A charge, Lord York, that I will see perform'd.

    But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey.
 No more of him; for I will deal with him
    That henceforth he shall trouble us no more.

    And so break off; the day is almost spent.

    Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.

  YORK.
 My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days  
    At Bristol I expect my soldiers;
    For there I'll ship them all for Ireland.

  SUFFOLK.

                                             Exeunt all but YORK
  YORK.

    Well, nobles, well, 'tis politicly done
    To send me packing with an host of men.

    I fear me you but warm the starved snake,
    Who, cherish'd in your breasts, will sting your hearts.

    'Twas men I lack'd, and you will give them me;
    I take it kindly.
 Yet be well assur'd  
    You put sharp weapons in a madman's hands.

    Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty band,
    I will stir up in England some black storm
    Shall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell;
    And this fell tempest shall not cease to rage
    Until the golden circuit on my head,
    Like to the glorious sun's transparent beams,
    Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw.

    And for a minister of my intent
    I have seduc'd a headstrong Kentishman,
    John Cade of Ashford,
    To make commotion, as full well he can,
    Under the tide of John Mortimer.

    In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade
    Oppose himself against a troop of kerns,
    And fought so long tiff that his thighs with darts
    Were almost like a sharp-quill'd porpentine;
    And in the end being rescu'd, I have seen
    Him caper upright like a wild Morisco,
    Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells.
  
    Full often, like a shag-hair'd crafty kern,
    Hath he conversed with the enemy,
    And undiscover'd come to me again
    And given me notice of their villainies.

    By this I shall perceive the commons' mind,
    How they affect the house and claim of York.
                   Exit




SCENE II.

Bury St.
 Edmunds.
 A room of state

Enter two or three MURDERERS running over the stage,
from the murder of DUKE HUMPHREY

  FIRST MURDERER.
 Run to my Lord of Suffolk; let him know
    We have dispatch'd the Duke, as he commanded.
 O that it were to do! What have we done?
    Didst ever hear a man so penitent?

                           Enter SUFFOLK

  FIRST MURDERER.
 Here comes my lord.
 Now, sirs, have you dispatch'd this thing?
  FIRST MURDERER.
 Ay, my good lord, he's dead.

  SUFFOLK.
 Why, that's well said.
 Go, get you to my house;
    I will reward you for this venturous deed.

    The King and all the peers are here at hand.
 'Tis, my good lord.
  
  SUFFOLK.
 Away! be gone.
                       Exeunt MURDERERS

             Sound trumpets.
 I'll call him presently, my noble lord.
 Lords, take your places; and, I pray you all,
    Proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle Gloucester
    Than from true evidence, of good esteem,
    He be approv'd in practice culpable.

  QUEEN.
 Dead in his bed, my lord; Gloucester is dead.

                                               [The KING swoons]
  QUEEN.
 How fares my lord? Help, lords! The King is dead.

  QUEEN.
 Run, go, help, help! O Henry, ope thine eyes!
  SUFFOLK.
 He doth revive again; madam, be patient.

  KING.
 Comfort, my sovereign! Gracious Henry, comfort!
  KING HENRY.

    Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding;
    Yet do not go away; come, basilisk,
    And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight;
    For in the shade of death I shall find joy-
    In life but double death,'now Gloucester's dead.

  QUEEN.
 Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolk thus?
    Although the Duke was enemy to him,
    Yet he most Christian-like laments his death;
    And for myself- foe as he was to me-
    Might liquid tears, or heart-offending groans,
    Or blood-consuming sighs, recall his life,
    I would be blind with weeping, sick with groans,
    Look pale as primrose with blood-drinking sighs,
    And all to have the noble Duke alive.
  
    What know I how the world may deem of me?
    For it is known we were but hollow friends:
    It may be judg'd I made the Duke away;
    So shall my name with slander's tongue be wounded,
    And princes' courts be fill'd with my reproach.
 Ay me, unhappy!
    To be a queen and crown'd with infamy!
  KING HENRY.
 Ah, woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man!
  QUEEN.
 Be woe for me, more wretched than he is.

    What, dost thou turn away, and hide thy face?
    I am no loathsome leper- look on me.

    What, art thou like the adder waxen deaf?
    Be poisonous too, and kill thy forlorn Queen.

    Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucester's tomb?
    Why, then Dame Margaret was ne'er thy joy.

    Erect his statue and worship it,
    And make my image but an alehouse sign.

    Was I for this nigh wreck'd upon the sea,
    And twice by awkward wind from England's bank
    Drove back again unto my native clime?  
    What boded this but well-forewarning wind
    Did seem to say 'Seek not a scorpion's nest,
    Nor set no footing on this unkind shore'?
    What did I then but curs'd the gentle gusts,
    And he that loos'd them forth their brazen caves;
    And bid them blow towards England's blessed shore,
    Or turn our stern upon a dreadful rock?
    Yet Aeolus would not be a murderer,
    But left that hateful office unto thee.

    The pretty-vaulting sea refus'd to drown me,
    Knowing that thou wouldst have me drown'd on shore
    With tears as salt as sea through thy unkindness;
    The splitting rocks cow'r'd in the sinking sands
    And would not dash me with their ragged sides,
    Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they,
    Might in thy palace perish Margaret.

    As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs,
    When from thy shore the tempest beat us back,
    I stood upon the hatches in the storm;
    And when the dusky sky began to rob  
    My earnest-gaping sight of thy land's view,
    I took a costly jewel from my neck-
    A heart it was, bound in with diamonds-
    And threw it towards thy land.


               Noise within.

    The commons, like an angry hive of bees
    That want their leader, scatter up and down
    And care not who they sting in his revenge.

    Myself have calm'd their spleenful mutiny
    Until they hear the order of his death.

    Enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse,
    And comment then upon his sudden death.
 Stay, Salisbury,
    With the rude multitude till I return.
                  Exit
                                   Exit SALISBURY with the commons
  KING HENRY.

    Fain would I go to chafe his paly lips
    With twenty thousand kisses and to drain
    Upon his face an ocean of salt tears
    To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk;
    And with my fingers feel his hand un-feeling;
    But all in vain are these mean obsequies;
    And to survey his dead and earthy image,
    What were it but to make my sorrow greater?

               Bed put forth with the body.

  WARWICK.

    Oft have I seen a timely-parted ghost,
    Of ashy semblance, meagre, pale, and bloodless,
    Being all descended to the labouring heart,
    Who, in the conflict that it holds with death,
    Attracts the same for aidance 'gainst the enemy,
    Which with the heart there cools, and ne'er returneth
    To blush and beautify the cheek again.

    But see, his face is black and full of blood;
    His eye-balls further out than when he liv'd,
    Staring full ghastly like a strangled man;
    His hair uprear'd, his nostrils stretch'd with struggling;
    His hands abroad display'd, as one that grasp'd
    And tugg'd for life, and was by strength subdu'd.

    Look, on the sheets his hair, you see, is sticking;
    His well-proportion'd beard made rough and rugged,
    Like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged.
  
    It cannot be but he was murd'red here:
    The least of all these signs were probable.

  SUFFOLK.

  WARWICK.

    'Tis like you would not feast him like a friend;
    And 'tis well seen he found an enemy.

  QUEEN.
 Then you, belike, suspect these noblemen
    As guilty of Duke Humphrey's timeless death.

  WARWICK.
 Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh,
    And sees fast by a butcher with an axe,
    But will suspect 'twas he that made the slaughter?
    Who finds the partridge in the puttock's nest
    But may imagine how the bird was dead,
    Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak?
    Even so suspicious is this tragedy.

  QUEEN.
 Are you the butcher, Suffolk? Where's your knife?
    Is Beaufort term'd a kite? Where are his talons?  
  SUFFOLK.
 Madam, be still- with reverence may I say;
    For every word you speak in his behalf
    Is slander to your royal dignity.

  SUFFOLK.
 Blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanour,
    If ever lady wrong'd her lord so much,
    Thy mother took into her blameful bed
    Some stern untutor'd churl, and noble stock
    Was graft with crab-tree slip, whose fruit thou art,
    And never of the Nevils' noble race.

  SUFFOLK.

  WARWICK.

    Unworthy though thou art, I'll cope with thee,
    And do some service to Duke Humphrey's ghost.

                                      Exeunt SUFFOLK and WARWICK
  KING HENRY.
 What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted?
    Thrice is he arm'd that hath his quarrel just;
    And he but naked, though lock'd up in steel,  
    Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.

                                                [A noise within]
  QUEEN.
 What noise is this?

       Re-enter SUFFOLK and WARWICK, with their weapons drawn

  KING.
 The trait'rous Warwick, with the men of Bury,
    Set all upon me, mighty sovereign.

    And therefore do they cry, though you forbid,
    That they will guard you, whe'er you will or no,
    From such fell serpents as false Suffolk is;  
    With whose envenomed and fatal sting
    Your loving uncle, twenty times his worth,
    They say, is shamefully bereft of life.
 [Within] An answer from the King, my Lord of Salisbury!
  SUFFOLK.
 'Tis like the commons, rude unpolish'd hinds,
    Could send such message to their sovereign;
    But you, my lord, were glad to be employ'd,
    To show how quaint an orator you are.
 [Within] An answer from the King, or we will all break in!
  KING HENRY.

                                                  Exit SALISBURY
  QUEEN.
 O Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk!
  KING HENRY.

    If after three days' space thou here be'st found
    On any ground that I am ruler of,
    The world shall not be ransom for thy life.

    Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me;
    I have great matters to impart to thee.

                                Exeunt all but QUEEN and SUFFOLK
  QUEEN.
 Cease, gentle Queen, these execrations,
    And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.
 Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch,
    Has thou not spirit to curse thine enemy?
  SUFFOLK.

    My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words,
    Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint,
    Mine hair be fix'd an end, as one distract;
    Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban;
    And even now my burden'd heart would break,
    Should I not curse them.
 Enough, sweet Suffolk, thou torment'st thyself;
    And these dread curses, like the sun 'gainst glass,
    Or like an overcharged gun, recoil,
    And turns the force of them upon thyself.

    O, could this kiss be printed in thy hand,
    That thou might'st think upon these by the seal,  
    Through whom a thousand sighs are breath'd for thee!
    So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief;
    'Tis but surmis'd whiles thou art standing by,
    As one that surfeits thinking on a want.

    Go, speak not to me; even now be gone.


                           Enter VAUX

  QUEEN.
 Whither goes Vaux so fast? What news, I prithee?
  VAUX.
 Go tell this heavy message to the King.
       Exit VAUX
    Ay me! What is this world! What news are these!
    But wherefore grieve I at an hour's poor loss,  
    Omitting Suffolk's exile, my soul's treasure?
    Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee,
    And with the southern clouds contend in tears-
    Theirs for the earth's increase, mine for my sorrows?
    Now get thee hence: the King, thou know'st, is coming;
    If thou be found by me; thou art but dead.
 If I depart from thee I cannot live;
    And in thy sight to die, what were it else
    But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?
    Here could I breathe my soul into the air,
    As mild and gentle as the cradle-babe
    Dying with mother's dug between its lips;
    Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad
    And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes,
    To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth;
    So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul,
    Or I should breathe it so into thy body,
    And then it liv'd in sweet Elysium.
  
    O, let me stay, befall what may befall!
  QUEEN.
 Let me hear from thee;
    For whereso'er thou art in this world's globe
    I'll have an Iris that shall find thee out.

  SUFFOLK.

  QUEEN.
 And take my heart with thee.
           [She kisses him]
  SUFFOLK.
 A jewel, lock'd into the woefull'st cask
    That ever did contain a thing of worth.

    Even as a splitted bark, so sunder we:
    This way fall I to death.
 CARDINAL BEAUFORT'S bedchamber

Enter the KING, SALISBURY, and WARWICK, to the CARDINAL in bed

  KING HENRY.
 How fares my lord? Speak, Beaufort, to thy sovereign.

  CARDINAL.
 If thou be'st Death I'll give thee England's treasure,
    Enough to purchase such another island,
    So thou wilt let me live and feel no pain.

  CARDINAL.
 Bring me unto my trial when you will.

    Died he not in his bed? Where should he die?
    Can I make men live, whe'er they will or no?
    O, torture me no more! I will confess.

  KING HENRY.
 O Thou eternal Mover of the heavens,
    Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch!
    O, beat away the busy meddling fiend
    That lays strong siege unto this wretch's soul,
    And from his bosom purge this black despair!
  WARWICK.
 See how the pangs of death do make him grin
  SALISBURY.
 Disturb him not, let him pass peaceably.

  KING HENRY.
 Peace to his soul, if God's good pleasure be!
    Lord Card'nal, if thou think'st on heaven's bliss,
    Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.

    He dies, and makes no sign: O God, forgive him!
  WARWICK.
 So bad a death argues a monstrous life.

  KING HENRY.
 Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.
                         Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE I.

The coast of Kent

Alarum.
  Ordnance goes off.
  Enter a LIEUTENANT,
a SHIPMASTER and his MATE, and WALTER WHITMORE, with sailors;
SUFFOLK and other GENTLEMEN, as prisoners

  LIEUTENANT.

    Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize;
    For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs,
    Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,
    Or with their blood stain this discoloured shore.
  
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 What is my ransom, master, let me know?
  MASTER.

  MATE.
 And so much shall you give, or off goes yours.
 What, think you much to pay two thousand crowns,
    And bear the name and port of gentlemen?
    Cut both the villains' throats- for die you shall;
    The lives of those which we have lost in fight
    Be counterpois'd with such a petty sum!
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 And so will I, and write home for it straight.

  WHITMORE.
 I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,
    [To SUFFOLK] And therefore, to revenge it, shalt thou die;
    And so should these, if I might have my will.

  LIEUTENANT.

  SUFFOLK.
 Look on my George, I am a gentleman:
    Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid.

  WHITMORE.

    How now! Why start'st thou? What, doth death affright?
  SUFFOLK.
 Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death.

  WHITMORE.

  SUFFOLK.

  WHITMORE.
 The Duke of Suffolk muffled up in rags?
  SUFFOLK.
 But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be.
 Obscure and lowly swain, King Henry's blood,
    The honourable blood of Lancaster,
    Must not be shed by such a jaded groom.

  WHITMORE.
 First let my words stab him, as he hath me.

  SUFFOLK.
 Base slave, thy words are blunt, and so art thou.
 Thou dar'st not, for thy own.

  LIEUTENANT.
 Poole?
  LIEUTENANT.
 Ay, kennel, puddle, sink, whose filth and dirt
    Troubles the silver spring where England drinks;  
    Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth
    For swallowing the treasure of the realm.

    By devilish policy art thou grown great,
    And, like ambitious Sylla, overgorg'd
    With gobbets of thy mother's bleeding heart.

    By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France;
    The false revolting Normans thorough thee
    Disdain to call us lord; and Picardy
    Hath slain their governors, surpris'd our forts,
    And sent the ragged soldiers wounded home.

    The princely Warwick, and the Nevils all,
    Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain,  
    As hating thee, are rising up in arms;
    And now the house of York- thrust from the crown
    By shameful murder of a guiltless king
    And lofty proud encroaching tyranny-
    Burns with revenging fire, whose hopeful colours
    Advance our half-fac'd sun, striving to shine,
    Under the which is writ 'Invitis nubibus.
'
    The commons here in Kent are up in arms;
    And to conclude, reproach and beggary
    Is crept into the palace of our King,
    And all by thee.
 Away! convey him hence.

  SUFFOLK.
 O that I were a god, to shoot forth thunder
    Upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges!
    Small things make base men proud: this villain here,
    Being captain of a pinnace, threatens more
    Than Bargulus, the strong Illyrian pirate.
  
    I go of message from the Queen to France:
    I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.

  LIEUTENANT.

  SUFFOLK.

  WHITMORE.
 Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.

    What, are ye daunted now? Now will ye stoop?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 My gracious lord, entreat him, speak him fair.

  SUFFOLK.
 Suffolk's imperial tongue is stem and rough,
    Us'd to command, untaught to plead for favour.
 Hale him away, and let him talk no more.
 Come, soldiers, show what cruelty ye can,  
    That this my death may never be forgot-
    Great men oft die by vile bezonians:
    A Roman sworder and banditto slave
    Murder'd sweet Tully; Brutus' bastard hand
    Stabb'd Julius Caesar; savage islanders
    Pompey the Great; and Suffolk dies by pirates.

                              Exeunt all but the FIRST GENTLEMAN

                Re-enter WHITMORE with SUFFOLK'S body

  WHITMORE.
 There let his head and lifeless body lie,
    Until the Queen his mistress bury it.
                   Exit
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 O barbarous and bloody spectacle!
    His body will I bear unto the King.
 Come and get thee a sword, though made of a lath; they have
    been up these two days.

  GEORGE.

  JOHN.
 So he had need, for 'tis threadbare.
 Well, I say it was never
    merry world in England since gentlemen came up.

  GEORGE.
 Nay, more, the King's Council are no good workmen.

  GEORGE.
 Thou hast hit it; for there's no better sign of a brave
    mind than a hard hand.
 I see them! I see them! There's Best's son, the tanner of
    Wingham-  
  GEORGE.
 He shall have the skins of our enemies to make dog's
    leather of.

  JOHN.
 Then is sin struck down, like an ox, and iniquity's throat
    cut like a calf.
 Argo, their thread of life is spun.

  JOHN.
 Come, come, let's fall in with them.


                Drum.
 Enter CADE, DICK THE BUTCHER, SMITH
             THE WEAVER, and a SAWYER, with infinite numbers

  CADE.
 We John Cade, so term'd of our supposed father-
  DICK.

  DICK.
 Silence!
  CADE.
 [Aside] I knew her well; she was a midwife.
 [Aside] She was, indeed, a pedlar's daughter, and sold many
    laces.
 [Aside] But now of late, not able to travel with her furr'd
    pack, she washes bucks here at home.

  CADE.
 Therefore am I of an honourable house.

  DICK.
 [Aside] Ay, by my faith, the field is honourable, and there
    was he born, under a hedge, for his father had never a house but
    the cage.
 Valiant I am.

  SMITH.
 [Aside] 'A must needs; for beggary is valiant.

  CADE.
 I am able to endure much.

  DICK.
 [Aside] No question of that; for I have seen him whipt three
    market days together.

  CADE.
 I fear neither sword nor fire.

  DICK.
 [Aside] But methinks he should stand in fear of fire, being
    burnt i' th' hand for stealing of sheep.
 Be brave, then, for your captain is brave, and vows
    reformation.
 God save your Majesty!
  CADE.
 I thank you, good people- there shall be no money; all shall
    eat and drink on my score, and I will apparel them all in one
    livery, that they may agree like brothers and worship me their
    lord.
 The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers.

  CADE.
 How now! Who's
    there?

              Enter some, bringing in the CLERK OF CHATHAM  

  SMITH.
 The clerk of Chatham.
 He can write and read and cast
    accompt.

  CADE.
 O monstrous!
  SMITH.
 We took him setting of boys' copies.

  CADE.

  CADE.
 Nay, he can make obligations and write court-hand.
 I am sorry for't; the man is a proper man, of mine honour;
    unless I find him guilty, he shall not die.
 Come hither, sirrah,
    I must examine thee.
 What is thy name?
  CLERK.
 Emmanuel.

  DICK.
 Let me alone.
 Sir, I thank God, I have been so well brought up that I can
    write my name.

  ALL.
 He hath confess'd.
 Away with him! He's a villain and a  
    traitor.
 Away with him, I say! Hang him with his pen and inkhorn about
    his neck.
                            Exit one with the CLERK

                           Enter MICHAEL

  MICHAEL.
 Fly, fly, fly! Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother are
    hard by, with the King's forces.
 He is but a knight,
    is 'a?
  MICHAEL.

  CADE.
 To equal him, I will make myself a knight presently.
 Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent,
    Mark'd for the gallows, lay your weapons down;
    Home to your cottages, forsake this groom;
    The King is merciful if you revolt.

  STAFFORD.
 Villain, thy father was a plasterer;
    And thou thyself a shearman, art thou not?
  CADE.
 And Adam was a gardener.

  WILLIAM STAFFORD.
 Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March,
    Married the Duke of Clarence' daughter, did he not?
  STAFFORD.
 Ay, sir.

  CADE.
 That's false.
  
    The elder of them being put to nurse,
    Was by a beggar-woman stol'n away,
    And, ignorant of his birth and parentage,
    Became a bricklayer when he came to age.

    His son am I; deny it if you can.
 Sir, he made a chimney in my father's house, and the bricks
    are alive at this day to testify it; therefore deny it not.
 And will you credit this base drudge's words
    That speaks he knows not what?
  ALL.

  CADE.
 [Aside] He lies, for I invented it myself- Go to, sirrah,
    tell the King from me that for his father's sake, Henry the
    Fifth, in whose time boys went to span-counter for French crowns,
    I am content he shall reign; but I'll be Protector over him.

  DICK.
 And furthermore, we'll have the Lord Say's head for selling
    the dukedom of Maine.

  CADE.
 And good reason; for thereby is England main'd and fain to go
    with a staff, but that my puissance holds it up.
 Go to,
    then, I ask but this: can he that speaks with the tongue of an
    enemy be a good counsellor, or no?
  ALL.
 No, no; and therefore we'll have his head.

  STAFFORD.
 Herald, away; and throughout every town
    Proclaim them traitors that are up with Cade;
    That those which fly before the battle ends
    May, even in their wives'and children's sight,
    Be hang'd up for example at their doors.

    And you that be the King's friends, follow me.

                           Exeunt the TWO STAFFORDS and soldiers
  CADE.
 And you that love the commons follow me.

    Now show yourselves men; 'tis for liberty.
 They are all in order, and march toward us.
 Come,
    march forward.
                                        Exeunt




SCENE III.
 Where's Dick, the butcher of Ashford?
  DICK.

  CADE.
 They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and thou behavedst
    thyself as if thou hadst been in thine own slaughter-house;
    therefore thus will I reward thee- the Lent shall be as long
    again as it is, and thou shalt have a licence to kill for a
    hundred lacking one.

  DICK.
 I desire no more.

  CADE.
 And, to speak truth, thou deserv'st no less.
 If we mean to thrive and do good, break open the gaols and
    let out the prisoners.

  CADE.
 Come, let's march towards
    London.
                                               Exeunt




SCENE IV.
 I'll send some holy bishop to entreat;
    For God forbid so many simple souls
    Should perish by the sword! And I myself,
    Rather than bloody war shall cut them short,
    Will parley with Jack Cade their general.

  QUEEN.
 Ah, barbarous villains! Hath this lovely face  
    Rul'd like a wandering planet over me,
    And could it not enforce them to relent
    That were unworthy to behold the same?
  KING HENRY.
 Lord Say, Jack Cade hath sworn to have thy head.
 Ay, but I hope your Highness shall have his.

  QUEEN.
 How now! What news? Why com'st thou in such haste?
  MESSENGER.

    His army is a ragged multitude  
    Of hinds and peasants, rude and merciless;
    Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother's death
    Hath given them heart and courage to proceed.

    All scholars, lawyers, courtiers, gentlemen,
    They call false caterpillars and intend their death.

  KING HENRY.
 O graceless men! they know not what they do.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 My gracious lord, retire to Killingworth
    Until a power be rais'd to put them down.
 Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive,
    These Kentish rebels would be soon appeas'd!
  KING HENRY.
 Lord Say, the traitors hate thee;
    Therefore away with us to Killingworth.

  SAY.
 So might your Grace's person be in danger.

    The sight of me is odious in their eyes;
    And therefore in this city will I stay
    And live alone as secret as I may.


                      Enter another MESSENGER

  SECOND MESSENGER.
 Jack Cade hath gotten London Bridge.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Then linger not, my lord; away, take horse.

  KING HENRY.

  QUEEN.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Trust nobody, for fear you be betray'd.

  SAY.
                 Exeunt




SCENE V.
 The Tower

Enter LORD SCALES Upon the Tower, walking.
 Then enter two or three CITIZENS,
below

  SCALES.
 How now! Is Jack Cade slain?
  FIRST CITIZEN.
 No, my lord, nor likely to be slain; for they have
    won the bridge, killing all those that withstand them.

    The Lord Mayor craves aid of your honour from the
    Tower, to defend the city from the rebels.

  SCALES.
 Such aid as I can spare you shall command,
    But I am troubled here with them myself;
    The rebels have assay'd to win the Tower.

    But get you to Smithfield, and gather head,
    And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe;
    Fight for your King, your country, and your lives;
    And so, farewell, for I must hence again.
             Exeunt




SCENE VI.

London.
 Cannon street

Enter JACK CADE and the rest, and strikes his staff on London Stone

  CADE.
 And here, sitting upon
    London Stone, I charge and command that, of the city's cost, the
    pissing conduit run nothing but claret wine this first year of
    our reign.
 And now henceforward it shall be treason for any that
    calls me other than Lord Mortimer.
 Jack Cade! Jack Cade!
  CADE.
 Knock him down there.
                    [They kill him]
  SMITH.
 But first go and set
    London Bridge on fire; and, if you can, burn down the Tower too.
                                     Exeunt




SCENE VII.
  Then enter JACK CADE,
with his company

  CADE.
 So, sirs.
 Now go some and pull down the Savoy; others to th'
    Inns of Court; down with them all.

  DICK.
 I have a suit unto your lordship.

  DICK.
 Only that the laws of England may come out of your mouth.
 [Aside] Mass, 'twill be sore law then; for he was thrust in
    the mouth with a spear, and 'tis not whole yet.
 [Aside] Nay, John, it will be stinking law; for his breath
    stinks with eating toasted cheese.

  CADE.
 Away, burn all the
    records of the realm.

  JOHN.
 [Aside] Then we are like to have biting statutes, unless his
    teeth be pull'd out.

  CADE.
 And henceforward all things shall be in common.
 What canst thou answer to my
    Majesty for giving up of Normandy unto Mounsieur Basimecu the
    Dauphin of France? Be it known unto thee by these presence, even
    the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I am the besom that must
    sweep the court clean of such filth as thou art.
 It will be proved to thy face that thou  
    hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and a verb, and
    such abominable words as no Christian ear can endure to hear.
 Moreover, thou
    hast put them in prison, and because they could not read, thou
    hast hang'd them, when, indeed, only for that cause they have
    been most worthy to live.
 Thou dost ride in a foot-cloth, dost
    thou not?
  SAY.
 What of that?
  CADE.
 Marry, thou ought'st not to let thy horse wear a cloak, when
    honester men than thou go in their hose and doublets.

  DICK.
 And work in their shirt too, as myself, for example, that am
    a butcher.

  SAY.
 You men of Kent-
  DICK.
 What say you of Kent?
  SAY.
'
  CADE.

  SAY.
  
    Sweet is the country, because full of riches;
    The people liberal valiant, active, wealthy;
    Which makes me hope you are not void of pity.

    When have I aught exacted at your hands,
    But to maintain the King, the realm, and you?
    Large gifts have I bestow'd on learned clerks,
    Because my book preferr'd me to the King,
    And seeing ignorance is the curse of God,
    Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven,
    Unless you be possess'd with devilish spirits
    You cannot but forbear to murder me.

    This tongue hath parley'd unto foreign kings
    For your behoof.
 Great men have reaching hands.
 Oft have I struck
    Those that I never saw, and struck them dead.
 O monstrous coward! What, to come behind folks?
  SAY.
 These cheeks are pale for watching for your good.

  CADE.
 Long sitting to determine poor men's causes
    Hath made me full of sickness and diseases.
 Ye shall have a hempen caudle then, and the help of hatchet.

  DICK.
 Why dost thou quiver, man?
  SAY.
 The palsy, and not fear, provokes me.
 Nay, he nods at us, as who should say 'I'll be even with
    you'; I'll see if his head will stand steadier on a pole, or no.

    Are my chests fill'd up with extorted gold?
    Is my apparel sumptuous to behold?
    Whom have I injur'd, that ye seek my death?
    These hands are free from guiltless bloodshedding,
    This breast from harbouring foul deceitful thoughts.

    O, let me live!
  CADE.
 [Aside] I feel remorse in myself with his words; but I'll  
    bridle it.
 Go, take him away, I say, and strike
    off his head presently, and then break into his son-in-law's
    house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off his head, and bring them
    both upon two poles hither.
 It shall be done.

  SAY.
 Ah, countrymen! if when you make your pray'rs,
    God should be so obdurate as yourselves,
    How would it fare with your departed souls?
    And therefore yet relent and save my life.
 Away with him, and do as I command ye.
 Men shall hold of me in capite; and we charge and
    command that their wives be as free as heart can wish or tongue
    can tell.
 My lord, when shall we go to Cheapside, and take up
    commodities upon our bills?  
  CADE.
 O, brave!

                      Re-enter one with the heads

  CADE.

Southwark

Alarum and retreat.
 Enter again CADE and all his rabblement

  CADE.
 Up Fish Street! down Saint Magnus' Corner! Kill and knock
    down! Throw them into Thames!               [Sound a parley]
    What noise is this I hear? Dare any be so bold to sound retreat
    or parley when I command them kill?

            Enter BUCKINGHAM and old CLIFFORD, attended

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Ay, here they be that dare and will disturb thee.

  CLIFFORD.
 What say ye, countrymen? Will ye relent
    And yield to mercy whilst 'tis offer'd you,
    Or let a rebel lead you to your deaths?
    Who loves the King, and will embrace his pardon,  
    Fling up his cap and say 'God save his Majesty!'
    Who hateth him and honours not his father,
    Henry the Fifth, that made all France to quake,
    Shake he his weapon at us and pass by.

  ALL.
 God save the King! God save the King!
  CADE.
 But you are all
    recreants and dastards, and delight to live in slavery to the
    nobility.
 Is Cade the son of Henry the Fifth,
    That thus you do exclaim you'll go with him?
    Will he conduct you through the heart of France,  
    And make the meanest of you earls and dukes?
    Alas, he hath no home, no place to fly to;
    Nor knows he how to live but by the spoil,
    Unless by robbing of your friends and us.

    Were't not a shame that whilst you live at jar
    The fearful French, whom you late vanquished,
    Should make a start o'er seas and vanquish you?
    Methinks already in this civil broil
    I see them lording it in London streets,
    Crying 'Villiago!' unto all they meet.

    Better ten thousand base-born Cades miscarry
    Than you should stoop unto a Frenchman's mercy.

  ALL.
 A Clifford! a Clifford! We'll follow the King and Clifford.
 Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as this
    multitude? The name of Henry the Fifth hales them to an hundred
    mischiefs, and makes them leave me desolate.
 My sword make way for me for here
    is no staying.
 In despite of the devils and hell, have through
    the very middest of you! and heavens and honour be witness that
    no want of resolution in me, but only my followers' base and
    ignominious treasons, makes me betake me to my heels.

 Exit
  BUCKINGHAM.
 What, is he fled? Go some, and follow him;
    And he that brings his head unto the King
    Shall have a thousand crowns for his reward.
 Was ever king that joy'd an earthly throne
    And could command no more content than I?
    No sooner was I crept out of my cradle
    But I was made a king, at nine months old.


               Enter BUCKINGHAM and old CLIFFORD

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Health and glad tidings to your Majesty!
  KING HENRY.
 He is fled, my lord, and all his powers do yield,  
    And humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
    Expect your Highness' doom of life or death.

    Continue still in this so good a mind,
    And Henry, though he be infortunate,
    Assure yourselves, will never be unkind.

    And so, with thanks and pardon to you all,
    I do dismiss you to your several countries.

  ALL.
 Please it your Grace to be advertised
    The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland
    And with a puissant and a mighty power
    Of gallowglasses and stout kerns
    Is marching hitherward in proud array,  
    And still proclaimeth, as he comes along,
    His arms are only to remove from thee
    The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms a traitor.

  KING HENRY.
 Thus stands my state, 'twixt Cade and York distress'd;
    Like to a ship that, having scap'd a tempest,
    Is straightway calm'd, and boarded with a pirate;
    But now is Cade driven back, his men dispers'd,
    And now is York in arms to second him.

    I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him
    And ask him what's the reason of these arms.

  SOMERSET.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 I will, my lord, and doubt not so to deal
    As all things shall redound unto your good.
  
  KING HENRY.
 Come, wife, let's in, and learn to govern better;
    For yet may England curse my wretched reign.
 Iden's garden

Enter CADE

  CADE.
 Fie on ambitions! Fie on myself, that have a sword and yet am
    ready to famish! These five days have I hid me in these woods and
    durst not peep out, for all the country is laid for me; but now
    am I so hungry that, if I might have a lease of my life for a
    thousand years, I could stay no longer.
 Wherefore, on a brick
    wall have I climb'd into this garden, to see if I can eat grass
    or pick a sallet another while, which is not amiss to cool a
    man's stomach this hot weather.
 Lord, who would live turmoiled in the court  
    And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
    This small inheritance my father left me
    Contenteth me, and worth a monarchy.
 Here's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray, for
    entering his fee-simple without leave.
 Ah, villain, thou wilt
    betray me, and get a thousand crowns of the King by carrying my
    head to him; but I'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich and
    swallow my sword like a great pin ere thou and I part.

  IDEN.
 Why, rude companion, whatsoe'er thou be,
    I know thee not; why then should I betray thee?
    Is't not enough to break into my garden
    And like a thief to come to rob my grounds,
    Climbing my walls in spite of me the owner,
    But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms?
  CADE.
 Brave thee? Ay, by the best blood that ever was broach'd, and
    beard thee too.

  IDEN.
 Nay, it shall ne'er be said, while England stands,
    That Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent,
    Took odds to combat a poor famish'd man.
 By my valour, the most complete champion that ever I heard!
    Steel, if thou turn the edge, or cut not out the burly bon'd
    clown in chines of beef ere thou sleep in thy sheath, I beseech
    God on my knees thou mayst be turn'd to hobnails.
 Let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me but the
    ten meals I have lost, and I'd defy them all.
 Wither, garden, and
    be henceforth a burying place to all that do dwell in this house,
    because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled.

  IDEN.

  CADE.
 Iden, farewell; and be proud of thy victory.
 How much thou wrong'st me, heaven be my judge.

    Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee!
    And as I thrust thy body in with my sword,
    So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT V.
 SCENE I.

    Ah, sancta majestas! who would not buy thee dear?
    Let them obey that knows not how to rule;
    This hand was made to handle nought but gold.

    I cannot give due action to my words
    Except a sword or sceptre balance it.

    A sceptre shall it have, have I a soul
    On which I'll toss the flower-de-luce of France.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 York, if thou meanest well I greet thee well.

    Art thou a messenger, or come of pleasure?
  BUCKINGHAM.
 A messenger from Henry, our dread liege,
    To know the reason of these arms in peace;
    Or why thou, being a subject as I am,
    Against thy oath and true allegiance sworn,
    Should raise so great a power without his leave,
    Or dare to bring thy force so near the court.

  YORK.
 [Aside] Scarce can I speak, my choler is so great.

    O, I could hew up rocks and fight with flint,
    I am so angry at these abject terms;
    And now, like Ajax Telamonius,
    On sheep or oxen could I spend my fury.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 That is too much presumption on thy part;
    But if thy arms be to no other end,
    The King hath yielded unto thy demand:
    The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.
 Upon mine honour, he is prisoner.

    Soldiers, I thank you all; disperse yourselves;
    Meet me to-morrow in Saint George's field,
    You shall have pay and everything you wish.

    And let my sovereign, virtuous Henry,
    Command my eldest son, nay, all my sons,
    As pledges of my fealty and love.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 York, I commend this kind submission.


                  Enter the KING, and attendants

  KING HENRY.
 Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to us,
    That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm?
  YORK.

  KING HENRY.
 Then what intends these forces thou dost bring?
  YORK.
 If one so rude and of so mean condition
    May pass into the presence of a king,
    Lo, I present your Grace a traitor's head,
    The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.
 The head of Cade! Great God, how just art Thou!  
    O, let me view his visage, being dead,
    That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.
 I was, an't like your Majesty.

  KING HENRY.
 How art thou call'd? And what is thy degree?
  IDEN.
 Alexander Iden, that's my name;
    A poor esquire of Kent that loves his king.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 So please it you, my lord, 'twere not amiss
    He were created knight for his good service.
 Iden, kneel down.
 [He kneels] Rise up a knight.

    We give thee for reward a thousand marks,
    And will that thou thenceforth attend on us.

  IDEN.
 May Iden live to merit such a bounty,
    And never live but true unto his liege!

                    Enter the QUEEN and SOMERSET

  KING HENRY.
 See, Buckingham! Somerset comes with th' Queen:
    Go, bid her hide him quickly from the Duke.

  QUEEN.
 For thousand Yorks he shall not hide his head,  
    But boldly stand and front him to his face.

  YORK.

    That head of thine doth not become a crown;
    Thy hand is made to grasp a palmer's staff,
    And not to grace an awful princely sceptre.

    That gold must round engirt these brows of mine,
    Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles' spear,
    Is able with the change to kill and cure.

    Give place.
  
  SOMERSET.

    Obey, audacious traitor; kneel for grace.

  YORK.
 Wouldst have me kneel? First let me ask of these,
    If they can brook I bow a knee to man.

                                                 Exit BUCKINGHAM
  YORK.
 O blood-bespotted Neapolitan,
    Outcast of Naples, England's bloody scourge!
    The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,
    Shall be their father's bail; and bane to those
    That for my surety will refuse the boys!

               Enter EDWARD and RICHARD PLANTAGENET
  
    See where they come: I'll warrant they'll make it good.

  CLIFFORD.
 Health and all happiness to my lord the King!
                                                        [Kneels]
  YORK.
 I thank thee, Clifford.
 Say, what news with thee?
    Nay, do not fright us with an angry look.
 He is a traitor; let him to the Tower,
    And chop away that factious pate of his.
 He is arrested, but will not obey;
    His sons, he says, shall give their words for him.
  
  YORK.
 Will you not, sons?
  EDWARD.
 Ay, noble father, if our words will serve.

  CLIFFORD.
 Why, what a brood of traitors have we here!
  YORK.
 Look in a glass, and call thy image so:
    I am thy king, and thou a false-heart traitor.


               Enter the EARLS OF WARWICK and SALISBURY

  CLIFFORD.
 Are these thy bears? We'll bait thy bears to death,
    And manacle the berard in their chains,
    If thou dar'st bring them to the baiting-place.

  CLIFFORD.
 Why, Warwick, hath thy knee forgot to bow?
    Old Salisbury, shame to thy silver hair,
    Thou mad misleader of thy brainsick son!
    What, wilt thou on thy death-bed play the ruffian
    And seek for sorrow with thy spectacles?
    O, where is faith? O, where is loyalty?
    If it be banish'd from the frosty head,
    Where shall it find a harbour in the earth?
    Wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war
    And shame thine honourable age with blood?
    Why art thou old, and want'st experience?
    Or wherefore dost abuse it, if thou hast it?
    For shame! In duty bend thy knee to me,
    That bows unto the grave with mickle age.
  
  SALISBURY.
 My lord, I have considered with myself
    The tide of this most renowned duke,
    And in my conscience do repute his Grace
    The rightful heir to England's royal seat.

  KING HENRY.
 Hast thou not sworn allegiance unto me?
  SALISBURY.
 I have.

  KING HENRY.
 Canst thou dispense with heaven for such an oath?
  SALISBURY.

    Who can be bound by any solemn vow
    To do a murd'rous deed, to rob a man,
    To force a spotless virgin's chastity,
    To reave the orphan of his patrimony,
    To wring the widow from her custom'd right,
    And have no other reason for this wrong
    But that he was bound by a solemn oath?
  QUEEN.

  KING HENRY.
 Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.

  YORK.
 Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou hast,
    I am resolv'd for death or dignity.
  
  CLIFFORD.
 The first I warrant thee, if dreams prove true.
 You were best to go to bed and dream again
    To keep thee from the tempest of the field.

  CLIFFORD.
 I am resolv'd to bear a greater storm
    Than any thou canst conjure up to-day;
    And that I'll write upon thy burgonet,
    Might I but know thee by thy household badge.
 And from thy burgonet I'll rend thy bear
    And tread it under foot with all contempt,
    Despite the berard that protects the bear.
 And so to arms, victorious father,
    To quell the rebels and their complices.
  
  YOUNG CLIFFORD.

Saint Albans

Alarums to the battle.

    Proud northern lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
  WARWICK is hoarse with calling thee to arms.
 The deadly-handed Clifford slew my steed;
    But match to match I have encount'red him,
    And made a prey for carrion kites and crows
    Even of the bonny beast he lov'd so well.
 Of one or both of us the time is come.

  YORK.
 Hold, Warwick, seek thee out some other chase,
    For I myself must hunt this deer to death.
            Exit
  CLIFFORD.
 What seest thou in me, York? Why dost thou pause?
  YORK.
 With thy brave bearing should I be in love
    But that thou art so fast mine enemy.

  YORK.
 My soul and body on the action both!
  YORK.
 A dreadful lay! Address thee instantly.

                                 [They fight and CLIFFORD falls]
  CLIFFORD.
 La fin couronne les oeuvres.
                  [Dies]
  YORK.
 O war, thou son of hell,
    Whom angry heavens do make their minister,
    Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part
    Hot coals of vengeance! Let no soldier fly.
 York not our old men spares;
    No more will I their babes.
 Tears virginal
    Shall be to me even as the dew to fire;
    And beauty, that the tyrant oft reclaims,
    Shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax.
 SOMERSET is killed

  RICHARD.
             Exit

        Fight.
 Excursions.
 Away, my lord! You are slow; for shame, away!
  KING HENRY.
 Can we outrun the heavens? Good Margaret, stay.

  QUEEN.

    Now is it manhood, wisdom, and defence,
    To give the enemy way, and to secure us
    By what we can, which can no more but fly.


                     Re-enter YOUNG CLIFFORD

  YOUNG CLIFFORD.
 But that my heart's on future mischief set,
    I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly;
    But fly you must; uncurable discomfit
    Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.

    Away, for your relief! and we will live
    To see their day and them our fortune give.

Fields near Saint Albans

Alarum.
 Enter YORK, RICHARD, WARWICK, and soldiers,
with drum and colours

  YORK.

  RICHARD.

    But, noble as he is, look where he comes.

  
                         Enter SALISBURY

  SALISBURY.
 Now, by my sword, well hast thou fought to-day!
    By th' mass, so did we all.
 I thank you, Richard:
    God knows how long it is I have to live,
    And it hath pleas'd Him that three times to-day
    You have defended me from imminent death.
 I know our safety is to follow them;
    For, as I hear, the King is fled to London
    To call a present court of Parliament.
 After them? Nay, before them, if we can.

    Now, by my faith, lords, 'twas a glorious day:
    Saint Albans' battle, won by famous York,
    Shall be eterniz'd in all age to come.

    Sound drum and trumpets and to London all;  
    And more such days as these to us befall!             Exeunt


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>





1591

THE THIRD PART OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  KING HENRY THE SIXTH
  EDWARD, PRINCE OF WALES, his son
  LEWIS XI, King of France           DUKE OF SOMERSET
  DUKE OF EXETER                     EARL OF OXFORD
  EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND             EARL OF WESTMORELAND
  LORD CLIFFORD
  RICHARD PLANTAGENET, DUKE OF YORK
  EDWARD, EARL OF MARCH, afterwards KING EDWARD IV, his son
  EDMUND, EARL OF RUTLAND, his son
  GEORGE, afterwards DUKE OF CLARENCE, his son
  RICHARD, afterwards DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, his son
  DUKE OF NORFOLK                    MARQUIS OF MONTAGUE
  EARL OF WARWICK                    EARL OF PEMBROKE
  LORD HASTINGS                      LORD STAFFORD
  SIR JOHN MORTIMER, uncle to the Duke of York
  SIR HUGH MORTIMER, uncle to the Duke of York
  HENRY, EARL OF RICHMOND, a youth
  LORD RIVERS, brother to Lady Grey
  SIR WILLIAM STANLEY                SIR JOHN MONTGOMERY
  SIR JOHN SOMERVILLE                TUTOR, to Rutland  
  MAYOR OF YORK                      LIEUTENANT OF THE TOWER
  A NOBLEMAN                         TWO KEEPERS
  A HUNTSMAN
  A SON that has killed his father
  A FATHER that has killed his son

  QUEEN MARGARET
  LADY GREY, afterwards QUEEN to Edward IV
  BONA, sister to the French Queen

  Soldiers, Attendants, Messengers, Watchmen, etc.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
 SCENE I.
 I wonder how the King escap'd our hands.

  YORK.
 While we pursu'd the horsemen of the north,
    He slily stole away and left his men;
    Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
    Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
    Cheer'd up the drooping army, and himself,
    Lord Clifford, and Lord Stafford, all abreast,
    Charg'd our main battle's front, and, breaking in,
    Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.

  EDWARD.

  MONTAGUE.

                                 [Throwing down SOMERSET'S head]
  YORK.
 Richard hath best deserv'd of all my sons.

    But is your Grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?
  NORFOLK.
 Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!
  RICHARD.
 Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.

  WARWICK.
 And so do I.

    This is the palace of the fearful King,
    And this the regal seat.
 Possess it, York;
    For this is thine, and not King Henry's heirs'.

  YORK.
 Assist me then, sweet Warwick, and I will;
    For hither we have broken in by force.

  NORFOLK.
 We'll all assist you; he that flies shall die.
 Thanks, gentle Norfolk.
 Stay by me, my lords;
    And, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.

                                                    [They go up]
  WARWICK.
  
    Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.
 The Queen this day here holds her parliament,
    But little thinks we shall be of her council.

    By words or blows here let us win our right.

  WARWICK.
 The bloody parliament shall this be call'd,
    Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be King,
    And bashful Henry depos'd, whose cowardice
    Hath made us by-words to our enemies.

  YORK.
 Then leave me not, my lords; be resolute:
    I mean to take possession of my right.

  WARWICK.

    I'll plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares.

    Resolve thee, Richard; claim the English crown.

                                      [YORK occupies the throne]

       Flourish.
 My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
    Even in the chair of state! Belike he means,
    Back'd by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
    To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 If I be not, heavens be reveng'd on me!
  CLIFFORD.
 The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.
 What, shall we suffer this? Let's pluck him down;
    My heart for anger burns; I cannot brook it.

  KING HENRY.
 Patience is for poltroons such as he;
    He durst not sit there had your father liv'd.

    My gracious lord, here in the parliament
    Let us assail the family of York.

  KING HENRY.
 But when the Duke is slain they'll quickly fly.

  KING HENRY.
 Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
    To make a shambles of the parliament house!
    Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words, and threats,
    Shall be the war that Henry means to use.

    Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne
    And kneel for grace and mercy at my feet;
    I am thy sovereign.

  YORK.
 I am thine.

  EXETER.
 For shame, come down; he made thee Duke of York.

  YORK.

  EXETER.
 Thy father was a traitor to the crown.

  WARWICK.

  CLIFFORD.
 Whom should he follow but his natural king?
  WARWICK.
 True, Clifford; and that's Richard Duke of York.

  KING HENRY.
 It must and shall be so; content thyself.

  WARWICK.
 Be Duke of Lancaster; let him be King.
 He is both King and Duke of Lancaster;
    And that the Lord of Westmoreland shall maintain.
 And Warwick shall disprove it.
 You forget
    That we are those which chas'd you from the field,
    And slew your fathers, and with colours spread
    March'd through the city to the palace gates.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief;
    And, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.

  WARWICK.
 Poor Clifford, how I scorn his worthless threats!
  YORK.
 What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
    Thy father was, as thou art, Duke of York;
    Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March:  
    I am the son of Henry the Fifth,
    Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop,
    And seiz'd upon their towns and provinces.

  KING HENRY.

    Father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.
 Sweet father, do so; set it on your head.

  RICHARD.
 Sound drums and trumpets, and the King will fly.
 Sons, peace!
  KING HENRY.

  WARWICK.
 Hear him, lords;
    And be you silent and attentive too,
    For he that interrupts him shall not live.

  KING HENRY.
 Think'st thou that I will leave my kingly throne,
    Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
    No; first shall war unpeople this my realm;  
    Ay, and their colours, often borne in France,
    And now in England to our heart's great sorrow,
    Shall be my winding-sheet.
 Why faint you, lords?
    My title's good, and better far than his.

  WARWICK.

  KING HENRY.

  YORK.

  KING HENRY.
-
    Tell me, may not a king adopt an heir?
  YORK.
 What then?
  KING HENRY.
 An if he may, then am I lawful King;
    For Richard, in the view of many lords,
    Resign'd the crown to Henry the Fourth,
    Whose heir my father was, and I am his.

  YORK.
 He rose against him, being his sovereign,
    And made him to resign his crown perforce.

  WARWICK.
 Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrain'd,
    Think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown?
  EXETER.
 No; for he could not so resign his crown
    But that the next heir should succeed and reign.
  
  KING HENRY.
 Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?
  EXETER.

  YORK.
 Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?
  EXETER.
 [Aside] All will revolt from me, and turn to him.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

  WARWICK.
 Depos'd he shall be, in despite of all.
 Thou art deceiv'd.
 'Tis not thy southern power
    Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
    Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
    Can set the Duke up in despite of me.

  CLIFFORD.
 King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
    Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence.

    May that ground gape, and swallow me alive,
    Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father!
  KING HENRY.
 Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.

    What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?
  WARWICK.
 Do right unto this princely Duke of York;  
    Or I will fill the house with armed men,
    And over the chair of state, where now he sits,
    Write up his title with usurping blood.

                                [He stamps with his foot and the
                                       soldiers show themselves]
  KING HENRY.
 My Lord of Warwick, hear but one word:
    Let me for this my life-time reign as king.

  YORK.
 Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,
    And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou liv'st.

  KING HENRY.
 How hast thou injur'd both thyself and or us!
  WESTMORELAND.
 Nor I.

  CLIFFORD.

  WESTMORELAND.
  
  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Be thou a prey unto the house of York
    And die in bands for this unmanly deed!
  CLIFFORD.
 In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
    Or live in peace abandon'd and despis'd!
                                Exeunt NORTHUMBERLAND, CLIFFORD,
                                                and WESTMORELAND
  WARWICK.
 Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.

  EXETER.
 They seek revenge, and therefore will not yield.

  KING HENRY.
 Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son,
    Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.

  YORK.
 This oath I willingly take, and will perform.
 Long live King Henry! Plantagenet, embrace him.

  KING HENRY.
 And long live thou, and these thy forward sons!
  YORK.
 Accurs'd be he that seeks to make them foes!
                                   [Sennet.
 Here they come down]
  YORK.
 Farewell, my gracious lord; I'll to my castle.

  WARWICK.
 And I'll keep London with my soldiers.

  NORFOLK.
 And I to Norfolk with my followers.

  MONTAGUE.
 And I unto the sea, from whence I came.


            Enter QUEEN MARGARET and the PRINCE OF WALES

  EXETER.

  KING HENRY.
 Exeter, so will I.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Nay, go not from me; I will follow thee.

  KING HENRY.
 Be patient, gentle queen, and I will stay.
  
  QUEEN MARGARET.

  PRINCE OF WALES.
 Father, you cannot disinherit me.

    If you be King, why should not I succeed?
  KING HENRY.
 Pardon me, Margaret; pardon me, sweet son.

    The Earl of Warwick and the Duke enforc'd me.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Enforc'd thee! Art thou King and wilt be
      forc'd?
    I shame to hear thee speak.

    To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
    What is it but to make thy sepulchre
    And creep into it far before thy time?
    Warwick is Chancellor and the lord of Calais;
    Stern Falconbridge commands the narrow seas;
    The Duke is made Protector of the realm;
    And yet shalt thou be safe? Such safety finds
    The trembling lamb environed with wolves.

    Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
    The soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes
    Before I would have granted to that act.

    But thou prefer'st thy life before thine honour;
    And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself,
    Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,
    Until that act of parliament be repeal'd
    Whereby my son is disinherited.

    Thus do I leave thee.

  KING HENRY.
 Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Thou hast spoke too much already; get thee gone.

  KING HENRY.
 Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?
  QUEEN MARGARET.

                            Exeunt QUEEN MARGARET and the PRINCE
  KING HENRY.

    I'll write unto them, and entreat them fair;
    Come, cousin, you shall be the messenger.
  
  EXETER.
 And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.

Sandal Castle, near Wakefield, in Yorkshire

Flourish.
 Enter EDWARD, RICHARD, and MONTAGUE

  RICHARD.
 Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.

  EDWARD.
 But I have reasons strong and forcible.


                     Enter the DUKE OF YORK

  YORK.
 Why, how now, sons and brother! at a strife?
    What is your quarrel? How began it first?
  EDWARD.
 No quarrel, but a slight contention.

  YORK.
 About what?
  RICHARD.

  RICHARD.
 Your right depends not on his life or death.

  EDWARD.
 Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now.

    By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
    It will outrun you, father, in the end.
  
  YORK.

  EDWARD.
 But for a kingdom any oath may be broken:
    I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.

  RICHARD.

  YORK.
 I shall be, if I claim by open war.

  RICHARD.
 I'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.

  YORK.
 Thou canst not, son; it is impossible.

  RICHARD.
 An oath is of no moment, being not took
    Before a true and lawful magistrate
    That hath authority over him that swears.

    Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk
    And tell him privily of our intent.

    While you are thus employ'd, what resteth more
    But that I seek occasion how to rise,
    And yet the King not privy to my drift,
    Nor any of the house of Lancaster?

                      Enter a MESSENGER

    But, stay.
 What news? Why com'st thou in such post?
  MESSENGER.
 The Queen with all the northern earls and lords
    Intend here to besiege you in your castle.

    She is hard by with twenty thousand men;  
    And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.

  YORK.
 Ay, with my sword.
 What! think'st thou that we fear them?
    Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me;
    My brother Montague shall post to London.

    Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
    Whom we have left protectors of the King,
    With pow'rful policy strengthen themselves
    And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.

  MONTAGUE.
 Brother, I go; I'll win them, fear it not.
                Exit

              Enter SIR JOHN and SIR HUGH MORTIMER

  YORK.

  YORK.
 Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need.

    A woman's general; what should we fear?  
                                              [A march afar off]
  EDWARD.
 I hear their drums.
 Let's set our men in order,
    And issue forth and bid them battle straight.

  YORK.
 Five men to twenty! Though the odds be great,
    I doubt not, uncle, of our victory.

    Many a battle have I won in France,
    When as the enemy hath been ten to one;
    Why should I not now have the like success?           Exeunt




SCENE III.

Field of battle between Sandal Castle and Wakefield

Alarum.
 Chaplain, away! Thy priesthood saves thy life.

    As for the brat of this accursed duke,
    Whose father slew my father, he shall die.

  TUTOR.

  CLIFFORD.
 Soldiers, away with him!
  TUTOR.
 Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child,
    Lest thou be hated both of God and man.

                                    Exit, forced off by soldiers
  CLIFFORD.
 How now, is he dead already? Or is it fear
    That makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.
 So looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch
    That trembles under his devouring paws;  
    And so he walks, insulting o'er his prey,
    And so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder.

    Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword,
    And not with such a cruel threat'ning look!
    Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die.

    I am too mean a subject for thy wrath;
    Be thou reveng'd on men, and let me live.
 In vain thou speak'st, poor boy; my father's blood
    Hath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter.

  RUTLAND.

    The sight of any of the house of York
    Is as a fury to torment my soul;
    And till I root out their accursed line
    And leave not one alive, I live in hell.
 O, let me pray before I take my death!
    To thee I pray: sweet Clifford, pity me.

  CLIFFORD.

  RUTLAND.

  RUTLAND.

    Thou hast one son; for his sake pity me,
    Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
    He be as miserably slain as I.

    Ah, let me live in prison all my days;
    And when I give occasion of offence
    Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.
       [Stabs him]
  RUTLAND.
 Plantagenet, I come, Plantagenet;
    And this thy son's blood cleaving to my blade
    Shall rust upon my weapon, till thy blood,
    Congeal'd with this, do make me wipe off both.
          Exit




SCENE IV.

    My uncles both are slain in rescuing me;
    And all my followers to the eager foe
    Turn back and fly, like ships before the wind,
    Or lambs pursu'd by hunger-starved wolves.

    My sons- God knows what hath bechanced them;
    But this I know- they have demean'd themselves
    Like men born to renown by life or death.
'
    And full as oft came Edward to my side
    With purple falchion, painted to the hilt
    In blood of those that had encount'red him.

    And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
    Richard cried 'Charge, and give no foot of ground!'
    And cried 'A crown, or else a glorious tomb!
    A sceptre, or an earthly sepulchre!'  
    With this we charg'd again; but out alas!
    We bodg'd again; as I have seen a swan
    With bootless labour swim against the tide
    And spend her strength with over-matching waves.

                                         [A short alarum within]
    Ah, hark! The fatal followers do pursue,
    And I am faint and cannot fly their fury;
    And were I strong, I would not shun their fury.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

  CLIFFORD.

  YORK.
 So cowards fight when they can fly no further;
    So doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons;
    So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
    Breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.
 O Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
    And in thy thought o'errun my former time;
    And, if thou canst for blushing, view this face,
    And bite thy tongue that slanders him with cowardice
    Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this!
  CLIFFORD.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Hold, valiant Clifford; for a thousand causes
    I would prolong awhile the traitor's life.
  
    Wrath makes him deaf; speak thou, Northumberland.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Hold, Clifford! do not honour him so much
    To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart.

    What valour were it, when a cur doth grin,
    For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
    When he might spurn him with his foot away?
    It is war's prize to take all vantages;
    And ten to one is no impeach of valour.

                         [They lay hands on YORK, who struggles]
  CLIFFORD.

  YORK.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 What would your Grace have done unto him now?
  QUEEN MARGARET.

    Alas, poor York! but that I hate thee deadly,
    I should lament thy miserable state.

    What, hath thy fiery heart so parch'd thine entrails
    That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death?
    Why art thou patient, man? Thou shouldst be mad;
    And I to make thee mad do mock thee thus.

    Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.

    A crown for York!-and, lords, bow low to him.

    But how is it that great Plantagenet
    Is crown'd so soon and broke his solemn oath?
    As I bethink me, you should not be King
    Till our King Henry had shook hands with death.

    And will you pale your head in Henry's glory,
    And rob his temples of the diadem,
    Now in his life, against your holy oath?
    O, 'tis a fault too too
    Off with the crown and with the crown his head;
    And, whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.
 That is my office, for my father's sake.

    Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
    Of both the Sicils and Jerusalem,
    Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.

    Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
    It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen;
    Unless the adage must be verified,
    That beggars mounted run their horse to death.

    'Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud;
    But, God He knows, thy share thereof is small.

    'Tis virtue that doth make them most admir'd;  
    The contrary doth make thee wond'red at.

    'Tis government that makes them seem divine;
    The want thereof makes thee abominable.

    Thou art as opposite to every good
    As the Antipodes are unto us,
    Or as the south to the septentrion.

    Bid'st thou me rage? Why, now thou hast thy wish;
    Wouldst have me weep? Why, now thou hast thy will;
    For raging wind blows up incessant showers,
    And when the rage allays, the rain begins.

    These tears are my sweet Rutland's obsequies;
    And every drop cries vengeance for his death
    'Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false Frenchwoman.
 Beshrew me, but his passions move me so  
    That hardly can I check my eyes from tears.
 That face of his the hungry cannibals
    Would not have touch'd, would not have stain'd with blood;
    But you are more inhuman, more inexorable-
    O, ten times more- than tigers of Hyrcania.

    Keep thou the napkin, and go boast of this;
    And if thou tell'st the heavy story right,
    Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears;
    Yea, even my foes will shed fast-falling tears
    And say 'Alas, it was a piteous deed!'
    There, take the crown, and with the crown my curse;
    And in thy need such comfort come to thee
    As now I reap at thy too cruel hand!
    Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world;
    My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads!
  NORTHUMBERLAND.

  QUEEN MARGARET.

  CLIFFORD.

                                                  [Stabbing him]
  QUEEN MARGARET.
 And here's to right our gentle-hearted king.

                                                  [Stabbing him]
  YORK.
 Open Thy gate of mercy, gracious God!
    My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.

                                                          [Dies]
  QUEEN MARGARET.

                                                Flourish.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.

A plain near Mortimer's Cross in Herefordshire

A march.

    How fares my brother? Why is he so sad?
  RICHARD.
 I cannot joy until I be resolv'd
    Where our right valiant father is become.

    I saw him in the battle range about,
    And watch'd him how he singled Clifford forth.

    Methinks 'tis prize enough to be his son.

    In this the heaven figures some event.

  EDWARD.

    I think it cites us, brother, to the field,
    That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
    Each one already blazing by our meeds,
    Should notwithstanding join our lights together  
    And overshine the earth, as this the world.
 Ah, one that was a woeful looker-on
    When as the noble Duke of York was slain,
    Your princely father and my loving lord!
  EDWARD.
 O, speak no more! for I have heard too much.
 Say how he died, for I will hear it all.

  MESSENGER.

    But Hercules himself must yield to odds;
    And many strokes, though with a little axe,  
    Hews down and fells the hardest-timber'd oak.

  EDWARD.

    O Clifford, boist'rous Clifford, thou hast slain
    The flow'r of Europe for his chivalry;
    And treacherously hast thou vanquish'd him,
    For hand to hand he would have vanquish'd thee.

    Now my soul's palace is become a prison.

  RICHARD.

    To weep is to make less the depth of grief.

    Tears then for babes; blows and revenge for me!
    Richard, I bear thy name; I'll venge thy death,
    Or die renowned by attempting it.

  EDWARD.
 Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird,
    Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun;
    For chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom, say:
    Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.
  

         March.
 Enter WARWICK, MONTAGUE, and their army

  WARWICK.

    O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!
  EDWARD.
 O Warwick, Warwick! that Plantagenet
    Which held thee dearly as his soul's redemption
    Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.
 Ten days ago I drown'd these news in tears;
    And now, to add more measure to your woes,
    I come to tell you things sith then befall'n.

    I, then in London, keeper of the King,  
    Muster'd my soldiers, gathered flocks of friends,
    And very well appointed, as I thought,
    March'd toward Saint Albans to intercept the Queen,
    Bearing the King in my behalf along;
    For by my scouts I was advertised
    That she was coming with a full intent
    To dash our late decree in parliament
    Touching King Henry's oath and your succession.

    I cheer'd them up with justice of our cause,
    With promise of high pay and great rewards,
    But all in vain; they had no heart to fight,
    And we in them no hope to win the day;
    So that we fled: the King unto the Queen;
    Lord George your brother, Norfolk, and myself,
    In haste post-haste are come to join with you;
    For in the marches here we heard you were
    Making another head to fight again.
 Some six miles off the Duke is with the soldiers;
    And for your brother, he was lately sent
    From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
    With aid of soldiers to this needful war.

  RICHARD.
 'Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled.

    Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,
    But ne'er till now his scandal of retire.

  WARWICK.
 Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear;  
    For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine
    Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry's head
    And wring the awful sceptre from his fist,
    Were he as famous and as bold in war
    As he is fam'd for mildness, peace, and prayer.
 I know it well, Lord Warwick; blame me not.

    But in this troublous time what's to be done?
    Shall we go throw away our coats of steel
    And wrap our bodies in black mourning-gowns,
    Numbering our Ave-Maries with our beads?
    Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
    Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
    If for the last, say 'Ay,' and to it, lords.

    Attend me, lords.
  
    He swore consent to your succession,
    His oath enrolled in the parliament;
    And now to London all the crew are gone
    To frustrate both his oath and what beside
    May make against the house of Lancaster.

    Now if the help of Norfolk and myself,
    With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
    Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,
    Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
    Why, Via! to London will we march amain,
    And once again bestride our foaming steeds,
    And once again cry 'Charge upon our foes!'
    But never once again turn back and fly.

  RICHARD.

    Ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day
    That cries 'Retire!' if Warwick bid him stay.

  EDWARD.

    King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
    Stay we no longer, dreaming of renown,
    But sound the trumpets and about our task.
 Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,
    As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
    I come to pierce it or to give thee mine.
 Then strike up drums.
 God and Saint George for us!

                       Enter a MESSENGER

  WARWICK.
 Why, then it sorts; brave warriors, let's away.
 Enter KING HENRY, QUEEN MARGARET, the PRINCE OF WALES, CLIFFORD,
NORTHUMBERLAND, with drum and trumpets

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.

    Yonder's the head of that arch-enemy
    That sought to be encompass'd with your crown.

    Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?
  KING HENRY.

    Withhold revenge, dear God; 'tis not my fault,
    Nor wittingly have I infring'd my vow.

  CLIFFORD.
 My gracious liege, this too much lenity
    And harmful pity must be laid aside.

    To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
    Not to the beast that would usurp their den.

    Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
    Not his that spoils her young before her face.

    Who scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting?  
    Not he that sets his foot upon her back,
    The smallest worm will turn, being trodden on,
    And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.

    Ambitious York did level at thy crown,
    Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows.

    He, but a Duke, would have his son a king,
    And raise his issue like a loving sire:
    Thou, being a king, bless'd with a goodly son,
    Didst yield consent to disinherit him,
    Which argued thee a most unloving father.

    Unreasonable creatures feed their young;
    And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
    Yet, in protection of their tender ones,
    Who hath not seen them- even with those wings
    Which sometime they have us'd with fearful flight-
    Make war with him that climb'd unto their nest,
    Offering their own lives in their young's defence
    For shame, my liege, make them your precedent!
    Were it not pity that this goodly boy
    Should lose his birthright by his father's fault,  
    And long hereafter say unto his child
    'What my great-grandfather and grandsire got
    My careless father fondly gave away'?
    Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy;
    And let his manly face, which promiseth
    Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart
    To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.

  KING HENRY.

    But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear
    That things ill got had ever bad success?
    And happy always was it for that son
    Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
    I'll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind;
    And would my father had left me no more!
    For all the rest is held at such a rate
    As brings a thousand-fold more care to keep
    Than in possession any jot of pleasure.

  KING HENRY.
 Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight;
    And learn this lesson: Draw thy sword in right.
 My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
    I'll draw it as apparent to the crown,
    And in that quarrel use it to the death.

  CLIFFORD.
 Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.


                      Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER.
  
  CLIFFORD.
 I would your Highness would depart the field:
    The Queen hath best success when you are absent.
 Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.

  KING HENRY.
 Why, that's my fortune too; therefore I'll stay.
 Now, perjur'd Henry, wilt thou kneel for grace
    And set thy diadem upon my head,
    Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?
  QUEEN MARGARET.

    I was adopted heir by his consent:  
    Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,
    You that are King, though he do wear the crown,
    Have caus'd him by new act of parliament
    To blot out me and put his own son in.
 Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!
  CLIFFORD.
 'Twas you that kill'd young Rutland, was it not?
  CLIFFORD.
 Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.

  RICHARD.
 What say'st thou, Henry? Wilt thou yield the crown?
  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Why, how now, long-tongu'd Warwick! Dare you speak?
    When you and I met at Saint Albans last
    Your legs did better service than your hands.

  WARWICK.
 Then 'twas my turn to fly, and now 'tis thine.

  CLIFFORD.
 You said so much before, and yet you fled.

  WARWICK.
 Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.

    Break off the parley; for scarce I can refrain
    The execution of my big-swol'n heart
    Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.
 Have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.
 My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
    Cannot be cur'd by words; therefore be still.
 Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword.
 Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no?
    A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day
    That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.
 If that be right which Warwick says is right,
    There is no wrong, but every thing is right.
 Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands;
    For well I wot thou hast thy mother's tongue.
 But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam;
    But like a foul misshapen stigmatic,
    Mark'd by the destinies to be avoided,
    As venom toads or lizards' dreadful stings.

  RICHARD.
 Iron of Naples hid with English gilt,
    Whose father bears the title of a king-
    As if a channel should be call'd the sea-
    Sham'st thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
    To let thy tongue detect thy base-born heart?
  EDWARD.
 A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns
    To make this shameless callet know herself.

    Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,
    Although thy husband may be Menelaus;
    And ne'er was Agamemmon's brother wrong'd  
    By that false woman as this king by thee.

    For what hath broach'd this tumult but thy pride?
    Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept;
    And we, in pity of the gentle King,
    Had slipp'd our claim until another age.

  GEORGE.

  EDWARD.
 And in this resolution I defy thee;
    Not willing any longer conference,
    Since thou deniest the gentle King to speak.

    Sound trumpets; let our bloody colours wave,
    And either victory or else a grave!
  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Stay, Edward.
 No, wrangling woman, we'll no longer stay;
    These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE III.
 Enter WARWICK

  WARWICK.

  WARWICK.
 Our hap is lost, our hope but sad despair;
    Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us.
  
    What counsel give you? Whither shall we fly?
  EDWARD.
 Bootless is flight: they follow us with wings;
    And weak we are, and cannot shun pursuit.


                         Enter RICHARD

  RICHARD.

  WARWICK.

    Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
    Wailing our losses, whiles the foe doth rage,
    And look upon, as if the tragedy  
    Were play'd in jest by counterfeiting actors?
    Here on my knee I vow to God above
    I'll never pause again, never stand still,
    Till either death hath clos'd these eyes of mine
    Or fortune given me measure of revenge.
 O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine,
    And in this vow do chain my soul to thine!
    And ere my knee rise from the earth's cold face
    I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to Thee,
    Thou setter-up and plucker-down of kings,
    Beseeching Thee, if with Thy will it stands
    That to my foes this body must be prey,
    Yet that Thy brazen gates of heaven may ope
    And give sweet passage to my sinful soul.

    Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,
    Where'er it be, in heaven or in earth.

  RICHARD.
 Away, away! Once more, sweet lords, farewell.

  GEORGE.

    This may plant courage in their quailing breasts,
    For yet is hope of life and victory.
               Exeunt




SCENE IV.

Another part of the field

Excursions.
 Enter RICHARD and CLIFFORD

  RICHARD.
 Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone.

    Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
    And this for Rutland; both bound to revenge,
    Wert thou environ'd with a brazen wall.

  CLIFFORD.
 Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone.
 Nay, Warwick, single out some other chase;
    For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.
            Exeunt




SCENE V.
 Enter KING HENRY alone

  KING HENRY.

    Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea
    Forc'd by the tide to combat with the wind;
    Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea
    Forc'd to retire by fury of the wind.

    Here on this molehill will I sit me down.

    Would I were dead, if God's good will were so!
    For what is in this world but grief and woe?
    O God! methinks it were a happy life
    To be no better than a homely swain;
    To sit upon a hill, as I do now,
    To carve out dials quaintly, point by point,
    Thereby to see the minutes how they run-
    How many makes the hour full complete,
    How many hours brings about the day,
    How many days will finish up the year,
    How many years a mortal man may live.

    When this is known, then to divide the times-
    So many hours must I tend my flock;
    So many hours must I take my rest;
    So many hours must I contemplate;
    So many hours must I sport myself;
    So many days my ewes have been with young;
    So many weeks ere the poor fools will can;
    So many years ere I shall shear the fleece:  
    So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,
    Pass'd over to the end they were created,
    Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.

    Ah, what a life were this! how sweet! how lovely!
    Gives not the hawthorn bush a sweeter shade
    To shepherds looking on their silly sheep,
    Than doth a rich embroider'd canopy
    To kings that fear their subjects' treachery?
    O yes, it doth; a thousand-fold it doth.
 Enter a son that hath kill'd his Father, at
       one door; and a FATHER that hath kill'd his Son, at  
                         another door

  SON.
 Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.

    Who's this? O God! It is my father's face,
    Whom in this conflict I unwares have kill'd.

    Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did.

    And pardon, father, for I knew not thee.
  
  KING HENRY.

    Weep, wretched man; I'll aid thee tear for tear;
    And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war,
    Be blind with tears and break o'ercharg'd with grief.


               Enter FATHER, bearing of his SON

  FATHER.
 Thou that so stoutly hath resisted me,
    Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold;
    For I have bought it with an hundred blows.

    But let me see.
 Woe above woe! grief more than common grief!
    O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
    O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!
    The red rose and the white are on his face,
    The fatal colours of our striving houses:
    The one his purple blood right well resembles;
    The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth.

    Wither one rose, and let the other flourish!
    If you contend, a thousand lives must perish.
 How will my mother for a father's death
    Take on with me, and ne'er be satisfied!
  FATHER.
 Was ever father so bemoan'd his son?
  KING HENRY.
 Was ever king so griev'd for subjects' woe?
    Much is your sorrow; mine ten times so much.

  SON.

                                              Exit with the body
  FATHER.
 These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet;
    My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre,
    For from my heart thine image ne'er shall go;
    My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell;
    And so obsequious will thy father be,
    Even for the loss of thee, having no more,
    As Priam was for all his valiant sons.

                                              Exit with the body
  KING HENRY.
 Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,
    Here sits a king more woeful than you are.


           Alarums, excursions.
 Enter QUEEN MARGARET,
                  PRINCE OF WALES, and EXETER  

  PRINCE OF WALES.

    Away! for death doth hold us in pursuit.

  QUEEN MARGARET.

    Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds
    Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
    With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath,
    And bloody steel grasp'd in their ireful hands,
    Are at our backs; and therefore hence amain.

    Nay, stay not to expostulate; make speed;
    Or else come after.
 I'll away before.

  KING HENRY.
 Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter.
 Forward; away!             Exeunt




SCENE VI.
 Enter CLIFFORD, wounded

  CLIFFORD.

    The common people swarm like summer flies;
    And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
    And who shines now but Henry's enemies?
    O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent
    That Phaethon should check thy fiery steeds,
    Thy burning car never had scorch'd the earth!
    And, Henry, hadst thou sway'd as kings should do,
    Or as thy father and his father did,
    Giving no ground unto the house of York,
    They never then had sprung like summer flies;  
    I and ten thousand in this luckless realm
    Had left no mourning widows for our death;
    And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.

    For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
    And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
    Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds.

    No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight.

    The foe is merciless and will not pity;
    For at their hands I have deserv'd no pity.

    The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
    And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.

    Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest;
    I stabb'd your fathers' bosoms: split my breast.

                                                     [He faints]

       Alarum and retreat.
 Now breathe we, lords.
 Good fortune bids us pause
    And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
 No, 'tis impossible he should escape;
    For, though before his face I speak the words,
    Your brother Richard mark'd him for the grave;
    And, whereso'er he is, he's surely dead.

    See who it is.
 And now the battle's ended,
    If friend or foe, let him be gently used.

  RICHARD.
 Revoke that doom of mercy, for 'tis Clifford;
    Who not contented that he lopp'd the branch
    In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,
    But set his murd'ring knife unto the root
    From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring-  
    I mean our princely father, Duke of York.

  WARWICK.

    Measure for measure must be answered.
 Bring forth that fatal screech-owl to our house,
    That nothing sung but death to us and ours.

    Now death shall stop his dismal threat'ning sound,
    And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.
 I think his understanding is bereft.

    Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
    Dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life,
    And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.
 O, would he did! and so, perhaps, he doth.

    'Tis but his policy to counterfeit,
    Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
    Which in the time of death he gave our father.
 If so thou think'st, vex him with eager words.

  RICHARD.
 Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.
 Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.
  
  WARWICK.
 Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.

  GEORGE.
 While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.

  RICHARD.
 Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.

  EDWARD.
 Thou pitied'st Rutland, I will pity thee.

  GEORGE.
 Where's Captain Margaret, to fence you now?
  WARWICK.

    I know by that he's dead; and by my soul,
    If this right hand would buy two hours' life,
    That I in all despite might rail at him,
    This hand should chop it off, and with the issuing blood
    Stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst
    York and young Rutland could not satisfy.

  WARWICK.
 Ay, but he's dead.
 Off with the traitor's head,
    And rear it in the place your father's stands.

    And now to London with triumphant march,
    There to be crowned England's royal King;
    From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France,
    And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen.
  
    So shalt thou sinew both these lands together;
    And, having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread
    The scatt'red foe that hopes to rise again;
    For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
    Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.

    First will I see the coronation;
    And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea
    To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.

  EDWARD.
 Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be;
    For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,
    And never will I undertake the thing
    Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.

    Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester;
    And George, of Clarence; Warwick, as ourself,
    Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.
 Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester;
    For Gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.
 Tut, that's a foolish observation.

    Richard, be Duke of Gloucester.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

A chase in the north of England

Enter two KEEPERS, with cross-bows in their hands

  FIRST KEEPER.
 Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves,
    For through this laund anon the deer will come;
    And in this covert will we make our stand,
    Culling the principal of all the deer.

  SECOND KEEPER.
 I'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.

  FIRST KEEPER.
 That cannot be; the noise of thy cross-bow
    Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.

  SECOND KEEPER.
 Here comes a man; let's stay till he be past.


        Enter KING HENRY, disguised, with a prayer-book

  KING HENRY.
  
    No, Harry, Harry, 'tis no land of thine;
    Thy place is fill'd, thy sceptre wrung from thee,
    Thy balm wash'd off wherewith thou wast anointed.
 Ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee.

    This is the quondam King; let's seize upon him.

  KING HENRY.
 Why linger we? let us lay hands upon him.

  FIRST KEEPER.

  KING HENRY.
 My Queen and son are gone to France for aid;
    And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
    Is thither gone to crave the French King's sister
    To wife for Edward.
 If this news be true,
    Poor queen and son, your labour is but lost;
    For Warwick is a subtle orator,
    And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words.
  
    By this account, then, Margaret may win him;
    For she's a woman to be pitied much.

    Her sighs will make a batt'ry in his breast;
    Her tears will pierce into a marble heart;
    The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn;
    And Nero will be tainted with remorse
    To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.

    Ay, but she's come to beg: Warwick, to give.

    O Margaret, thus 'twill be; and thou, poor soul,
    Art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn!  
  SECOND KEEPER.
 Say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?
  KING HENRY.
 More than I seem, and less than I was born to:
    A man at least, for less I should not be;
    And men may talk of kings, and why not I?
  SECOND KEEPER.
 Why, so I am- in mind; and that's enough.

  SECOND KEEPER.
 But, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?
  KING HENRY.
 My crown is in my heart, not on my head;
    Not deck'd with diamonds and Indian stones,
    Not to be seen.

  SECOND KEEPER.

  KING HENRY.
 But did you never swear, and break an oath?
  SECOND KEEPER.
 No, never such an oath; nor will not now.
 Where did you dwell when I was King of England?  
  SECOND KEEPER.
 Here in this country, where we now remain.

  KING HENRY.
 I was anointed king at nine months old;
    My father and my grandfather were kings;
    And you were sworn true subjects unto me;
    And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?
  FIRST KEEPER.
 No;
    For we were subjects but while you were king.

  KING HENRY.

    But do not break your oaths; for of that sin
    My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.

  FIRST KEEPER.
 We are true subjects to the King, King Edward.
  
  KING HENRY.

  FIRST KEEPER.
 We charge you, in God's name and the King's,
    To go with us unto the officers.

  KING HENRY.
 In God's name, lead; your King's name be obey'd;
    And what God will, that let your King perform;
    And what he will, I humbly yield unto.
                Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



SCENE II.

London.
 The palace

Enter KING EDWARD, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and LADY GREY

  KING EDWARD.
 Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Albans' field
    This lady's husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,
    His land then seiz'd on by the conqueror.

  GLOUCESTER.
 It were no less; but yet I'll make a pause.
 [Aside to CLARENCE] Yea, is it so?
    I see the lady hath a thing to grant,
    Before the King will grant her humble suit.

  CLARENCE.
 [Aside to GLOUCESTER] He knows the game; how true he
    keeps the wind!
  GLOUCESTER.
 Widow, we will consider of your suit;  
    And come some other time to know our mind.

  LADY GREY.
 Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay.

    Fight closer or, good faith, you'll catch a blow.

  GLOUCESTER.
 [Aside to CLARENCE] God forbid that, for he'll take
    vantages.
 How many children hast thou, widow, tell me.
 [Aside to GLOUCESTER] I think he means to beg a child of
    her.
 [Aside to CLARENCE] Nay, then whip me; he'll rather
    give her two.

  LADY GREY.
 Three, my most gracious lord.

  GLOUCESTER.
  
  LADY GREY.

  KING EDWARD.

  GLOUCESTER.
 [Aside] Ay, good leave have you; for you will have
      leave
    Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch.
 Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.

  KING EDWARD.
 And would you not do much to do them good?
  LADY GREY.
 To do them good I would sustain some harm.

  LADY GREY.
 Therefore I came unto your Majesty.

  KING EDWARD.
 I'll tell you how these lands are to be got.

  LADY GREY.
 So shall you bind me to your Highness' service.

  KING EDWARD.
 What you command that rests in me to do.
 But you will take exceptions to my boon.

  LADY GREY.

  KING EDWARD.

  LADY GREY.
  
  GLOUCESTER.
 He plies her hard; and much rain wears the marble.

  CLARENCE.
 As red as fire! Nay, then her wax must melt.

  LADY GREY.
 Why stops my lord? Shall I not hear my task?
  KING EDWARD.

  LADY GREY.
 Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.
 I take my leave with many thousand thanks.

  GLOUCESTER.

  KING EDWARD.
 The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.

  KING EDWARD.
 Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.

    What love, thinkst thou, I sue so much to get?
  LADY GREY.
 My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers;
    That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.

  KING EDWARD.
 No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.

  LADY GREY.
 But now you partly may perceive my mind.

  LADY GREY.

  KING EDWARD.
 To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.
  
  LADY GREY.

  KING EDWARD.
 Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.

  LADY GREY.

  KING EDWARD.
 Therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.

    But, mighty lord, this merry inclination
    Accords not with the sadness of my suit.

  KING EDWARD.

  LADY GREY.
 Then, no, my lord.
 My suit is at an end.

  CLARENCE.
 He is the bluntest wooer in Christendom.
 [Aside] Her looks doth argue her replete with modesty;
    Her words doth show her wit incomparable;
    All her perfections challenge sovereignty.

    One way or other, she is for a king;
    And she shall be my love, or else my queen.

    Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?  
  LADY GREY.
 'Tis better said than done, my gracious lord.

    I am a subject fit to jest withal,
    But far unfit to be a sovereign.
 Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee
    I speak no more than what my soul intends;
    And that is to enjoy thee for my love.

  LADY GREY.
 And that is more than I will yield unto.

    I know I am too mean to be your queen,
    And yet too good to be your concubine.
 You cavil, widow; I did mean my queen.

  LADY GREY.
 'Twill grieve your Grace my sons should call you father.

  KING EDWARD.
No more than when my daughters call thee mother.

    Thou art a widow, and thou hast some children;
    And, by God's Mother, I, being but a bachelor,
    Have other some.
 Why, 'tis a happy thing
    To be the father unto many sons.

    Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.
 The ghostly father now hath done his shrift.

  CLARENCE.
 When he was made a shriver, 'twas for shrift.

  KING EDWARD.
 Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.
  
  GLOUCESTER.
 The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.
 You'd think it strange if I should marry her.
 Why, Clarence, to myself.

  GLOUCESTER.
 That would be ten days' wonder at the least.

  CLARENCE.
 That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.
 Well, jest on, brothers; I can tell you both
    Her suit is granted for her husband's lands.
 My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken
    And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.

    Widow, go you along.
 Ay, Edward will use women honourably.

    My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much,  
    Unless my hand and strength could equal them.

    O miserable thought! and more unlikely
    Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns.

    Why, love forswore me in my mother's womb;
    And, for I should not deal in her soft laws,
    She did corrupt frail nature with some bribe
    To shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub
    To make an envious mountain on my back,
    Where sits deformity to mock my body;
    To shape my legs of an unequal size;
    To disproportion me in every part,
    Like to a chaos, or an unlick'd bear-whelp
    That carries no impression like the dam.

    Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
    And cry 'Content!' to that which grieves my heart,
    And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,  
    And frame my face to all occasions.

    Can I do this, and cannot get a crown?
    Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.
  Enter LEWIS the French King, his sister BONA,
his Admiral call'd BOURBON; PRINCE EDWARD, QUEEN MARGARET,
and the EARL of OXFORD.
 Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
    Sit down with us.
 No, mighty King of France.
 Now Margaret
    Must strike her sail and learn a while to serve
    Where kings command.
 I was, I must confess,
    Great Albion's Queen in former golden days;
    But now mischance hath trod my title down
    And with dishonour laid me on the ground,
    Where I must take like seat unto my fortune,
    And to my humble seat conform myself.
 Why, say, fair Queen, whence springs this deep despair?
  QUEEN MARGARET.
 From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears
    And stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.
  
  LEWIS.
 Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself,
    And sit thee by our side.
 [Seats her by him] Yield not thy neck
    To fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind
    Still ride in triumph over all mischance.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts
    And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.

    Now therefore be it known to noble Lewis
    That Henry, sole possessor of my love,
    Is, of a king, become a banish'd man,
    And forc'd to live in Scotland a forlorn;
    While proud ambitious Edward Duke of York
    Usurps the regal title and the seat
    Of England's true-anointed lawful King.

    This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
    With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir,
    Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid;
    And if thou fail us, all our hope is done.

  LEWIS.

  LEWIS.
 The more I stay, the more I'll succour thee.
 O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.

  LEWIS.
 She ariseth]
  QUEEN MARGARET.

  WARWICK.
 From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
    My lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend,  
    I come, in kindness and unfeigned love,
    First to do greetings to thy royal person,
    And then to crave a league of amity,
    And lastly to confirm that amity
    With nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
    That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,
    To England's King in lawful marriage.
 [Aside] If that go forward, Henry's hope is done.

  WARWICK.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak
    Before you answer Warwick.
 His demand
    Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love,
    But from deceit bred by necessity;
    For how can tyrants safely govern home
    Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?  
    To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice,
    That Henry liveth still; but were he dead,
    Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son.

    Look therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage
    Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour;
    For though usurpers sway the rule a while
    Yet heav'ns are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.

  WARWICK.
 Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt,
    Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
    And, after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
    Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest;
    And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
    Who by his prowess conquered all France.
 Oxford, how haps it in this smooth discourse
    You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost  
    All that which Henry the Fifth had gotten?
    Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.

    But for the rest: you tell a pedigree
    Of threescore and two years- a silly time
    To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.
 Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,
    Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years,
    And not betray thy treason with a blush?
  WARWICK.
 Can Oxford that did ever fence the right
    Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
    For shame! Leave Henry, and call Edward king.

  OXFORD.
 Call him my king by whose injurious doom
    My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
    Was done to death; and more than so, my father,
    Even in the downfall of his mellow'd years,
    When nature brought him to the door of death?
    No, Warwick, no; while life upholds this arm,
    This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.
 And I the house of York.
 Heavens grant that Warwick's words bewitch him not!
  LEWIS.
 Now, Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,
    Is Edward your true king? for I were loath
    To link with him that were not lawful chosen.

  WARWICK.
 Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour.

  LEWIS.
 Then further: all dissembling set aside,
    Tell me for truth the measure of his love
    Unto our sister Bona.

  WARWICK.
 Such it seems
    As may beseem a monarch like himself.
 Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.
 Your grant or your denial shall be mine.

    [To WARWICK] Yet I confess that often ere this day,
    When I have heard your king's desert recounted,
    Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.

  LEWIS.

    And now forthwith shall articles be drawn
    Touching the jointure that your king must make,
    Which with her dowry shall be counterpois'd.

    Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness
    That Bona shall be wife to the English king.

  PRINCE OF WALES.
 To Edward, but not to the English king.
 Deceitful Warwick, it was thy device
    By this alliance to make void my suit.

  LEWIS.

    But if your title to the crown be weak,
    As may appear by Edward's good success,
    Then 'tis but reason that I be releas'd  
    From giving aid which late I promised.

  WARWICK.

                                    [POST blowing a horn within]
  LEWIS.
 Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.


                       Enter the POST

  POST.

    And, madam, these for you; from whom I know not.

                                   [They all read their letters]
  OXFORD.
 I like it well that our fair Queen and mistress
    Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.

    I hope all's for the best.
 Warwick, what are thy news? And yours, fair Queen?
  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Mine such as fill my heart with unhop'd joys.

  WARWICK.
 Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.

  LEWIS.
 I told your Majesty as much before.

    This proveth Edward's love and Warwick's honesty.

    Did I forget that by the house of York
    My father came untimely to his death?
    Did I let pass th' abuse done to my niece?
    Did I impale him with the regal crown?
    Did I put Henry from his native right?
    And am I guerdon'd at the last with shame?
    Shame on himself! for my desert is honour;
    And to repair my honour lost for him
    I here renounce him and return to Henry.

    My noble Queen, let former grudges pass,
    And henceforth I am thy true servitor.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love;
    And I forgive and quite forget old faults,
    And joy that thou becom'st King Henry's friend.

    'Tis not his new-made bride shall succour him;
    And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,
    He's very likely now to fall from him
    For matching more for wanton lust than honour
    Or than for strength and safety of our country.

  BONA.
 My quarrel and this English queen's are one.

  WARWICK.
 And mine, fair Lady Bona, joins with yours.

  LEWIS.

    Therefore, at last, I firmly am resolv'd
    You shall have aid.

  BONA.
 Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
    I'll wear the willow-garland for his sake.

  WARWICK.
 Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
    And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.

    There's thy reward; be gone.
                       Exit POST
  LEWIS.

    Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt:
    What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?
  WARWICK.
 This shall assure my constant loyalty:
    That if our Queen and this young Prince agree,  
    I'll join mine eldest daughter and my joy
    To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.

  QUEEN MARGARET.

                                          Exeunt all but WARWICK
  WARWICK.
 I came from Edward as ambassador,
    But I return his sworn and mortal foe.

    Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
    But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
  
    Had he none else to make a stale but me?
    Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.

    I was the chief that rais'd him to the crown,
    And I'll be chief to bring him down again;
    Not that I pity Henry's misery,
    But seek revenge on Edward's mockery.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.
 The palace

Enter GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, SOMERSET, and MONTAGUE

  GLOUCESTER.
 Alas, you know 'tis far from hence to France!
    How could he stay till Warwick made return?
  SOMERSET.
 Enter KING EDWARD, attended; LADY
          GREY, as Queen; PEMBROKE, STAFFORD, HASTINGS,
      and others.
 Four stand on one side, and four on the other

  GLOUCESTER.
 And his well-chosen bride.
 I mind to tell him plainly what I think.

  KING EDWARD.

  KING EDWARD.
 Suppose they take offence without a cause;
    They are but Lewis and Warwick: I am Edward,
    Your King and Warwick's and must have my will.
 And shall have your will, because our King.

    Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.
 Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?
  GLOUCESTER.

    No, God forbid that I should wish them sever'd
    Whom God hath join'd together; ay, and 'twere pity
    To sunder them that yoke so well together.

  KING EDWARD.
 Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,
    Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
    Should not become my wife and England's Queen.

    And you too, Somerset and Montague,
    Speak freely what you think.
 Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
    Becomes your enemy for mocking him
    About the marriage of the Lady Bona.

  GLOUCESTER.
 And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,  
    Is now dishonoured by this new marriage.

  KING EDWARD.
 What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeas'd
    By such invention as I can devise?
  MONTAGUE.
 Yet to have join'd with France in such alliance
    Would more have strength'ned this our commonwealth
    'Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage.

  HASTINGS.
 Why, knows not Montague that of itself
    England is safe, if true within itself?
  MONTAGUE.

    In them and in ourselves our safety lies.

  CLARENCE.

  GLOUCESTER.
 And yet methinks your Grace hath not done well
    To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales  
    Unto the brother of your loving bride.

    She better would have fitted me or Clarence;
    But in your bride you bury brotherhood.

  CLARENCE.
 Or else you would not have bestow'd the heir
    Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,
    And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.

  KING EDWARD.

  CLARENCE.
 In choosing for yourself you show'd your judgment,
    Which being shallow, you shall give me leave
    To play the broker in mine own behalf;
    And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.
 Leave me or tarry, Edward will be King,
    And not be tied unto his brother's will.
 My lords, before it pleas'd his Majesty
    To raise my state to title of a queen,
    Do me but right, and you must all confess
    That I was not ignoble of descent:
    And meaner than myself have had like fortune.

    But as this title honours me and mine,  
    So your dislikes, to whom I would be pleasing,
    Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.
 My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns.

    What danger or what sorrow can befall thee,
    So long as Edward is thy constant friend
    And their true sovereign whom they must obey?
    Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
    Unless they seek for hatred at my hands;
    Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
    And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.

  GLOUCESTER.
 [Aside] I hear, yet say not much, but think the more.
 My sovereign liege, no letters, and few words,
    But such as I, without your special pardon,
    Dare not relate.

  KING EDWARD.
 Go to, we pardon thee; therefore, in brief,  
    Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
'
  KING EDWARD.
'
  KING EDWARD.
 But what said Henry's queen?
    For I have heard that she was there in place.

  MESSENGER.
 'Tell him' quoth she 'my mourning weeds are done,
    And I am ready to put armour on.
'
  KING EDWARD.
 Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
    Well, I will arm me, being thus forewarn'd.

    They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.

  CLARENCE.
 Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.

    You that love me and Warwick, follow me.

  KING EDWARD.
 Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick!
    Yet am I arm'd against the worst can happen;  
    And haste is needful in this desp'rate case.

    Myself in person will straight follow you.
 You twain, of all the rest,
    Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance.

    Tell me if you love Warwick more than me?
    If it be so, then both depart to him:
    I rather wish you foes than hollow friends.

    But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
    Give me assurance with some friendly vow,
    That I may never have you in suspect.
 And Hastings as he favours Edward's cause!
  KING EDWARD.
 Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.

  KING EDWARD.
          Exeunt




SCENE II.

A plain in Warwickshire

Enter WARWICK and OXFORD, with French soldiers

  WARWICK.


                 Enter CLARENCE and SOMERSET

    But see where Somerset and Clarence comes.
 Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick;
    And welcome, Somerset.
 I hold it cowardice
    To rest mistrustful where a noble heart
    Hath pawn'd an open hand in sign of love;
    Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's brother,
    Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings.

    But welcome, sweet Clarence; my daughter shall be thine.

    You that will follow me to this attempt,
    Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.

                                         [They all cry 'Henry!']
    Why then, let's on our way in silent sort.

    For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!    Exeunt



SCENE III.

Edward's camp, near Warwick

Enter three WATCHMEN, to guard the KING'S tent

  FIRST WATCHMAN.
 Why, no; for he hath made a solemn vow
    Never to lie and take his natural rest
    Till Warwick or himself be quite suppress'd.
 To-morrow then, belike, shall be the day,
    If Warwick be so near as men report.
 But say, I pray, what nobleman is that
    That with the King here resteth in his tent?
  FIRST WATCHMAN.

  THIRD WATCHMAN.
 'Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.

  THIRD WATCHMAN.
 Ay, but give me worship and quietness;
    I like it better than dangerous honour.
  
    If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
    'Tis to be doubted he would waken him.

  FIRST WATCHMAN.
 Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.

  SECOND WATCHMAN.
 This is his tent; and see where stand his guard.

    Courage, my masters! Honour now or never!
    But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.
 Who goes there?
  SECOND WATCHMAN.
 Stay, or thou diest.


       WARWICK and the rest cry all 'Warwick! Warwick!' and
      set upon the guard, who fly, crying 'Arm! Arm!' WARWICK
                   and the rest following them

      The drum playing and trumpet sounding, re-enter WARWICK  
         and the rest, bringing the KING out in his gown,
   sitting in a chair.
 What are they that fly there?
  WARWICK.
 Richard and Hastings.
 Let them go; here is the Duke.
 The Duke! Why, Warwick, when we parted,
    Thou call'dst me King?
  WARWICK.
 Ay, but the case is alter'd.

    When you disgrac'd me in my embassade,
    Then I degraded you from being King,
    And come now to create you Duke of York.

    Alas, how should you govern any kingdom
    That know not how to use ambassadors,
    Nor how to be contented with one wife,
    Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
    Nor how to study for the people's welfare,
    Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?
  KING EDWARD.

    Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance,  
    Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
    Edward will always bear himself as King.
 Then, for his mind, be Edward England's king;
                                           [Takes off his crown]
    But Henry now shall wear the English crown
    And be true King indeed; thou but the shadow.

    When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows,
    I'll follow you and tell what answer
    Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.

    Now for a while farewell, good Duke of York.
 What fates impose, that men must needs abide;
    It boots not to resist both wind and tide.

                                    [They lead him out forcibly]
  OXFORD.
 What now remains, my lords, for us to do
    But march to London with our soldiers?  
  WARWICK.

London.
 Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Then is my sovereign slain?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner;
    Either betray'd by falsehood of his guard
    Or by his foe surpris'd at unawares;
    And, as I further have to understand,
    Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
    Fell Warwick's brother, and by that our foe.

  RIVERS.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Till then, fair hope must hinder life's decay.

    And I the rather wean me from despair  
    For love of Edward's offspring in my womb.

    This is it that makes me bridle passion
    And bear with mildness my misfortune's cross;
    Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear
    And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
    Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown
    King Edward's fruit, true heir to th' English crown.

    But to prevent the tyrant's violence-
    For trust not him that hath once broken faith-
    I'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary
    To save at least the heir of Edward's right.

A park near Middleham Castle in Yorkshire

Enter GLOUCESTER, LORD HASTINGS, SIR WILLIAM STANLEY, and others

  GLOUCESTER.
 Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley,
    Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither
    Into this chiefest thicket of the park.

    Thus stands the case: you know our King, my brother,
    Is prisoner to the Bishop here, at whose hands
    He hath good usage and great liberty;
    And often but attended with weak guard
    Comes hunting this way to disport himself.

    I have advertis'd him by secret means
    That if about this hour he make this way,
    Under the colour of his usual game,
    He shall here find his friends, with horse and men,
    To set him free from his captivity.

  KING EDWARD.
 Nay, this way, man.
 See where the huntsmen stand.

  KING EDWARD.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Well guess'd, believe me; for that was my meaning.

  KING EDWARD.
 Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Huntsman, what say'st thou? Wilt thou go along?
  HUNTSMAN.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Come then, away; let's ha' no more ado.

  KING EDWARD.
 Bishop, farewell.
 The Tower

Flourish.
 Master Lieutenant, now that God and friends
    Have shaken Edward from the regal seat
    And turn'd my captive state to liberty,
    My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
    At our enlargement what are thy due fees?
  LIEUTENANT.
 For what, Lieutenant? For well using me?
    Nay, be thou sure I'll well requite thy kindness,
    For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure;
    Ay, such a pleasure as incaged birds
    Conceive when, after many moody thoughts,
    At last by notes of household harmony
    They quite forget their loss of liberty.
  
    But, Warwick, after God, thou set'st me free,
    And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee;
    He was the author, thou the instrument.

  WARWICK.
 Your Grace hath still been fam'd for virtuous,
    And now may seem as wise as virtuous
    By spying and avoiding fortune's malice,
    For few men rightly temper with the stars;
    Yet in this one thing let me blame your Grace,
    For choosing me when Clarence is in place.

  CLARENCE.
 No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
    To whom the heav'ns in thy nativity
    Adjudg'd an olive branch and laurel crown,
    As likely to be blest in peace and war;  
    And therefore I yield thee my free consent.
 And I choose Clarence only for Protector.

  KING HENRY.
 Warwick and Clarence, give me both your hands.

  WARWICK.
 What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will?
  CLARENCE.
 That he consents, if Warwick yield consent,
    For on thy fortune I repose myself.

  WARWICK.
 Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content.

    We'll yoke together, like a double shadow
    To Henry's body, and supply his place;
    I mean, in bearing weight of government,
    While he enjoys the honour and his ease.
  
  CLARENCE.

  WARWICK.
 Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.
 But, with the first of all your chief affairs,
    Let me entreat- for I command no more-
    That Margaret your Queen and my son Edward
    Be sent for to return from France with speed;
    For till I see them here, by doubtful fear
    My joy of liberty is half eclips'd.
 It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.

  KING HENRY.
 My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that,
    Of whom you seem to have so tender care?
  SOMERSET.
 My liege, it is young Henry, Earl of Richmond.

  KING HENRY.
 Come hither, England's hope.

                                     [Lays his hand on his head]
    If secret powers
    Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts,
    This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss.

    His looks are full of peaceful majesty;
    His head by nature fram'd to wear a crown,
    His hand to wield a sceptre; and himself  
    Likely in time to bless a regal throne.
 What news, my friend?
  POST.
 That Edward is escaped from your brother
    And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.
 Unsavoury news! But how made he escape?
  POST.
 He was convey'd by Richard Duke of Gloucester
    And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
    In secret ambush on the forest side
    And from the Bishop's huntsmen rescu'd him;
    For hunting was his daily exercise.

  WARWICK.

    But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide
    A salve for any sore that may betide.
 My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's;  
    For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help,
    And we shall have more wars befor't be long.

    Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
    Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany,
    Till storms be past of civil enmity.

  OXFORD.

  SOMERSET.
              Exeunt




SCENE VII.

Before York

Flourish.

    Well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas,
    And brought desired help from Burgundy;
    What then remains, we being thus arriv'd
    From Ravenspurgh haven before the gates of York,
    But that we enter, as into our dukedom?
  GLOUCESTER.
 The gates made fast! Brother, I like not this;
    For many men that stumble at the threshold
    Are well foretold that danger lurks within.

  KING EDWARD.
 Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us.

    By fair or foul means we must enter in,
    For hither will our friends repair to us.

  HASTINGS.
 My liege, I'll knock once more to summon them.
 My lords, we were forewarned of your coming
    And shut the gates for safety of ourselves,
    For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.

  KING EDWARD.
 True, my good lord; I know you for no less.

  KING EDWARD.
 [Aside] But when the fox hath once got in his nose,
    He'll soon find means to make the body follow.

  HASTINGS.
 Why, Master Mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
    Open the gates; we are King Henry's friends.
 Ay, say you so? The gates shall then be open'd.

                                                   [He descends]
  GLOUCESTER.
 The good old man would fain that all were well,  
    So 'twere not long of him; but being ent'red,
    I doubt not, I, but we shall soon persuade
    Both him and all his brothers unto reason.


             Enter, below, the MAYOR and two ALDERMEN

  KING EDWARD.
 So, Master Mayor.
 These gates must not be shut
    But in the night or in the time of war.

    What! fear not, man, but yield me up the keys;
                                                [Takes his keys]
    For Edward will defend the town and thee,
    And all those friends that deign to follow me.


           March.
 Enter MONTGOMERY with drum and soldiers

  GLOUCESTER.
 Welcome, Sir john! But why come you in arms?
  MONTGOMERY.
 To help King Edward in his time of storm,
    As every loyal subject ought to do.
  
  KING EDWARD.
 Thanks, good Montgomery; but we now forget
    Our title to the crown, and only claim
    Our dukedom till God please to send the rest.

  MONTGOMERY.
 Then fare you well, for I will hence again.

    I came to serve a king and not a duke.

    Drummer, strike up, and let us march away.

                                      [The drum begins to march]
  KING EDWARD.
 Nay, stay, Sir John, a while, and we'll debate
    By what safe means the crown may be recover'd.

  MONTGOMERY.
 Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?
  KING EDWARD.

    Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand;  
    The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.

  KING EDWARD.
 Then be it as you will; for 'tis my right,
    And Henry but usurps the diadem.

  MONTGOMERY.
 Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself;
    And now will I be Edward's champion.
 Sound trumpet; Edward shall be here proclaim'd.

                                   [Gives him a paper.
 [Reads] 'Edward the Fourth, by the grace of God,
    King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, &c.
'
  MONTGOMERY.
 And whoso'er gainsays King Edward's right,
    By this I challenge him to single fight.
 Long live Edward the Fourth!
  KING EDWARD.
 Thanks, brave Montgomery, and thanks unto you all;
    If fortune serve me, I'll requite this kindness.

    Ah, froward Clarence, how evil it beseems the
    To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
    Yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.

    Come on, brave soldiers; doubt not of the day,
    And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.
        Exeunt




SCENE VIII.

London.
 The palace

Flourish.
 Enter KING HENRY, WARWICK, MONTAGUE, CLARENCE, OXFORD, and EXETER

  WARWICK.

  KING HENRY.

  CLARENCE.

  WARWICK.
 In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,
    Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war;
    Those will I muster up, and thou, son Clarence,
    Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent,
    The knights and gentlemen to come with thee.

    Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
    Northampton, and in Leicestershire, shalt find
    Men well inclin'd to hear what thou command'st.
  
    And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well belov'd,
    In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.

    My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
    Like to his island girt in with the ocean
    Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs,
    Shall rest in London till we come to him.

    Fair lords, take leave and stand not to reply.

    Farewell, my sovereign.
 Farewell, my Hector and my Troy's true hope.

  CLARENCE.
 In sign of truth, I kiss your Highness' hand.

  KING HENRY.
 Comfort, my lord; and so I take my leave.

  OXFORD.
 [Kissing the KING'S band] And thus I seal my truth and bid
    adieu.

  KING HENRY.
 Sweet Oxford, and my loving Montague,
    And all at once, once more a happy farewell.

  WARWICK.
 Farewell, sweet lords; let's meet at Coventry.

                              Exeunt all but the KING and EXETER
  KING HENRY.
 Here at the palace will I rest a while.

    Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your lordship?  
    Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
    Should not be able to encounter mine.

  EXETER.
 The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.

  KING HENRY.

    Then why should they love Edward more than me?
    No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace;
    And, when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
    The lamb will never cease to follow him.
 Hark, hark, my lord! What shouts are these?

            Enter KING EDWARD, GLOUCESTER, and soldiers  

  KING EDWARD.

    You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow.

    Now stops thy spring; my sea shall suck them dry,
    And swell so much the higher by their ebb.

    Hence with him to the Tower: let him not speak.

                                     Exeunt some with KING HENRY
    And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course,
    Where peremptory Warwick now remains.

    The sun shines hot; and, if we use delay,
    Cold biting winter mars our hop'd-for hay.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Away betimes, before his forces join,
    And take the great-grown traitor unawares.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.
 SCENE I.
 Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
    How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?
  FIRST MESSENGER.
 By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.

  WARWICK.
 How far off is our brother Montague?
    Where is the post that came from Montague?
  SECOND MESSENGER.
 By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.
 Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?
    And by thy guess how nigh is Clarence now?
  SOMERVILLE.

                                                    [Drum heard]
  WARWICK.
 Then Clarence is at hand; I hear his drum.

  SOMERVILLE.
  
    The drum your Honour hears marcheth from Warwick.
 Who should that be? Belike unlook'd for friends.

  SOMERVILLE.
 Go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
    Speak gentle words, and humbly bend thy knee,
    Call Edward King, and at his hands beg mercy?
    And he shall pardon thee these outrages.
  
  GLOUCESTER.
 I thought, at least, he would have said the King;
    Or did he make the jest against his will?
  WARWICK.
 Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give.

    I'll do thee service for so good a gift.

  KING EDWARD.

  WARWICK.
 Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight;
    And, weakling, Warwick takes his gift again;
    And Henry is my King, Warwick his subject.

  KING EDWARD.
 But Warwick's king is Edward's prisoner.

    And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:
    What is the body when the head is off?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
    But, whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
    The king was slily finger'd from the deck!
    You left poor Henry at the Bishop's palace,
    And ten to one you'll meet him in the Tower.

  KING EDWARD.
 'Tis even so; yet you are Warwick still.
  
    Nay, when? Strike now, or else the iron cools.

  WARWICK.

  KING EDWARD.
 Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,
    This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair,
    Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,
    Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood:
    'Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.
'

               Enter OXFORD, with drum and colours

  WARWICK.
 O cheerful colours! See where Oxford comes.

  OXFORD.
 Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster!
                              [He and his forces enter the city]
  GLOUCESTER.
 The gates are open, let us enter too.

  KING EDWARD.

  WARWICK.


             Enter MONTAGUE, with drum and colours

  MONTAGUE.
 Montague, Montague, for Lancaster!
                              [He and his forces enter the city]
  GLOUCESTER.
 Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
    Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.

  KING EDWARD.
 The harder match'd, the greater victory.

    My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.


             Enter SOMERSET, with drum and colours

  SOMERSET.
 Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster!
                              [He and his forces enter the city]
  GLOUCESTER.
 Two of thy name, both Dukes of Somerset,
    Have sold their lives unto the house of York;
    And thou shalt be the third, if this sword hold.

  CLARENCE.
 Clarence, Clarence, for Lancaster!
  KING EDWARD.

                  [Sound a parley.

  CLARENCE.
 Why, trowest thou, Warwick,
    That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
    To bend the fatal instruments of war  
    Against his brother and his lawful King?
    Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath.

    To keep that oath were more impiety
    Than Jephtha when he sacrific'd his daughter.

    And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
    And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.

    Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends;
    And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
    For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.

  KING EDWARD.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Welcome, good Clarence; this is brother-like.
 O passing traitor, perjur'd and unjust!
  KING EDWARD.
 What, Warwick, wilt thou leave die town and fight?  
    Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?
  WARWICK.
 Alas, I am not coop'd here for defence!
    I will away towards Barnet presently
    And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou dar'st.
 Yes, Warwick, Edward dares and leads the way.

    Lords, to the field; Saint George and victory!
                                                 Exeunt YORKISTS
                         [March.
 WARWICK and his company follow]




SCENE II.

A field of battle near Barnet

Alarum and excursions.

    Now, Montague, sit fast; I seek for thee,
    That Warwick's bones may keep thine company.
            Exit
  WARWICK.

    These eyes, that now are dimm'd with death's black veil,  
    Have been as piercing as the mid-day sun
    To search the secret treasons of the world;
    The wrinkles in my brows, now fill'd with blood,
    Were lik'ned oft to kingly sepulchres;
    For who liv'd King, but I could dig his grave?
    And who durst smile when Warwick bent his brow?
    Lo now my glory smear'd in dust and blood!
    My parks, my walks, my manors, that I had,
    Even now forsake me; and of all my lands
    Is nothing left me but my body's length.

    what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
    And live we how we can, yet die we must.
 Ah, Warwick, Warwick! wert thou as we are,
    We might recover all our loss again.
 Ah, Montague,  
    If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand,
    And with thy lips keep in my soul a while!
    Thou lov'st me not; for, brother, if thou didst,
    Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood
    That glues my lips and will not let me speak.

  SOMERSET.
 Ah, Warwick! Montague hath breath'd his last;
    And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
    And said 'Commend me to my valiant brother.
'
    And more he would have said; and more he spoke,
    Which sounded like a clamour in a vault,
    That mought not be distinguish'd; but at last,
    I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
    'O farewell, Warwick!'
  WARWICK.

                                                          [Dies]
  OXFORD.

Another part of the field

Flourish.
 Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
    And we are grac'd with wreaths of victory.

  CLARENCE.
 A little gale will soon disperse that cloud
    And blow it to the source from whence it came;
    Thy very beams will dry those vapours up,
    For every cloud engenders not a storm.

  GLOUCESTER.

  KING EDWARD.
          Exeunt




SCENE IV.
 Enter QUEEN MARGARET, PRINCE EDWARD, SOMERSET, OXFORD,
and SOLDIERS

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Is't meet that he
    Should leave the helm and, like a fearful lad,
    With tearful eyes add water to the sea
    And give more strength to that which hath too much;
    Whiles, in his moan, the ship splits on the rock,
    Which industry and courage might have sav'd?
    Ah, what a shame! ah, what a fault were this!
    Say Warwick was our anchor; what of that?
    And Montague our top-mast; what of him?
    Our slaught'red friends the tackles; what of these?  
    Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
    And Somerset another goodly mast?
    The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?
    And, though unskilful, why not Ned and I
    For once allow'd the skilful pilot's charge?
    We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
    But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
    From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wreck,
    As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.

    Say you can swim; alas, 'tis but a while!
    Tread on the sand; why, there you quickly sink.

    Bestride the rock; the tide will wash you off,
    Or else you famish- that's a threefold death.

    Why, courage then! What cannot be avoided
    'Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.

    I speak not this as doubting any here;
    For did I but suspect a fearful man,
    He should have leave to go away betimes,
    Lest in our need he might infect another
    And make him of the like spirit to himself.

    If any such be here- as God forbid!-
    Let him depart before we need his help.

  OXFORD.
 Women and children of so high a courage,
    And warriors faint! Why, 'twere perpetual shame.
 And he that will not fight for such a hope,  
    Go home to bed and, like the owl by day,
    If he arise, be mock'd and wond'red at.
 And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.
 Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand
    Ready to fight; therefore be resolute.
 It is his policy
    To haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.

  OXFORD.
 Here pitch our battle; hence we will not budge.


      Flourish and march.
 Enter, at a distance, KING EDWARD,
               GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and soldiers

  KING EDWARD.
 Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood
    Which, by the heavens' assistance and your strength,  
    Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
 Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say
    My tears gainsay; for every word I speak,
    Ye see, I drink the water of my eye.
 Exeunt




SCENE V.
 Enter KING EDWARD, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and forces,
With QUEEN MARGARET, OXFORD, and SOMERSET, prisoners

  KING EDWARD.
 Now here a period of tumultuous broils.

    Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight;
    For Somerset, off with his guilty head.

    Go, bear them hence; I will not hear them speak.

  OXFORD.

                             Exeunt OXFORD and SOMERSET, guarded
  QUEEN MARGARET.
 So part we sadly in this troublous world,
    To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.
 It is; and lo where youthful Edward comes.

    What, can so young a man begin to prick?
    Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make
    For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,
    And all the trouble thou hast turn'd me to?
  PRINCE OF WALES.
 Speak like a subject, proud ambitious York.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Ah, that thy father had been so resolv'd!
  GLOUCESTER.
 That you might still have worn the petticoat
    And ne'er have stol'n the breech from Lancaster.

  PRINCE OF WALES.
 Let Aesop fable in a winter's night;
    His currish riddle sorts not with this place.
 By heaven, brat, I'll plague ye for that word.
 Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.

  GLOUCESTER.
 For God's sake, take away this captive scold.

  PRINCE OF WALES.

  KING EDWARD.
 Peace, wilful boy, or I will charm your tongue.
  
  CLARENCE.
 Untutor'd lad, thou art too malapert.

  PRINCE OF WALES.

    Lascivious Edward, and thou perjur'd George,
    And thou misshapen Dick, I tell ye all
    I am your better, traitors as ye are;
    And thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.

  KING EDWARD.

                                                     [Stabs him]
  GLOUCESTER.
 Sprawl'st thou? Take that, to end thy agony.

                                                     [Stabs him]
  CLARENCE.
 Marry, and shall.
             [Offers to kill her]
  KING EDWARD.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Why should she live to fill the world with words?
  KING EDWARD.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Clarence, excuse me to the King my brother.

    I'll hence to London on a serious matter;
    Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.
  
  CLARENCE.
 What? what?
  GLOUCESTER.
 O Ned, sweet Ned, speak to thy mother, boy!
    Canst thou not speak? O traitors! murderers!
    They that stabb'd Caesar shed no blood at all,
    Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,
    If this foul deed were by to equal it.

    He was a man: this, in respect, a child;
    And men ne'er spend their fury on a child.

    What's worse than murderer, that I may name it?
    No, no, my heart will burst, an if I speak-
    And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.

    But if you ever chance to have a child,
    Look in his youth to have him so cut off
    As, deathsmen, you have rid this sweet young prince!
  KING EDWARD.
  
  QUEEN MARGARET.

    What, wilt thou not? Then, Clarence, do it thou.
 By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.

  QUEEN MARGARET.

  CLARENCE.
 Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself.

    What! wilt thou not? Where is that devil's butcher,
    Hard-favour'd Richard? Richard, where art thou?
    Thou art not here.
 Murder is thy alms-deed;
    Petitioners for blood thou ne'er put'st back.
 Away, I say; I charge ye bear her hence.
 So come to you and yours as to this prince.

                                          Exit, led out forcibly
  KING EDWARD.
 Where's Richard gone?
  CLARENCE.
 To London, all in post; and, as I guess,
    To make a bloody supper in the Tower.

  KING EDWARD.
 He's sudden, if a thing comes in his head.

    Now march we hence.
 Discharge the common sort  
    With pay and thanks; and let's away to London
    And see our gentle queen how well she fares.

    By this, I hope, she hath a son for me.
               Exeunt




SCENE VI.

London.
 The Tower

Enter KING HENRY and GLOUCESTER with the LIEUTENANT, on the walls

  GLOUCESTER.
 What, at your book so hard?
  KING HENRY.
 Ay, my good lord- my lord, I should say rather.
 Sirrah, leave us to ourselves; we must confer.
 Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind:
    The thief doth fear each bush an officer.
 The bird that hath been limed in a bush
    With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush;
    And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,  
    Have now the fatal object in my eye
    Where my poor young was lim'd, was caught, and kill'd.
 Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete
    That taught his son the office of a fowl!
    And yet, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.

    Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
    My breast can better brook thy dagger's point
    Than can my ears that tragic history.

    But wherefore dost thou come? Is't for my life?
  GLOUCESTER.
 A persecutor I am sure thou art.

    If murdering innocents be executing,
    Why, then thou are an executioner.

  GLOUCESTER.

  KING HENRY.

    And thus I prophesy, that many a thousand
    Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
    And many an old man's sigh, and many a widow's,
    And many an orphan's water-standing eye-
    Men for their sons, wives for their husbands,
    Orphans for their parents' timeless death-
    Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.

    The owl shriek'd at thy birth- an evil sign;
    The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time;
    Dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees;
    The raven rook'd her on the chimney's top,
    And chatt'ring pies in dismal discords sung;
    Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
    And yet brought forth less than a mother's hope,
    To wit, an indigest deformed lump,
    Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.

    Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born,
    To signify thou cam'st to bite the world;
    And if the rest be true which I have heard,  
    Thou cam'st-
  GLOUCESTER.

                                                     [Stabs him]
    For this, amongst the rest, was I ordain'd.

  KING HENRY.

    O, God forgive my sins and pardon thee!               [Dies]
  GLOUCESTER.

    O, may such purple tears be always shed
    From those that wish the downfall of our house!
    If any spark of life be yet remaining,
    Down, down to hell; and say I sent thee thither-
                                               [Stabs him again]
    I, that have neither pity, love, nor fear.

    Indeed, 'tis true that Henry told me of;
    For I have often heard my mother say
    I came into the world with my legs forward.

    Had I not reason, think ye, to make haste
    And seek their ruin that usurp'd our right?  
    The midwife wonder'd; and the women cried
    'O, Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!'
    And so I was, which plainly signified
    That I should snarl, and bite, and play the dog.

    Then, since the heavens have shap'd my body so,
    Let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it.

    Clarence, beware; thou keep'st me from the light,
    But I will sort a pitchy day for thee;
    For I will buzz abroad such prophecies
    That Edward shall be fearful of his life;
    And then to purge his fear, I'll be thy death.

    King Henry and the Prince his son are gone.

    I'll throw thy body in another room,
    And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.
  
                                              Exit with the body




SCENE VII.

London.
 The palace

Flourish.
 Enter KING EDWARD, QUEEN ELIZABETH, CLARENCE, GLOUCESTER,
HASTINGS, NURSE, with the Young PRINCE, and attendants

  KING EDWARD.
 Once more we sit in England's royal throne,
    Repurchas'd with the blood of enemies.

    Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat
    And made our footstool of security.
  
    Young Ned, for thee thine uncles and myself
    Have in our armours watch'd the winter's night,
    Went all afoot in summer's scalding heat,
    That thou might'st repossess the crown in peace;
    And of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.

  GLOUCESTER.
 [Aside] I'll blast his harvest if your head were laid;
    For yet I am not look'd on in the world.

    This shoulder was ordain'd so thick to heave;
    And heave it shall some weight or break my back.

    Work thou the way- and that shall execute.

  CLARENCE.
 The duty that I owe unto your Majesty
    I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.

  KING EDWARD.
 And that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st,
    Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.

    [Aside] To say the truth, so Judas kiss'd his master
    And cried 'All hail!' when as he meant all harm.
 Now am I seated as my soul delights,  
    Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.

  CLARENCE.
 What will your Grace have done with Margaret?
    Reignier, her father, to the King of France
    Hath pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem,
    And hither have they sent it for her ransom.

  KING EDWARD.

    And now what rests but that we spend the time
    With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
    Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
    Sound drums and trumpets.
 Farewell, sour annoy!
    For here, I hope, begins our lasting joy.
             Exeunt


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1611

KING HENRY THE EIGHTH

by William Shakespeare


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  KING HENRY THE EIGHTH
  CARDINAL WOLSEY               CARDINAL CAMPEIUS
  CAPUCIUS, Ambassador from the Emperor Charles V
  CRANMER, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY
  DUKE OF NORFOLK               DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
  DUKE OF SUFFOLK               EARL OF SURREY
  LORD CHAMBERLAIN              LORD CHANCELLOR
  GARDINER, BISHOP OF WINCHESTER
  BISHOP OF LINCOLN             LORD ABERGAVENNY
  LORD SANDYS                   SIR HENRY GUILDFORD
  SIR THOMAS LOVELL             SIR ANTHONY DENNY
  SIR NICHOLAS VAUX             SECRETARIES to Wolsey
  CROMWELL, servant to Wolsey
  GRIFFITH, gentleman-usher to Queen Katharine
  THREE GENTLEMEN
  DOCTOR BUTTS, physician to the King
  GARTER KING-AT-ARMS
  SURVEYOR to the Duke of Buckingham
  BRANDON, and a SERGEANT-AT-ARMS
  DOORKEEPER Of the Council chamber  
  PORTER, and his MAN           PAGE to Gardiner
  A CRIER

  QUEEN KATHARINE, wife to King Henry, afterwards divorced
  ANNE BULLEN, her Maid of Honour, afterwards Queen
  AN OLD LADY, friend to Anne Bullen
  PATIENCE, woman to Queen Katharine

  Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Lords and Ladies in the Dumb
       Shows; Women attending upon the Queen; Scribes,
       Officers, Guards, and other Attendants; Spirits

                          SCENE:

              London; Westminster; Kimbolton



                 KING HENRY THE EIGHTH

                     THE PROLOGUE.
 Those that can pity here
    May, if they think it well, let fall a tear:
    The subject will deserve it.
 Such as give
    Their money out of hope they may believe
    May here find truth too.
 Think ye see
    The very persons of our noble story
    As they were living; think you see them great,
    And follow'd with the general throng and sweat
    Of thousand friends; then, in a moment, see
    How soon this mightiness meets misery.

    And if you can be merry then, I'll say
    A man may weep upon his wedding-day.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT I.
 Good morrow, and well met.
 I thank your Grace,
    Healthful; and ever since a fresh admirer
    Of what I saw there.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 An untimely ague
    Stay'd me a prisoner in my chamber when
    Those suns of glory, those two lights of men,
    Met in the vale of Andren.
 'Twixt Guynes and Arde-
    I was then present, saw them salute on horseback;
    Beheld them, when they lighted, how they clung
    In their embracement, as they grew together;
    Which had they, what four thron'd ones could have weigh'd  
    Such a compounded one?
  BUCKINGHAM.
 All the whole time
    I was my chamber's prisoner.

  NORFOLK.
 Then you lost
    The view of earthly glory; men might say,
    Till this time pomp was single, but now married
    To one above itself.
 Each following day
    Became the next day's master, till the last
    Made former wonders its.
 Their dwarfish pages were
    As cherubins, an gilt; the madams too,
    Not us'd to toil, did almost sweat to bear
    The pride upon them, that their very labour
    Was to them as a painting.
 The two kings,
    Equal in lustre, were now best, now worst,  
    As presence did present them: him in eye
    still him in praise; and being present both,
    'Twas said they saw but one, and no discerner
    Durst wag his tongue in censure.
 When these suns-
    For so they phrase 'em-by their heralds challeng'd
    The noble spirits to arms, they did perform
    Beyond thought's compass, that former fabulous story,
    Being now seen possible enough, got credit,
    That Bevis was believ'd.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 As I belong to worship, and affect
    In honour honesty, the tract of ev'rything
    Would by a good discourser lose some life
    Which action's self was tongue to.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 One, certes, that promises no element
    In such a business.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 I pray you, who, my lord?
  NORFOLK.
 All this was ord'red by the good discretion
    Of the right reverend Cardinal of York.
 The devil speed him! No man's pie is freed
    From his ambitious finger.
 What had he
    To do in these fierce vanities? I wonder
    That such a keech can with his very bulk
    Take up the rays o' th' beneficial sun,
    And keep it from the earth.

  NORFOLK.
 Surely, sir,
    There's in him stuff that puts him to these ends;
    For, being not propp'd by ancestry, whose grace
    Chalks successors their way, nor call'd upon
    For high feats done to th' crown, neither allied
    To eminent assistants, but spider-like,
    Out of his self-drawing web, 'a gives us note
    The force of his own merit makes his way-
    A gift that heaven gives for him, which buys  
    A place next to the King.
 I cannot tell
    What heaven hath given him-let some graver eye
    Pierce into that; but I can see his pride
    Peep through each part of him.
 Whence has he that?
    If not from hell, the devil is a niggard
    Or has given all before, and he begins
    A new hell in himself.

  BUCKINGHAM.

  ABERGAVENNY.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 O, many
    Have broke their backs with laying manors on 'em
    For this great journey.
 What did this vanity
    But minister communication of
    A most poor issue?
  NORFOLK.
 Grievingly I think
    The peace between the French and us not values
    The cost that did conclude it.

  NORFOLK.
 Which is budded out;
    For France hath flaw'd the league, and hath attach'd
    Our merchants' goods at Bordeaux.
 Is it therefore
    Th' ambassador is silenc'd?  
  NORFOLK.
 Marry, is't.
 A proper tide of a peace, and purchas'd
    At a superfluous rate!
  BUCKINGHAM.
 Why, all this business
    Our reverend Cardinal carried.
 Like it your Grace,
    The state takes notice of the private difference
    Betwixt you and the Cardinal.
 I advise you-
    And take it from a heart that wishes towards you
    Honour and plenteous safety-that you read
    The Cardinal's malice and his potency
    Together; to consider further, that
    What his high hatred would effect wants not
    A minister in his power.
 You know his nature,
    That he's revengeful; and I know his sword
    Hath a sharp edge-it's long and't may be said
    It reaches far, and where 'twill not extend,
    Thither he darts it.
  

      Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, the purse borne before
      him, certain of the guard, and two SECRETARIES
      with papers.
 The CARDINAL in his passage fixeth his
      eye on BUCKINGHAM, and BUCKINGHAM on him,
      both full of disdain

  WOLSEY.
 The Duke of Buckingham's surveyor? Ha!
    Where's his examination?
  SECRETARY.

  WOLSEY.
 Is he in person ready?
  SECRETARY.

  WOLSEY.
 This butcher's cur is venom-mouth'd, and I
    Have not the power to muzzle him; therefore best
    Not wake him in his slumber.

  NORFOLK.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 I read in's looks
    Matter against me, and his eye revil'd
    Me as his abject object.
 At this instant
    He bores me with some trick.
 He's gone to th' King;
    I'll follow, and outstare him.
 Stay, my lord,
    And let your reason with your choler question
    What 'tis you go about.
 Anger is like
    A full hot horse, who being allow'd his way,
    Self-mettle tires him.
 I'll to the King,
    And from a mouth of honour quite cry down
    This Ipswich fellow's insolence; or proclaim
    There's difference in no persons.

  NORFOLK.
 Know you not
    The fire that mounts the liquor till't run o'er
    In seeming to augment it wastes it? Be advis'd.

    I say again there is no English soul
    More stronger to direct you than yourself,
    If with the sap of reason you would quench
    Or but allay the fire of passion.

  NORFOLK.
 Say not treasonous.

  BUCKINGHAM.

  NORFOLK.
 Faith, and so it did.
 Pray, give me favour, sir; this cunning cardinal
    The articles o' th' combination drew
    As himself pleas'd; and they were ratified
    As he cried 'Thus let be' to as much end
    As give a crutch to th' dead.
 But our Count-Cardinal
    Has done this, and 'tis well; for worthy Wolsey,
    Who cannot err, he did it.

  NORFOLK.
 I am sorry
    To hear this of him, and could wish he were
    Something mistaken in't.
  
  BUCKINGHAM.
 No, not a syllable:
    I do pronounce him in that very shape
    He shall appear in proof.


       Enter BRANDON, a SERGEANT-AT-ARMS before him,
              and two or three of the guard

  BRANDON.

  BRANDON.
  
  BUCKINGHAM.
 It will help nothing
    To plead mine innocence; for that dye is on me
    Which makes my whit'st part black.
 The will of heav'n
    Be done in this and all things! I obey.

    O my Lord Aberga'ny, fare you well!
  BRANDON.
 Nay, he must bear you company.

  ABERGAVENNY.

  BRANDON.
 Here is warrant from
    The King t' attach Lord Montacute and the bodies
    Of the Duke's confessor, John de la Car,
    One Gilbert Peck, his chancellor-
  BUCKINGHAM.
 So, so!
    These are the limbs o' th' plot; no more, I hope.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 O, Nicholas Hopkins?  
  BRANDON.
 He.
 My surveyor is false.
 The o'er-great Cardinal
    Hath show'd him gold; my life is spann'd already.
 My lord, farewell.
 SCENE 2.
 The Council Chamber

Cornets.
 Enter KING HENRY, leaning on the CARDINAL'S shoulder, the NOBLES,
and SIR THOMAS LOVELL, with others.
 My life itself, and the best heart of it,
    Thanks you for this great care; I stood i' th' level
    Of a full-charg'd confederacy, and give thanks
    To you that chok'd it.


      A noise within, crying 'Room for the Queen!'
      Enter the QUEEN, usher'd by the DUKES OF NORFOLK
      and SUFFOLK; she kneels.
 The KING riseth
      from his state, takes her up, kisses and placeth her  
      by him

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Nay, we must longer kneel: I am suitor.

  KING.
 Arise, and take place by us.

    The other moiety ere you ask is given;
    Repeat your will, and take it.
 Thank your Majesty.

    That you would love yourself, and in that love
    Not unconsidered leave your honour nor
    The dignity of your office, is the point
    Of my petition.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 I am solicited, not by a few,
    And those of true condition, that your subjects
    Are in great grievance: there have been commissions
    Sent down among 'em which hath flaw'd the heart
    Of all their loyalties; wherein, although,
    My good Lord Cardinal, they vent reproaches
    Most bitterly on you as putter-on  
    Of these exactions, yet the King our master-
    Whose honour Heaven shield from soil!-even he escapes not
    Language unmannerly; yea, such which breaks
    The sides of loyalty, and almost appears
    In loud rebellion.

  NORFOLK.
 Not almost appears-
    It doth appear; for, upon these taxations,
    The clothiers all, not able to maintain
    The many to them 'longing, have put of
    The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers, who
    Unfit for other life, compell'd by hunger
    And lack of other means, in desperate manner
    Daring th' event to th' teeth, are all in uproar,
    And danger serves among them.

  KING.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 No, my lord!
    You know no more than others! But you frame
    Things that are known alike, which are not wholesome
    To those which would not know them, and yet must
    Perforce be their acquaintance.
 They say
    They are devis'd by you, or else you suffer
    Too hard an exclamation.
 Still exaction!
    The nature of it? In what kind, let's know,
    Is this exaction?
  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 I am much too venturous
    In tempting of your patience, but am bold'ned
    Under your promis'd pardon.
 The subjects' grief
    Comes through commissions, which compels from each
    The sixth part of his substance, to be levied  
    Without delay; and the pretence for this
    Is nam'd your wars in France.

  WOLSEY.
 If I am
    Traduc'd by ignorant tongues, which neither know
    My faculties nor person, yet will be
    The chronicles of my doing, let me say
    'Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake
    That virtue must go through.

  KING.
 Things done well
    And with a care exempt themselves from fear:
    Things done without example, in their issue
    Are to be fear'd.
 Have you a precedent
    Of this commission? I believe, not any.
 To every county
    Where this is question'd send our letters with
    Free pardon to each man that has denied
    The force of this commission.
 [Aside to the SECRETARY]  A word with you.
                         Exit SECRETARY

                    Enter SURVEYOR

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 I am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham
    Is run in your displeasure.

  KING.
 It grieves many.
  
    The gentleman is learn'd and a most rare speaker;
    To nature none more bound; his training such
    That he may furnish and instruct great teachers
    And never seek for aid out of himself.
 Bid him recount
    The fore-recited practices, whereof
    We cannot feel too little, hear too much.

  WOLSEY.
 Speak freely.

  SURVEYOR.
 First, it was usual with him-every day
    It would infect his speech-that if the King
    Should without issue die, he'll carry it so
    To make the sceptre his.

  WOLSEY.
 My learn'd Lord Cardinal,
    Deliver all with charity.
 Speak on.

    How grounded he his title to the crown
    Upon our fail? To this point hast thou heard him
    At any time speak aught?  
  SURVEYOR.
 He was brought to this
    By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Henton.

  KING.
 What was that Henton?
  SURVEYOR.
 Sir, a Chartreux friar,
    His confessor, who fed him every minute
    With words of sovereignty.
 How know'st thou this?
  SURVEYOR.
 Not long before your Highness sped to France,
    The Duke being at the Rose, within the parish
    Saint Lawrence Poultney, did of me demand
    What was the speech among the Londoners
    Concerning the French journey.
 I replied
    Men fear'd the French would prove perfidious,
    To the King's danger.
"'
  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Take good heed
    You charge not in your spleen a noble person
    And spoil your nobler soul.
 Let him on.
 On my soul, I'll speak but truth.
 He answer'd 'Tush,
    It can do me no damage'; adding further
    That, had the King in his last sickness fail'd,
    The Cardinal's and Sir Thomas Lovell's heads
    Should have gone off.
 Canst thou say further?
  SURVEYOR.
 I can, my liege.

  SURVEYOR.
 Being at Greenwich,
    After your Highness had reprov'd the Duke
    About Sir William Bulmer-
  KING.
 I remember
    Of such a time: being my sworn servant,
    The Duke retain'd him his.
 But on: what hence?
  SURVEYOR.
 Now, madam, may his Highness live in freedom,
    And this man out of prison?
  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 There's something more would out of thee: what say'st?
  SURVEYOR.
 After 'the Duke his father' with the 'knife,'
    He stretch'd him, and, with one hand on his dagger,
    Another spread on's breast, mounting his eyes,
    He did discharge a horrible oath, whose tenour
    Was, were he evil us'd, he would outgo
    His father by as much as a performance
    Does an irresolute purpose.

  KING.
 There's his period,
    To sheath his knife in us.
                                Exeunt




ACT I.
 SCENE 3.
 As far as I see, all the good our English
    Have got by the late voyage is but merely
    A fit or two o' th' face; but they are shrewd ones;
    For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly
    Their very noses had been counsellors
    To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so.

  SANDYS.
 They have all new legs, and lame ones.

  CHAMBERLAIN.
 Death! my lord,
    Their clothes are after such a pagan cut to't,  
    That sure th' have worn out Christendom.
 Faith, my lord,
    I hear of none but the new proclamation
    That's clapp'd upon the court gate.
 The reformation of our travell'd gallants,
    That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors.

  CHAMBERLAIN.
 Now I would pray our monsieurs
    To think an English courtier may be wise,
    And never see the Louvre.
 There, I take it,
    They may, cum privilegio, wear away
    The lag end of their lewdness and be laugh'd at.

  SANDYS.
 'Tis time to give 'em physic, their diseases
    Are grown so catching.

  CHAMBERLAIN.
 What a loss our ladies
    Will have of these trim vanities!
  LOVELL.

    A French song and a fiddle has no fellow.
 The devil fiddle 'em! I am glad they are going,
    For sure there's no converting 'em.
 Well said, Lord Sandys;
    Your colt's tooth is not cast yet.
 Sir Thomas,
    Whither were you a-going?
  LOVELL.
 To the Cardinal's;
    Your lordship is a guest too.

  CHAMBERLAIN.

  LOVELL.
 That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed,
    A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us;
    His dews fall everywhere.
 No doubt he's noble;
    He had a black mouth that said other of him.

  CHAMBERLAIN.
 True, they are so;
    But few now give so great ones.
 My barge stays;
    Your lordship shall along.
 Come, good Sir Thomas,
    We shall be late else; which I would not be,
    For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guildford,
    This night to be comptrollers.

  SANDYS.
 I am your lordship's.
 SCENE 4.
 A small table under a state for the Cardinal,
a longer table for the guests.
 Then enter ANNE BULLEN,
and divers other LADIES and GENTLEMEN, as guests, at one door;
at another door enter SIR HENRY GUILDFORD

  GUILDFORD.
 Ladies, a general welcome from his Grace
    Salutes ye all; this night he dedicates
    To fair content and you.
 None here, he hopes,
    In all this noble bevy, has brought with her
    One care abroad; he would have all as merry
    As, first, good company, good wine, good welcome,
    Can make good people.

  SANDYS.

  LOVELL.
 O that your lordship were but now confessor
    To one or two of these!
  SANDYS.

  LOVELL.
 As easy as a down bed would afford it.
 Sweet ladies, will it please you sit? Sir Harry,
    Place you that side; I'll take the charge of this.

    His Grace is ent'ring.
 Nay, you must not freeze:
    Two women plac'd together makes cold weather.

    My Lord Sandys, you are one will keep 'em waking:
    Pray sit between these ladies.
 By my faith,
    And thank your lordship.

  ANNE.
 O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too.
 Well said, my lord.

    So, now y'are fairly seated.
 Gentlemen,
    The penance lies on you if these fair ladies
    Pass away frowning.

  SANDYS.
 For my little cure,
    Let me alone.


         Hautboys.
 Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, attended; and
                         takes his state

  WOLSEY.
 Y'are welcome, my fair guests.
 Your Grace is noble.

    Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks
    And save me so much talking.

  WOLSEY.
 My Lord Sandys,
    I am beholding to you.
 You are a merry gamester,
    My Lord Sandys.
 Yes, if I make my play.
 I told your Grace they would talk anon.
  
                             [Drum and trumpet.
 Chambers discharg'd]
  WOLSEY.
 What's that?
  CHAMBERLAIN.
             Exit a SERVANT
  WOLSEY.
 What warlike voice,
    And to what end, is this? Nay, ladies, fear not:
    By all the laws of war y'are privileg'd.


            Re-enter SERVANT

  CHAMBERLAIN.
 How now! what is't?
  SERVANT.
 A noble troop of strangers-
    For so they seem.

  WOLSEY.
 Good Lord Chamberlain,
    Go, give 'em welcome; you can speak the French tongue;
    And pray receive 'em nobly and conduct 'em
    Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty
    Shall shine at full upon them.

              Exit CHAMBERLAIN attended.
 All rise, and tables remov'd  
    You have now a broken banquet, but we'll mend it.

      They pass directly before the CARDINAL,
      and gracefully salute him

    A noble company! What are their pleasures?
  CHAMBERLAIN.
 Because they speak no English, thus they pray'd
    To tell your Grace, that, having heard by fame
    Of this so noble and so fair assembly
    This night to meet here, they could do no less,
    Out of the great respect they bear to beauty,
    But leave their flocks and, under your fair conduct,
    Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat
    An hour of revels with 'em.

  WOLSEY.
 Say, Lord Chamberlain,
    They have done my poor house grace; for which I pay 'em  
    A thousand thanks, and pray 'em take their pleasures.

                   [They choose ladies.
 The KING chooses ANNE BULLEN]
  KING.
 The fairest hand I ever touch'd! O beauty,
    Till now I never knew thee!                        [Music.
 Dance]
  WOLSEY.
 My lord!
  CHAMBERLAIN.
 Your Grace?
  WOLSEY.

  CHAMBERLAIN.
 I will, my lord.

                                         [He whispers to the maskers]
  WOLSEY.
 What say they?
  CHAMBERLAIN.

  WOLSEY.
                    [Comes from his state]
    By all your good leaves, gentlemen, here I'll make
    My royal choice.
  [Unmasking]  Ye have found him, Cardinal.

    You hold a fair assembly; you do well, lord.

  WOLSEY.

  KING.
 My Lord Chamberlain,
    Prithee come hither: what fair lady's that?
  CHAMBERLAIN.
 An't please your Grace, Sir Thomas Bullen's
      daughter-
    The Viscount Rochford-one of her Highness' women.

  KING.
 By heaven, she is a dainty one.
 Sweet heart,
    I were unmannerly to take you out
    And not to kiss you.
 A health, gentlemen!
    Let it go round.

  WOLSEY.
 Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready
    I' th' privy chamber?
  LOVELL.

  WOLSEY.
 Your Grace,
    I fear, with dancing is a little heated.
  
  KING.
 I fear, too much.
 There's fresher air, my lord,
    In the next chamber.

  KING.
 Lead in your ladies, ev'ry one.
 Sweet partner,
    I must not yet forsake you.
 Let's be merry:
    Good my Lord Cardinal, I have half a dozen healths
    To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure
    To lead 'em once again; and then let's dream
    Who's best in favour.
 Let the music knock it.

                                                Exeunt, with trumpets




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.


Westminster.
 Yes, indeed, was I.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 You may guess quickly what.
 Is he found guilty?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 So are a number more.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 But, pray, how pass'd it?  
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 I'll tell you in a little.

    Came to the bar; where to his accusations
    He pleaded still not guilty, and alleged
    Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.

    All these accus'd him strongly, which he fain
    Would have flung from him; but indeed he could not;
    And so his peers, upon this evidence,
    Have found him guilty of high treason.
 Much
    He spoke, and learnedly, for life; but all  
    Was either pitied in him or forgotten.
 When he was brought again to th' bar to hear
    His knell rung out, his judgment, he was stirr'd
    With such an agony he sweat extremely,
    And something spoke in choler, ill and hasty;
    But he fell to himself again, and sweetly
    In all the rest show'd a most noble patience.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 I do not think he fears death.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Certainly
    The Cardinal is the end of this.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 At his return
    No doubt he will requite it.
 This is noted,
    And generally: whoever the King favours
    The Cardinal instantly will find employment,
    And far enough from court too.
 All the commons
    Hate him perniciously, and, o' my conscience,
    Wish him ten fathom deep: this Duke as much
    They love and dote on; call him bounteous Buckingham,
    The mirror of all courtesy-

      Enter BUCKINGHAM from his arraignment, tip-staves
      before him; the axe with the edge towards him; halberds
      on each side; accompanied with SIR THOMAS
      LOVELL, SIR NICHOLAS VAUX, SIR WILLIAM SANDYS,
      and common people, etc.


  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 Stay there, sir,
    And see the noble ruin'd man you speak of.
  
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Let's stand close, and behold him.
 All good people,
    You that thus far have come to pity me,
    Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.

    I have this day receiv'd a traitor's judgment,
    And by that name must die; yet, heaven bear witness,
    And if I have a conscience, let it sink me
    Even as the axe falls, if I be not faithful!
    The law I bear no malice for my death:
    'T has done, upon the premises, but justice.

    Be what they will, I heartily forgive 'em;
    Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief
    Nor build their evils on the graves of great men,
    For then my guiltless blood must cry against 'em.
 You few that lov'd me
    And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,
    His noble friends and fellows, whom to leave  
    Is only bitter to him, only dying,
    Go with me like good angels to my end;
    And as the long divorce of steel falls on me
    Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice,
    And lift my soul to heaven.

  LOVELL.
 I do beseech your Grace, for charity,
    If ever any malice in your heart
    Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you
    As I would be forgiven.

    There cannot be those numberless offences
    'Gainst me that I cannot take peace with.
 No black envy
    Shall mark my grave.
 Commend me to his Grace;
    And if he speak of Buckingham, pray tell him
    You met him half in heaven.
 My vows and prayers
    Yet are the King's, and, till my soul forsake,
    Shall cry for blessings on him.
 May he live
    Longer than I have time to tell his years;
    Ever belov'd and loving may his rule be;
    And when old time Shall lead him to his end,  
    Goodness and he fill up one monument!
  LOVELL.

  VAUX.
 Nay, Sir Nicholas,
    Let it alone; my state now will but mock me.

    When I came hither I was Lord High Constable
    And Duke of Buckingham; now, poor Edward Bohun.

    Yet I am richer than my base accusers
    That never knew what truth meant; I now seal it;
    And with that blood will make 'em one day groan fort.
 Now his son,
    Henry the Eighth, life, honour, name, and all
    That made me happy, at one stroke has taken
    For ever from the world.

    Farewell;
    And when you would say something that is sad,
    Speak how I fell.
 I have done; and God forgive me!
                                          Exeunt BUCKINGHAM and train
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 O, this is full of pity! Sir, it calls,
    I fear, too many curses on their heads
    That were the authors.
 If the Duke be guiltless,
    'Tis full of woe; yet I can give you inkling
    Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,
    Greater than this.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 Good angels keep it from us!
    What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 I am confident.
  
    You shall, sir.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 But that slander, sir,
    Is found a truth now; for it grows again
    Fresher than e'er it was, and held for certain
    The King will venture at it.
 Either the Cardinal
    Or some about him near have, out of malice
    To the good Queen, possess'd him with a scruple
    That will undo her.
 To confirm this too,
    Cardinal Campeius is arriv'd and lately;
    As all think, for this business.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 'Tis the Cardinal;
    And merely to revenge him on the Emperor
    For not bestowing on him at his asking  
    The archbishopric of Toledo, this is purpos'd.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
                               Exeunt




ACT II.
 SCENE 2.
 The palace

Enter the LORD CHAMBERLAIN reading this letter

  CHAMBERLAIN.
 'My lord,
    'The horses your lordship sent for, with all the care
    had, I saw well chosen, ridden, and furnish'd.
'

    I fear he will indeed.


    Enter to the LORD CHAMBERLAIN the DUKES OF NORFOLK and SUFFOLK

  NORFOLK.
  
  CHAMBERLAIN.
 Good day to both your Graces.
 How is the King employ'd?
  CHAMBERLAIN.
 I left him private,
    Full of sad thoughts and troubles.

  NORFOLK.
 What's the cause?
  CHAMBERLAIN.

  SUFFOLK.
 'Tis so;
    This is the Cardinal's doing; the King-Cardinal,
    That blind priest, like the eldest son of fortune,
    Turns what he list.
 The King will know him one day.
 How holily he works in all his business!
    And with what zeal! For, now he has crack'd the league
    Between us and the Emperor, the Queen's great nephew,
    He dives into the King's soul and there scatters
    Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience,
    Fears, and despairs-and all these for his marriage;  
    And out of all these to restore the King,
    He counsels a divorce, a loss of her
    That like a jewel has hung twenty years
    About his neck, yet never lost her lustre;
    Of her that loves him with that excellence
    That angels love good men with; even of her
    That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls,
    Will bless the King-and is not this course pious?
  CHAMBERLAIN.
 Heaven keep me from such counsel! 'Tis most true
    These news are everywhere; every tongue speaks 'em,
    And every true heart weeps for 't.
 All that dare
    Look into these affairs see this main end-
    The French King's sister.
 We had need pray, and heartily, for our deliverance;
    Or this imperious man will work us an
    From princes into pages.

  SUFFOLK.
 For me, my lords,
    I love him not, nor fear him-there's my creed;
    As I am made without him, so I'll stand,
    If the King please; his curses and his blessings
    Touch me alike; th' are breath I not believe in.

    I knew him, and I know him; so I leave him
    To him that made him proud-the Pope.

  NORFOLK.
 Let's in;
    And with some other business put the King
    From these sad thoughts that work too much upon him.
 Excuse me,
    The King has sent me otherwhere; besides,
    You'll find a most unfit time to disturb him.
 Thanks, my good Lord Chamberlain.
 How sad he looks; sure, he is much afflicted.
  
  KING.
 Pray God he be not angry.
 Who's there, I say? How dare you thrust yourselves
    Into my private meditations?
    Who am I, ha?
  NORFOLK.
 A gracious king that pardons all offences
    Malice ne'er meant.
 Ye are too bold.

    Go to; I'll make ye know your times of business.

    Is this an hour for temporal affairs, ha?

      Enter WOLSEY and CAMPEIUS with a commission

    Who's there? My good Lord Cardinal? O my Wolsey,
    The quiet of my wounded conscience,
    Thou art a cure fit for a King.
  [To CAMPEIUS]  You're
      welcome,
    Most learned reverend sir, into our kingdom.
  
    Use us and it.
 Sir, you cannot.

  SUFFOLK.

                                           Exeunt NORFOLK and SUFFOLK
  WOLSEY.
 Your Grace has given a precedent of wisdom
    Above all princes, in committing freely
    Your scruple to the voice of Christendom.
 All the clerks,
    I mean the learned ones, in Christian kingdoms
    Have their free voices.
 And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,
    And thank the holy conclave for their loves.

  CAMPEIUS.

  KING.
 Two equal men.
 Where's Gardiner?
  WOLSEY.
 I know your Majesty has always lov'd her
    So dear in heart not to deny her that  
    A woman of less place might ask by law-
    Scholars allow'd freely to argue for her.

  KING.
 Ay, and the best she shall have; and my favour
    To him that does best.
 Cardinal,
    Prithee call Gardiner to me, my new secretary;
    I find him a fit fellow.

  GARDINER.
 Come hither, Gardiner.

  CAMPEIUS.
 Was he not held a learned man?
  WOLSEY.
 Yes, surely.
  
  CAMPEIUS.
 Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread then,
    Even of yourself, Lord Cardinal.

  WOLSEY.
 How! Of me?
  CAMPEIUS.
 They will not stick to say you envied him
    And, fearing he would rise, he was so virtuous,
    Kept him a foreign man still; which so griev'd him
    That he ran mad and died.

  WOLSEY.
 Heav'n's peace be with him!
    That's Christian care enough.

    I will have none so near else.
 Learn this, brother,
    We live not to be grip'd by meaner persons.

  KING.

                                                        Exit GARDINER
    The most convenient place that I can think of
    For such receipt of learning is Blackfriars;
    There ye shall meet about this weighty business-
    My Wolsey, see it furnish'd.
              Exeunt




ACT II.


London.
 The palace

Enter ANNE BULLEN and an OLD LADY

  ANNE.
 Not for that neither.
 Here's the pang that pinches:
    His Highness having liv'd so long with her, and she
    So good a lady that no tongue could ever
    Pronounce dishonour of her-by my life,
    She never knew harm-doing-O, now, after
    So many courses of the sun enthroned,
    Still growing in a majesty and pomp, the which
    To leave a thousand-fold more bitter than
    'Tis sweet at first t' acquire-after this process,
    To give her the avaunt, it is a pity
    Would move a monster.
 Hearts of most hard temper
    Melt and lament for her.

  OLD LADY.

  ANNE.
 So much the more
    Must pity drop upon her.
 Our content
    Is our best having.

  ANNE.
 By my troth and maidenhead,
    I would not be a queen.

  OLD LADY.
 Beshrew me, I would,
    And venture maidenhead for 't; and so would you,
    For all this spice of your hypocrisy.

    You that have so fair parts of woman on you
    Have too a woman's heart, which ever yet
    Affected eminence, wealth, sovereignty;  
    Which, to say sooth, are blessings; and which gifts,
    Saving your mincing, the capacity
    Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive
    If you might please to stretch it.
 Nay, good troth.
 Yes, troth and troth.
 You would not be a queen!
  ANNE.

  OLD LADY.
 'Tis strange: a threepence bow'd would hire me,
    Old as I am, to queen it.
 But, I pray you,
    What think you of a duchess? Have you limbs
    To bear that load of title?
  ANNE.
 Then you are weakly made.
 Pluck off a little;
    I would not be a young count in your way
    For more than blushing comes to.
 How you do talk!
    I swear again I would not be a queen
    For all the world.
  
  OLD LADY.
 I myself
    Would for Carnarvonshire, although there long'd
    No more to th' crown but that.
 Lo, who comes here?

         Enter the LORD CHAMBERLAIN

  CHAMBERLAIN.
 Good morrow, ladies.
 What were't worth to know
    The secret of your conference?
  ANNE.
 It was a gentle business and becoming
    The action of good women; there is hope
    All will be well.

  ANNE.
 That you may, fair lady,
    Perceive I speak sincerely and high notes
    Ta'en of your many virtues, the King's Majesty  
    Commends his good opinion of you to you, and
    Does purpose honour to you no less flowing
    Than Marchioness of Pembroke; to which tide
    A thousand pound a year, annual support,
    Out of his grace he adds.

  ANNE.
 I do not know
    What kind of my obedience I should tender;
    More than my all is nothing, nor my prayers
    Are not words duly hallowed, nor my wishes
    More worth than empty vanities; yet prayers and wishes
    Are all I can return.
 Beseech your lordship,
    Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience,
    As from a blushing handmaid, to his Highness;
    Whose health and royalty I pray for.

  CHAMBERLAIN.
 Lady,
    I shall not fail t' approve the fair conceit
    The King hath of you.
  [Aside]  I have perus'd her well:
    Beauty and honour in her are so mingled
    That they have caught the King; and who knows yet
    But from this lady may proceed a gem  
    To lighten all this isle?-I'll to the King
    And say I spoke with you.

  ANNE.
 My honour'd lord!                       Exit LORD CHAMBERLAIN
  OLD LADY.
 Why, this it is: see, see!
    I have been begging sixteen years in court-
    Am yet a courtier beggarly-nor could
    Come pat betwixt too early and too late
    For any suit of pounds; and you, O fate!
    A very fresh-fish here-fie, fie, fie upon
    This compell'd fortune!-have your mouth fill'd up
    Before you open it.

  ANNE.

    There was a lady once-'tis an old story-
    That would not be a queen, that would she not,
    For all the mud in Egypt.
 With your theme I could
    O'ermount the lark.
 The Marchioness of Pembroke!
    A thousand pounds a year for pure respect!  
    No other obligation! By my life,
    That promises moe thousands: honour's train
    Is longer than his foreskirt.
 Good lady,
    Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy,
    And leave me out on't.
 Would I had no being,
    If this salute my blood a jot; it faints me
    To think what follows.
 What do you think me?                              Exeunt




ACT II.
 SCENE 4.
 A hall in Blackfriars

Trumpets, sennet, and cornets.
 Then enter the KING and QUEEN
and their trains.

The LORDS sit next the BISHOPS.
 The rest of the attendants stand
in convenient order about the stage

  WOLSEY.

  KING.
 Say 'Henry King of England, come into the court.
'
  CRIER.

  KING.
 Here.
 Say 'Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.
 Katharine Queen of England, &c.
 Alas, sir,
    In what have I offended you? What cause
    Hath my behaviour given to your displeasure
    That thus you should proceed to put me of
    And take your good grace from me? Heaven witness,
    I have been to you a true and humble wife,
    At all times to your will conformable,
    Ever in fear to kindle your dislike,
    Yea, subject to your countenance-glad or sorry
    As I saw it inclin'd.
 When was the hour
    I ever contradicted your desire
    Or made it not mine too? Or which of your friends
    Have I not strove to love, although I knew  
    He were mine enemy? What friend of mine
    That had to him deriv'd your anger did
    Continue in my liking? Nay, gave notice
    He was from thence discharg'd? Sir, call to mind
    That I have been your wife in this obedience
    Upward of twenty years, and have been blest
    With many children by you.
 Please you, sir,
    The King, your father, was reputed for
    A prince most prudent, of an excellent
    And unmatch'd wit and judgment; Ferdinand,
    My father, King of Spain, was reckon'd one
    The wisest prince that there had reign'd by many
    A year before.
 Wherefore I humbly
    Beseech you, sir, to spare me till I may
    Be by my friends in Spain advis'd, whose counsel
    I will implore.
 If not, i' th' name of God,
    Your pleasure be fulfill'd!
  WOLSEY.
 It shall be therefore bootless
    That longer you desire the court, as well
    For your own quiet as to rectify
    What is unsettled in the King.

  CAMPEIUS.
  
  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Lord Cardinal,
    To you I speak.
 Sir,
    I am about to weep; but, thinking that
    We are a queen, or long have dream'd so, certain
    The daughter of a king, my drops of tears
    I'll turn to sparks of fire.

  WOLSEY.
 Be patient yet.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 I do believe,
    Induc'd by potent circumstances, that
    You are mine enemy, and make my challenge
    You shall not be my judge; for it is you
    Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me-
    Which God's dew quench! Therefore I say again,
    I utterly abhor, yea, from my soul
    Refuse you for my judge, whom yet once more
    I hold my most malicious foe and think not
    At all a friend to truth.
  
  WOLSEY.
 I do profess
    You speak not like yourself, who ever yet
    Have stood to charity and display'd th' effects
    Of disposition gentle and of wisdom
    O'ertopping woman's pow'r.
 Therefore in him
    It lies to cure me, and the cure is to
    Remove these thoughts from you; the which before
    His Highness shall speak in, I do beseech  
    You, gracious madam, to unthink your speaking
    And to say so no more.
 My lord, my lord,
    I am a simple woman, much too weak
    T' oppose your cunning.
 Y'are meek and humble-mouth'd;
    You sign your place and calling, in full seeming,
    With meekness and humility; but your heart
    Is cramm'd with arrogancy, spleen, and pride.

                     [She curtsies to the KING, and offers to depart]  
  CAMPEIUS.

    She's going away.
 Call her again.

  CRIER.
 Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.
 Madam, you are call'd back.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 What need you note it? Pray you keep your way;
    When you are call'd, return.
 Now the Lord help!
    They vex me past my patience.

    That man i' th' world who shall report he has
    A better wife, let him in nought be trusted
    For speaking false in that.
 Most gracious sir,
    In humblest manner I require your Highness
    That it shall please you to declare in hearing
    Of all these ears-for where I am robb'd and bound,
    There must I be unloos'd, although not there
    At once and fully satisfied-whether ever I
    Did broach this business to your Highness, or
    Laid any scruple in your way which might
    Induce you to the question on't, or ever
    Have to you, but with thanks to God for such
    A royal lady, spake one the least word that might
    Be to the prejudice of her present state,
    Or touch of her good person?
  KING.
 You are not to be taught  
    That you have many enemies that know not
    Why they are so, but, like to village curs,
    Bark when their fellows do.
 Now, what mov'd me to't,
    I will be bold with time and your attention.

    Then mark th' inducement.
 Thus it came-give heed to't:
    My conscience first receiv'd a tenderness,
    Scruple, and prick, on certain speeches utter'd
    By th' Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador,
    Who had been hither sent on the debating
    A marriage 'twixt the Duke of Orleans and
    Our daughter Mary.
 First, methought
    I stood not in the smile of heaven, who had
    Commanded nature that my lady's womb,
    If it conceiv'd a male child by me, should
    Do no more offices of life to't than
    The grave does to the dead; for her male issue
    Or died where they were made, or shortly after
    This world had air'd them.
 Then follows that
    I weigh'd the danger which my realms stood in  
    By this my issue's fail, and that gave to me
    Many a groaning throe.
 First, I began in private
    With you, my Lord of Lincoln; you remember
    How under my oppression I did reek,
    When I first mov'd you.

  LINCOLN.
 Very well, my liege.
 I have spoke long; be pleas'd yourself to say
    How far you satisfied me.

  LINCOLN.

  KING.

    Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life
    And kingly dignity, we are contented
    To wear our moral state to come with her,
    Katharine our queen, before the primest creature
    That's paragon'd o' th' world.

  CAMPEIUS.
 So please your Highness,
    The Queen being absent, 'tis a needful fitness
    That we adjourn this court till further day;
    Meanwhile must be an earnest motion  
    Made to the Queen to call back her appeal
    She intends unto his Holiness.

  KING.
  [Aside]  I may perceive
    These cardinals trifle with me.
 I abhor
    This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome.
 With thy approach I know
    My comfort comes along.
                   Exuent in manner as they entered




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT III.
 SCENE 1.
 The QUEEN'S apartments

Enter the QUEEN and her women, as at work

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Take thy lute, wench.
 Leave working.


                    SONG

        Orpheus with his lute made trees,
        And the mountain tops that freeze,
          Bow themselves when he did sing;
        To his music plants and flowers
        Ever sprung, as sun and showers
          There had made a lasting spring.
  
        In sweet music is such art,
        Killing care and grief of heart
          Fall asleep or hearing die.


              Enter a GENTLEMAN

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 An't please your Grace, the two great Cardinals
    Wait in the presence.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Would they speak with me?
  GENTLEMAN.
 They will'd me say so, madam.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Pray their Graces
    To come near.
 [Exit GENTLEMAN] What can be their business
    With me, a poor weak woman, fall'n from favour?
    I do not like their coming.
 Now I think on't,
    They should be good men, their affairs as righteous;
    But all hoods make not monks.


         Enter the two CARDINALS, WOLSEY and CAMPEIUS
  
  WOLSEY.
 Your Graces find me here part of housewife;
    I would be all, against the worst may happen.

    What are your pleasures with me, reverend lords?
  WOLSEY.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Speak it here;
    There's nothing I have done yet, o' my conscience,
    Deserves a corner.

  WOLSEY.
 O, good my lord, no Latin!  
    I am not such a truant since my coming,
    As not to know the language I have liv'd in;
    A strange tongue makes my cause more strange, suspicious;
    Pray speak in English.
 Here are some will thank you,
    If you speak truth, for their poor mistress' sake:
    Believe me, she has had much wrong.
 Lord Cardinal,
    The willing'st sin I ever yet committed
    May be absolv'd in English.

  WOLSEY.
  
  CAMPEIUS.
 Most honour'd madam,
    My Lord of York, out of his noble nature,
    Zeal and obedience he still bore your Grace,
    Forgetting, like a good man, your late censure
    Both of his truth and him-which was too far-
    Offers, as I do, in a sign of peace,
    His service and his counsel.
-
    My lords, I thank you both for your good wins;
    Ye speak like honest men-pray God ye prove so!
    But how to make ye suddenly an answer,
    In such a point of weight, so near mine honour,
    More near my life, I fear, with my weak wit,
    And to such men of gravity and learning,
    In truth I know not.

    For her sake that I have been-for I feel
    The last fit of my greatness-good your Graces,
    Let me have time and counsel for my cause.
  
    Alas, I am a woman, friendless, hopeless!
  WOLSEY.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 In England
    But little for my profit; can you think, lords,
    That any Englishman dare give me counsel?
    Or be a known friend, 'gainst his Highness' pleasure-
    Though he be grown so desperate to be honest-
    And live a subject? Nay, forsooth, my friends,
    They that must weigh out my afflictions,
    They that my trust must grow to, live not here;
    They are, as all my other comforts, far hence,
    In mine own country, lords.

  CAMPEIUS.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 How, sir?
  CAMPEIUS.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Ye tell me what ye wish for both-my ruin.

    Is this your Christian counsel? Out upon ye!
    Heaven is above all yet: there sits a Judge
    That no king can corrupt.
 Your rage mistakes us.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Is this your comfort?
    The cordial that ye bring a wretched lady-
    A woman lost among ye, laugh'd at, scorn'd?
    I will not wish ye half my miseries:
    I have more charity; but say I warned ye.

    Take heed, for heaven's sake take heed, lest at once
    The burden of my sorrows fall upon ye.
 Ye turn me into nothing.
 Woe upon ye,  
    And all such false professors! Would you have me-
    If you have any justice, any pity,
    If ye be any thing but churchmen's habits-
    Put my sick cause into his hands that hates me?
    Alas! has banish'd me his bed already,
    His love too long ago! I am old, my lords,
    And all the fellowship I hold now with him
    Is only my obedience.
 What can happen
    To me above this wretchedness? All your studies
    Make me a curse like this.

  CAMPEIUS.
 Your fears are worse.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Have I liv'd thus long-let me speak myself,
    Since virtue finds no friends-a wife, a true one?
    A woman, I dare say without vain-glory,
    Never yet branded with suspicion?
    Have I with all my full affections
    Still met the King, lov'd him next heav'n, obey'd him,
    Been, out of fondness, superstitious to him,
    Almost forgot my prayers to content him,
    And am I thus rewarded? 'Tis not well, lords.
  
    Bring me a constant woman to her husband,
    One that ne'er dream'd a joy beyond his pleasure,
    And to that woman, when she has done most,
    Yet will I add an honour-a great patience.

  WOLSEY.
 Madam, you wander from the good we aim at.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 My lord, I dare not make myself so guilty,
    To give up willingly that noble title
    Your master wed me to: nothing but death
    Shall e'er divorce my dignities.

  WOLSEY.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Would I had never trod this English earth,
    Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it!
    Ye have angels' faces, but heaven knows your hearts.

    [To her WOMEN]  Alas, poor wenches, where are now
      your fortunes?
    Shipwreck'd upon a kingdom, where no pity,
    No friends, no hope; no kindred weep for me;
    Almost no grave allow'd me.
 Like the My,  
    That once was mistress of the field, and flourish'd,
    I'll hang my head and perish.
 Why should we, good lady,
    Upon what cause, wrong you? Alas, our places,
    The way of our profession is against it;
    We are to cure such sorrows, not to sow 'em.

    For goodness' sake, consider what you do;
    How you may hurt yourself, ay, utterly
    Grow from the King's acquaintance, by this carriage.

    The hearts of princes kiss obedience,
    So much they love it; but to stubborn spirits
    They swell and grow as terrible as storms.

    I know you have a gentle, noble temper,
    A soul as even as a calm.
 Pray think us
    Those we profess, peace-makers, friends, and servants.
 Madam, you'll find it so.
 A noble spirit,
    As yours was put into you, ever casts  
    Such doubts as false coin from it.
 For us, if you please
    To trust us in your business, we are ready
    To use our utmost studies in your service.

  QUEEN KATHARINE.
 Do what ye will my lords; and pray
      forgive me
    If I have us'd myself unmannerly;
    You know I am a woman, lacking wit
    To make a seemly answer to such persons.
              Exeunt



ACT III.


London.
 If you will now unite in your complaints
    And force them with a constancy, the Cardinal
    Cannot stand under them: if you omit
    The offer of this time, I cannot promise
    But that you shall sustain moe new disgraces
    With these you bear already.

  SUFFOLK.

    What he deserves of you and me I know;
    What we can do to him-though now the time
    Gives way to us-I much fear.
 If you cannot
    Bar his access to th' King, never attempt
    Anything on him; for he hath a witchcraft
    Over the King in's tongue.

  NORFOLK.
 O, fear him not!
    His spell in that is out; the King hath found
    Matter against him that for ever mars
    The honey of his language.
 No, he's settled,
    Not to come off, in his displeasure.
 Sir,
    I should be glad to hear such news as this
    Once every hour.

  NORFOLK.
 Believe it, this is true:
    In the divorce his contrary proceedings
    Are all unfolded; wherein he appears
    As I would wish mine enemy.

  SURREY.
 O, how, how?
  SUFFOLK.
 The Cardinal's letters to the Pope miscarried,
    And came to th' eye o' th' King; wherein was read
    How that the Cardinal did entreat his Holiness
    To stay the judgment o' th' divorce; for if
    It did take place, 'I do' quoth he 'perceive
    My king is tangled in affection to
    A creature of the Queen's, Lady Anne Bullen.
'
  SURREY.
 Believe it.

  SURREY.
 My amen to't!
  NORFOLK.
 An men's!
  SUFFOLK.
 There's order given for her coronation;
    Marry, this is yet but young, and may be left
    To some ears unrecounted.
 I persuade me from her
    Will fall some blessing to this land, which shall
    In it be memoriz'd.
 No, no;
    There be moe wasps that buzz about his nose
    Will make this sting the sooner.
 I do assure you
    The King cried 'Ha!' at this.

  CHAMBERLAIN.
 Now, God incense him,
    And let him cry 'Ha!' louder!
  NORFOLK.
 He is return'd in his opinions; which
    Have satisfied the King for his divorce,
    Together with all famous colleges
    Almost in Christendom.
 Katharine no more
    Shall be call'd queen, but princess dowager
    And widow to Prince Arthur.

  NORFOLK.
 This same Cranmer's
    A worthy fellow, and hath ta'en much pain
    In the King's business.

  SUFFOLK.
 So I hear.

  SUFFOLK.
 'Tis so.


        Enter WOLSEY and CROMWELL

    The Cardinal!
  NORFOLK.
 Observe, observe, he's moody.
 The packet, Cromwell,
    Gave't you the King?
  CROMWELL.
 To his own hand, in's bedchamber.

  WOLSEY.
 Look'd he o' th' inside of the paper?
  CROMWELL.
 Presently
    He did unseal them; and the first he view'd,
    He did it with a serious mind; a heed
    Was in his countenance.
 You he bade
    Attend him here this morning.
 Is he ready
    To come abroad?
  CROMWELL.
 I think by this he is.
                              Exit CROMWELL
    [Aside]  It shall be to the Duchess of Alencon,
    The French King's sister; he shall marry her.
 Speedily I wish
    To hear from Rome.

  SUFFOLK.
 May be he hears the King
    Does whet his anger to him.

  SURREY.
 Sharp enough,
    Lord, for thy justice!
  WOLSEY.
  [Aside]  The late Queen's gentlewoman, a knight's
      daughter,
    To be her mistress' mistress! The Queen's queen!
    This candle burns not clear.

  NORFOLK.
 He is vex'd at something.
 I would 'twere something that would fret the string,
    The master-cord on's heart!
  SUFFOLK.
 The King, the King!
  KING.
 It may well be
    There is a mutiny in's mind.

  NORFOLK.

  KING.
 If we did think
    His contemplation were above the earth  
    And fix'd on spiritual object, he should still
    dwell in his musings; but I am afraid
    His thinkings are below the moon, not worth
    His serious considering.
 Heaven forgive me!
    Ever God bless your Highness!
  KING.
 You have scarce time
    To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span
    To keep your earthly audit; sure, in that
    I deem you an ill husband, and am glad
    To have you therein my companion.

  WOLSEY.
 Sir,
    For holy offices I have a time; a time
    To think upon the part of business which
    I bear i' th' state; and nature does require  
    Her times of preservation, which perforce
    I, her frail son, amongst my brethren mortal,
    Must give my tendance to.

  KING.
 You have said well.

  WOLSEY.
 And ever may your Highness yoke together,
    As I will lend you cause, my doing well
    With my well saying!
  KING.
 My father lov'd you:
    He said he did; and with his deed did crown
    His word upon you.
  [Aside]  The Lord increase this business!
  KING.
 For your great graces
    Heap'd upon me, poor undeserver, I
    Can nothing render but allegiant thanks;
    My pray'rs to heaven for you; my loyalty,
    Which ever has and ever shall be growing,
    Till death, that winter, kill it.

  KING.
 I presume
    That, as my hand has open'd bounty to you,
    My heart dropp'd love, my pow'r rain'd honour, more
    On you than any, so your hand and heart,
    Your brain, and every function of your power,
    Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty,
    As 'twere in love's particular, be more
    To me, your friend, than any.
 I do profess
    That for your Highness' good I ever labour'd
    More than mine own; that am, have, and will be-
    Though all the world should crack their duty to you,
    And throw it from their soul; though perils did
    Abound as thick as thought could make 'em, and
    Appear in forms more horrid-yet my duty,
    As doth a rock against the chiding flood,
    Should the approach of this wild river break,
    And stand unshaken yours.

  KING.
 Read o'er this;
                                                  [Giving him papers]
    And after, this; and then to breakfast with
    What appetite you have.

                Exit the KING, frowning upon the CARDINAL; the NOBLES
                             throng after him, smiling and whispering
  WOLSEY.
 I must read this paper;
    I fear, the story of his anger.
 'Tis th' account
    Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together
    For mine own ends; indeed to gain the popedom,
    And fee my friends in Rome.
 O negligence,
    Fit for a fool to fall by! What cross devil
    Made me put this main secret in the packet  
    I sent the King? Is there no way to cure this?
    No new device to beat this from his brains?
    I know 'twill stir him strongly; yet I know
    A way, if it take right, in spite of fortune,
    Will bring me off again.
 What's this? 'To th' Pope.
'
    The letter, as I live, with all the business
    I writ to's Holiness.


        Re-enter to WOLSEY the DUKES OF NORFOLK and
        SUFFOLK, the EARL OF SURREY, and the LORD
        CHAMBERLAIN

  NORFOLK.

  WOLSEY.
 Stay:
    Where's your commission, lords? Words cannot carry
    Authority so weighty.

  SUFFOLK.
 Who dares cross 'em,
    Bearing the King's will from his mouth expressly?
  WOLSEY.
 Till I find more than will or words to do it-
    I mean your malice-know, officious lords,
    I dare and must deny it.
 That seal
    You ask with such a violence, the King-
    Mine and your master-with his own hand gave me;
    Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honours,  
    During my life; and, to confirm his goodness,
    Tied it by letters-patents.
 The King, that gave it.

  WOLSEY.
 It must be himself then.
 Proud lord, thou liest.

    Within these forty hours Surrey durst better
    Have burnt that tongue than said so.

  SURREY.
 Thy ambition,
    Thou scarlet sin, robb'd this bewailing land
    Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law.

    If I lov'd many words, lord, I should tell you
    You have as little honesty as honour,
    That in the way of loyalty and truth
    Toward the King, my ever royal master,
    Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be
    And an that love his follies.

  SURREY.
 By my soul,
    Your long coat, priest, protects you; thou shouldst feel
    My sword i' the life-blood of thee else.

  WOLSEY.

  SURREY.
 Yes, that goodness
    Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one,
    Into your own hands, Cardinal, by extortion;
    The goodness of your intercepted packets
    You writ to th' Pope against the King; your goodness,
    Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.
 I'll startle you
    Worse than the sacring bell, when the brown wench
    Lay kissing in your arms, Lord Cardinal.

  WOLSEY.
 How much, methinks, I could despise this man,
    But that I am bound in charity against it!
  NORFOLK.

  WOLSEY.

    Now, if you can blush and cry guilty, Cardinal,
    You'll show a little honesty.

  WOLSEY.
 Speak on, sir;
    I dare your worst objections.

  SURREY.
 I had rather want those than my head.
 Have at you!
    First, that without the King's assent or knowledge
    You wrought to be a legate; by which power
    You maim'd the jurisdiction of all bishops.
 Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else
    To foreign princes, 'Ego et Rex meus'
    Was still inscrib'd; in which you brought the King
    To be your servant.

  SUFFOLK.
 Then, that without the knowledge
    Either of King or Council, when you went  
    Ambassador to the Emperor, you made bold
    To carry into Flanders the great seal.
 Item, you sent a large commission
    To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude,
    Without the King's will or the state's allowance,
    A league between his Highness and Ferrara.

  SURREY.
 Then, that you have sent innumerable substance,
    By what means got I leave to your own conscience,
    To furnish Rome and to prepare the ways
    You have for dignities, to the mere undoing
    Of all the kingdom.
 O my lord,
    Press not a falling man too far! 'Tis virtue.

    His faults lie open to the laws; let them,
    Not you, correct him.
 My heart weeps to see him
    So little of his great self.
  
  SURREY.
 I forgive him.

  SUFFOLK.
 And so we'll leave you to your meditations
    How to live better.
 For your stubborn answer
    About the giving back the great seal to us,
    The King shall know it, and, no doubt, shall thank you.

    So fare you well, my little good Lord Cardinal.

                                                Exeunt all but WOLSEY
  WOLSEY.
 I have ventur'd,
    Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
    This many summers in a sea of glory;
    But far beyond my depth.

    Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye;
    I feel my heart new open'd.
 I have no power to speak, sir.

  CROMWELL.
 How does your Grace?
  WOLSEY.
 Why, well;
    Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.

    I know myself now, and I feel within me
    A peace above all earthly dignities,
    A still and quiet conscience.
 The King has cur'd me,
    I humbly thank his Grace; and from these shoulders,
    These ruin'd pillars, out of pity, taken
    A load would sink a navy-too much honour.

  WOLSEY.
 I hope I have.

    What news abroad?
  CROMWELL.

  WOLSEY.
 God bless him!
  CROMWELL.
 The next is that Sir Thomas More is chosen
    Lord Chancellor in your place.

  WOLSEY.
 May he continue
    Long in his Highness' favour, and do justice
    For truth's sake and his conscience; that his bones
    When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings,
    May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on him!
    What more?
  CROMWELL.
 That Cranmer is return'd with welcome,
    Install'd Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
 There was the weight that pull'd me down.

    No sun shall ever usher forth mine honours,
    Or gild again the noble troops that waited
    Upon my smiles.
 Go get thee from me, Cromwell;
    I am a poor fall'n man, unworthy now
    To be thy lord and master.
 Seek the King;
    That sun, I pray, may never set! I have told him
    What and how true thou art.
 O my lord,
    Must I then leave you? Must I needs forgo
    So good, so noble, and so true a master?
    Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,
    With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.

  WOLSEY.

    Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition:  
    By that sin fell the angels.
 How can man then,
    The image of his Maker, hope to win by it?
    Love thyself last; cherish those hearts that hate thee;
    Corruption wins not more than honesty.

    Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace
    To silence envious tongues.

    There take an inventory of all I have
    To the last penny; 'tis the King's.
 My robe,
    And my integrity to heaven, is all
    I dare now call mine own.
 So I have.
 Farewell
    The hopes of court! My hopes in heaven do dwell.
           Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE 1.
 Y'are well met once again.
 'Tis all my business.
 'Tis very true.
 But that time offer'd
      sorrow;
    This, general joy.
 'Tis well.
 May I be bold to ask what that contains,
    That paper in your hand?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.

    The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
    To be High Steward; next, the Duke of Norfolk,
    He to be Earl Marshal.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.

    But, I beseech you, what's become of Katharine,
    The Princess Dowager? How goes her business?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 Stand close, the Queen is coming.

[Hautboys]

              THE ORDER OF THE CORONATION.


    1.

    2.

    3.

    4.
 CHORISTERS singing.
 MAYOR OF LONDON, bearing the mace.
 Then GARTER, in
       his coat of arms, and on his head he wore a gilt copper
       crown.

    6.
 DUKE OF SUFFOLK, in his robe of estate, his coronet on
       his head, bearing a long white wand, as High Steward.

       With him, the DUKE OF NORFOLK, with the rod of
       marshalship, a coronet on his head.
 A canopy borne by four of the CINQUE-PORTS; under it
       the QUEEN in her robe; in her hair richly adorned with
       pearl, crowned.
 On each side her, the BISHOPS OF LONDON
       and WINCHESTER.
 Certain LADIES or COUNTESSES, with plain circlets of gold
       without flowers.


             Exeunt, first passing over the stage in order and state,
                                and then a great flourish of trumpets

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 A royal train, believe me.
 Marquis Dorset;
    And that the Earl of Surrey, with the rod.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 That should be
    The Duke of Suffolk?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 'Tis the same-High Steward.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 And that my Lord of Norfolk?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
  [Looking on the QUEEN]  Heaven
      bless thee!
    Thou hast the sweetest face I ever look'd on.

    Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel;
    Our king has all the Indies in his arms,
    And more and richer, when he strains that lady;
    I cannot blame his conscience.
 They that bear
    The cloth of honour over her are four barons
    Of the Cinque-ports.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Those men are happy; and so are all
      are near her.
  
    I take it she that carries up the train
    Is that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Their coronets say so.
 No more of that.
 Among the crowds i' th' Abbey, where a finger
    Could not be wedg'd in more; I am stifled
    With the mere rankness of their joy.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 That I did.
 How was it?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN.
 Well worth the seeing.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Good sir, speak it to us.
  
  THIRD GENTLEMAN.

    Believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman
    That ever lay by man; which when the people
    Had the full view of, such a noise arose
    As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest,
    As loud, and to as many tunes; hats, cloaks-
    Doublets, I think-flew up, and had their faces
    Been loose, this day they had been lost.
 Great-bellied women,
    That had not half a week to go, like rams
    In the old time of war, would shake the press,
    And make 'em reel before 'em.
 No man living
    Could say 'This is my wife' there, all were woven
    So strangely in one piece.
  
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 At length her Grace rose, and with
      modest paces
    Came to the altar, where she kneel'd, and saintlike
    Cast her fair eyes to heaven, and pray'd devoutly.

    Then rose again, and bow'd her to the people;
    When by the Archbishop of Canterbury
    She had all the royal makings of a queen:
    As holy oil, Edward Confessor's crown,
    The rod, and bird of peace, and all such emblems
    Laid nobly on her; which perform'd, the choir,
    With all the choicest music of the kingdom,
    Together sung 'Te Deum.
 Sir,
    You must no more call it York Place: that's past:
    For since the Cardinal fell that title's lost.

    'Tis now the King's, and called Whitehall.

  THIRD GENTLEMAN.
 I know it;  
    But 'tis so lately alter'd that the old name
    Is fresh about me.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Stokesly and Gardiner: the one of Winchester,
    Newly preferr'd from the King's secretary;
    The other, London.
 He of Winchester
    Is held no great good lover of the Archbishop's,
    The virtuous Cranmer.
 All the land knows that;
    However, yet there is no great breach.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 He will deserve more.
 As I walk thither,
    I'll tell ye more.

  BOTH.
 SCENE 2.


Kimbolton

Enter KATHARINE, Dowager, sick; led between GRIFFITH, her Gentleman Usher,
and PATIENCE, her woman

  GRIFFITH.
 How does your Grace?
  KATHARINE.

  KATHARINE.
 Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died.

  GRIFFITH.
 Well, the voice goes, madam;  
    For after the stout Earl Northumberland
    Arrested him at York and brought him forward,
    As a man sorely tainted, to his answer,
    He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill
    He could not sit his mule.

  KATHARINE.
 Alas, poor man!
  GRIFFITH.
  
  KATHARINE.
 So may he rest; his faults lie gently on him!
    Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him,
    And yet with charity.
 He was a man
    Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
    Himself with princes; one that, by suggestion,
    Tied all the kingdom.
 Simony was fair play;
    His own opinion was his law.
 I' th' presence
    He would say untruths, and be ever double
    Both in his words and meaning.
 He was never,
    But where he meant to ruin, pitiful.

    His promises were, as he then was, mighty;
    But his performance, as he is now, nothing.

    Of his own body he was ill, and gave
    The clergy ill example.
 Noble madam,
    Men's evil manners live in brass: their virtues
    We write in water.
 This Cardinal,
    Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly
    Was fashion'd to much honour from his cradle.

  KATHARINE.
 After my death I wish no other herald,
    No other speaker of my living actions,
    To keep mine honour from corruption,
    But such an honest chronicler as Griffith.

    Whom I most hated living, thou hast made me,
    With thy religious truth and modesty,
    Now in his ashes honour.
 Peace be with him!
    patience, be near me still, and set me lower:
    I have not long to trouble thee.
 Good Griffith,
    Cause the musicians play me that sad note
    I nam'd my knell, whilst I sit meditating
    On that celestial harmony I go to.

                                              [Sad and solemn music]
  GRIFFITH.
 She is asleep.
 Good wench, let's sit down quiet,
    For fear we wake her.
 Softly, gentle Patience.


                 THE VISION.


      Enter, solemnly tripping one after another, six  
      PERSONAGES clad in white robes, wearing on their
      heads garlands of bays, and golden vizards on their
      faces; branches of bays or palm in their hands.

      Then the two that held the garland deliver the
      same to the other next two, who observe the same
      order in their changes, and holding the garland over
      her head; which done, they deliver the same garland
      to the last two, who likewise observe the same order;
      at which, as it were by inspiration, she makes
      in her sleep signs of rejoicing, and holdeth up her
      hands to heaven.
 And so in their dancing vanish,
      carrying the garland with them.
 Spirits of peace, where are ye? Are ye all gone?
    And leave me here in wretchedness behind ye?
  GRIFFITH.

  KATHARINE.
 It is not you I call for.
  
    Saw ye none enter since I slept?
  GRIFFITH.
 None, madam.
 No? Saw you not, even now, a blessed troop
    Invite me to a banquet; whose bright faces
    Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun?
    They promis'd me eternal happiness,
    And brought me garlands, Griffith, which I feel
    I am not worthy yet to wear.

  GRIFFITH.
 I am most joyful, madam, such good dreams
    Possess your fancy.

  KATHARINE.
 Bid the music leave,
    They are harsh and heavy to me.
 She is going, wench.
 Pray, pray.

  PATIENCE.
 Heaven comfort her!

             Enter a MESSENGER  

  MESSENGER.
 You are a saucy fellow.

    Deserve we no more reverence?
  GRIFFITH.
 You are to blame,
    Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness,
    To use so rude behaviour.

  MESSENGER.

  KATHARINE.
                            Exit MESSENGER

              Enter LORD CAPUCIUS

    If my sight fail not,
    You should be Lord Ambassador from the Emperor,
    My royal nephew, and your name Capucius.
 Madam, the same-your servant.
 But, I pray you,
    What is your pleasure with me?
  CAPUCIUS.
 Noble lady,
    First, mine own service to your Grace; the next,
    The King's request that I would visit you,
    Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me
    Sends you his princely commendations
    And heartily entreats you take good comfort.

    How does his Highness?
  CAPUCIUS.
 Madam, in good health.

  KATHARINE.
 So may he ever do! and ever flourish
    When I shall dwell with worms, and my poor name
    Banish'd the kingdom! Patience, is that letter
    I caus'd you write yet sent away?
  PATIENCE.
                       [Giving it to KATHARINE]  
  KATHARINE.

  CAPUCIUS.

  KATHARINE.
 In which I have commended to his goodness
    The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter-
    The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her!-
    Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding-
    She is young, and of a noble modest nature;
    I hope she will deserve well-and a little
    To love her for her mother's sake, that lov'd him,
    Heaven knows how dearly.
 My next poor petition
    Is that his noble Grace would have some pity
    Upon my wretched women that so long
    Have follow'd both my fortunes faithfully;
    Of which there is not one, I dare avow-
    And now I should not lie-but will deserve,
    For virtue and true beauty of the soul,
    For honesty and decent carriage,
    A right good husband, let him be a noble;
    And sure those men are happy that shall have 'em.

    These are the whole contents; and, good my lord,
    By that you love the dearest in this world,
    As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,
    Stand these poor people's friend, and urge the King
    To do me this last right.
 Remember me
    In all humility unto his Highness;
    Say his long trouble now is passing
    Out of this world.
 Mine eyes grow dim.
 Farewell,
    My lord.
 Griffith, farewell.
 Nay, Patience,
    You must not leave me yet.
 I must to bed;  
    Call in more women.
 When I am dead, good wench,
    Let me be us'd with honour; strew me over
    With maiden flowers, that all the world may know
    I was a chaste wife to my grave.

    I can no more.
                          Exeunt, leading KATHARINE




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.
 SCENE 1.


London.
 A gallery in the palace

Enter GARDINER, BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, a PAGE with a torch before him,
met by SIR THOMAS LOVELL

  GARDINER.
 It hath struck.

  GARDINER.
 Good hour of night, Sir Thomas!
    Whither so late?
  LOVELL.
 I did, Sir Thomas, and left him at primero
    With the Duke of Suffolk.

  LOVELL.
 I'll take my leave.

  GARDINER.
 Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell.
 An if there be  
    No great offence belongs to't, give your friend
    Some touch of your late business.
 Affairs that walk-
    As they say spirits do-at midnight, have
    In them a wilder nature than the business
    That seeks despatch by day.

  LOVELL.
 The Queen's in labour,
    They say in great extremity, and fear'd
    She'll with the labour end.
 The fruit she goes with
    I pray for heartily, that it may find
    Good time, and live; but for the stock, Sir Thomas,
    I wish it grubb'd up now.

  LOVELL.
 Y'are a gentleman  
    Of mine own way; I know you wise, religious;
    And, let me tell you, it will ne'er be well-
    'Twill not, Sir Thomas Lovell, take't of me-
    Till Cranmer, Cromwell, her two hands, and she,
    Sleep in their graves.

  LOVELL.
 Th' Archbishop
    Is the King's hand and tongue, and who dare speak
    One syllable against him?
  GARDINER.
 Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,
    There are that dare; and I myself have ventur'd
    To speak my mind of him; and indeed this day,
    Sir-I may tell it you-I think I have
    Incens'd the lords o' th' Council, that he is-
    For so I know he is, they know he is-
    A most arch heretic, a pestilence  
    That does infect the land; with which they moved
    Have broken with the King, who hath so far
    Given ear to our complaint-of his great grace
    And princely care, foreseeing those fell mischiefs
    Our reasons laid before him-hath commanded
    To-morrow morning to the Council board
    He be convented.
 He's a rank weed, Sir Thomas,
    And we must root him out.
 From your affairs
    I hinder you too long-good night, Sir Thomas.

  LOVELL.
 Sir, I did never win of you before.

  KING.
 But little, Charles;
    Nor shall not, when my fancy's on my play.

    Now, Lovell, from the Queen what is the news?  
  LOVELL.

  KING.
 Alas, good lady!
  SUFFOLK.
 'Tis midnight, Charles;
    Prithee to bed; and in thy pray'rs remember
    Th' estate of my poor queen.

  SUFFOLK.
 I wish your Highness
    A quiet night, and my good mistress will  
    Remember in my prayers.
 Charles, good night.
 Sir, I have brought my lord the Archbishop,
    As you commanded me.
 Ha! Canterbury?
  DENNY.

  KING.
 Where is he, Denny?
  DENNY.
 He attends your Highness' pleasure.
 Bring him to us.
                                   Exit DENNY
  LOVELL.
  [Aside]  This is about that which the bishop spake.

    I am happily come hither.
 Avoid the gallery.
                     [LOVELL seems to stay]
    Ha! I have said.
 Be gone.

  KING.

  CRANMER.
  [Kneeling]  It is my duty
    T'attend your Highness' pleasure.

  KING.

    Come, you and I must walk a turn together;
    I have news to tell you; come, come, me your hand.

    I have, and most unwillingly, of late
    Heard many grievous-I do say, my lord,
    Grievous-complaints of you; which, being consider'd,
    Have mov'd us and our Council that you shall
    This morning come before us; where I know
    You cannot with such freedom purge yourself
    But that, till further trial in those charges  
    Which will require your answer, you must take
    Your patience to you and be well contented
    To make your house our Tow'r.
 You a brother of us,
    It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness
    Would come against you.

  CRANMER.
 I humbly thank your Highness
    And am right glad to catch this good occasion
    Most throughly to be winnowed where my chaff
    And corn shall fly asunder; for I know
    There's none stands under more calumnious tongues
    Than I myself, poor man.

  KING.
 Stand up, good Canterbury;
    Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted
    In us, thy friend.
 Give me thy hand, stand up;
    Prithee let's walk.
 Now, by my holidame,
    What manner of man are you? My lord, I look'd
    You would have given me your petition that
    I should have ta'en some pains to bring together
    Yourself and your accusers, and to have heard you
    Without indurance further.
  
  CRANMER.
 Most dread liege,
    The good I stand on is my truth and honesty;
    If they shall fail, I with mine enemies
    Will triumph o'er my person; which I weigh not,
    Being of those virtues vacant.
 I fear nothing
    What can be said against me.

    You are potently oppos'd, and with a malice
    Of as great size.
 Ween you of better luck,
    I mean in perjur'd witness, than your Master,
    Whose minister you are, whiles here He liv'd
    Upon this naughty earth? Go to, go to;
    You take a precipice for no leap of danger,  
    And woo your own destruction.

  CRANMER.
 God and your Majesty
    Protect mine innocence, or I fall into
    The trap is laid for me!
  KING.

    Keep comfort to you, and this morning see
    You do appear before them; if they shall chance,
    In charging you with matters, to commit you,
    The best persuasions to the contrary
    Fail not to use, and with what vehemency
    Th' occasion shall instruct you.
 Look, the good man weeps!
    He's honest, on mine honour.
 Get you gone,
    And do as I have bid you.

                                                         Exit CRANMER  
    He has strangled his language in his tears.


           Enter OLD LADY

  GENTLEMAN.
  [Within]  Come back; what mean you?
  OLD LADY.
 Now, good angels
    Fly o'er thy royal head, and shade thy person
    Under their blessed wings!
  KING.
 Now, by thy looks
    I guess thy message.
 The God of Heaven
    Both now and ever bless her! 'Tis a girl,
    Promises boys hereafter.
 Sir, your queen
    Desires your visitation, and to be
    Acquainted with this stranger; 'tis as like you
    As cherry is to cherry.

  KING.
 Lovell!  

           Enter LOVELL

  LOVELL.
 Sir?
  KING.
 I'll to the Queen.
            Exit
  OLD LADY.
 An hundred marks? By this light, I'll ha' more!
    An ordinary groom is for such payment.

    Said I for this the girl was like to him! I'll
    Have more, or else unsay't; and now, while 'tis hot,
    I'll put it to the issue.
 SCENE 2.
 Yes, my lord;
    But yet I cannot help you.


           Enter DOCTOR BUTTS

  CRANMER.
 So.

  BUTTS.
  [Aside]  This is a piece of malice.


         Enter the KING and BUTTS at window above

  BUTTS.
 I'll show your Grace the strangest sight-
  KING.
 I think your Highness saw this many a day.

  KING.
 Ha, 'tis he indeed.

    Is this the honour they do one another?
    'Tis well there's one above 'em yet.
 I had thought
    They had parted so much honesty among 'em-
    At least good manners-as not thus to suffer
    A man of his place, and so near our favour,
    To dance attendance on their lordships' pleasures,
    And at the door too, like a post with packets.
                                   Exeunt




ACT V.
 SCENE 3.


The Council Chamber

A Council table brought in, with chairs and stools, and placed
under the state.
 KEEPER at the door

  CHANCELLOR.
 Speak to the business, master secretary;
    Why are we met in council?
  CROMWELL.
 Please your honours,
    The chief cause concerns his Grace of Canterbury.
 Yes.

  NORFOLK.
 Who waits there?
  KEEPER.
 Without, my noble lords?
  GARDINER.
  
  KEEPER.

  CHANCELLOR.

  KEEPER.
 If we suffer,
    Out of our easiness and childish pity
    To one man's honour, this contagious sickness,
    Farewell all physic; and what follows then?
    Commotions, uproars, with a general taint
    Of the whole state; as of late days our neighbours,
    The upper Germany, can dearly witness,
    Yet freshly pitied in our memories.

  CRANMER.
 My good lords, hitherto in all the progress
    Both of my life and office, I have labour'd,
    And with no little study, that my teaching
    And the strong course of my authority
    Might go one way, and safely; and the end
    Was ever to do well.

    Pray heaven the King may never find a heart
    With less allegiance in it! Men that make
    Envy and crooked malice nourishment
    Dare bite the best.
 I do beseech your lordships
    That, in this case of justice, my accusers,
    Be what they will, may stand forth face to face
    And freely urge against me.

  SUFFOLK.
 Nay, my lord,
    That cannot be; you are a councillor,
    And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.

  GARDINER.
 My lord, because we have business of more moment,
    We will be short with you.
 'Tis his Highness' pleasure
    And our consent, for better trial of you,
    From hence you be committed to the Tower;
    Where, being but a private man again,
    You shall know many dare accuse you boldly,
    More than, I fear, you are provided for.
 Ah, my good Lord of Winchester, I thank you;
    You are always my good friend; if your will pass,  
    I shall both find your lordship judge and juror,
    You are so merciful.
 I see your end-
    'Tis my undoing.
 Love and meekness, lord,
    Become a churchman better than ambition;
    Win straying souls with modesty again,
    Cast none away.
 That I shall clear myself,
    Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience,
    I make as little doubt as you do conscience
    In doing daily wrongs.
 I could say more,
    But reverence to your calling makes me modest.

  GARDINER.
 My lord, my lord, you are a sectary;
    That's the plain truth.
 Your painted gloss discovers,
    To men that understand you, words and weakness.
 My Lord of Winchester, y'are a little,
    By your good favour, too sharp; men so noble,
    However faulty, yet should find respect
    For what they have been; 'tis a cruelty
    To load a falling man.

  CROMWELL.

  CROMWELL.
 Not sound?
  GARDINER.
 Not sound, I say.

  GARDINER.
 I shall remember this bold language.

    Remember your bold life too.

  CHANCELLOR.
 This is too much;
    Forbear, for shame, my lords.
 I have done.
 And I.

  CHANCELLOR.
 Then thus for you, my lord: it stands agreed,
    I take it, by all voices, that forthwith
    You be convey'd to th' Tower a prisoner;
    There to remain till the King's further pleasure
    Be known unto us.
 We are.

  CRANMER.
 Is there no other way of mercy,
    But I must needs to th' Tower, my lords?
  GARDINER.
 What other
    Would you expect? You are strangely troublesome.


           Enter the guard

  CRANMER.
 For me?
    Must I go like a traitor thither?
  GARDINER.

  CRANMER.

  SURREY.
 'Tis no counterfeit.
  
  SUFFOLK.
 'Tis the right ring, by heav'n.
 Do you think, my lords,
    The King will suffer but the little finger
    Of this man to be vex'd?
  CHAMBERLAIN.
 'Tis now too certain;
    How much more is his life in value with him!
    Would I were fairly out on't!
  CROMWELL.
 My mind gave me,
    In seeking tales and informations
    Against this man-whose honesty the devil
    And his disciples only envy at-
    Ye blew the fire that burns ye.
 Now have at ye!

      Enter the KING frowning on them; he takes his seat

  GARDINER.
 Dread sovereign, how much are we bound to heaven
    In daily thanks, that gave us such a prince;
    Not only good and wise but most religious;  
    One that in all obedience makes the church
    The chief aim of his honour and, to strengthen
    That holy duty, out of dear respect,
    His royal self in judgment comes to hear
    The cause betwixt her and this great offender.
 You were ever good at sudden commendations,
    Bishop of Winchester.
 But know I come not
    To hear such flattery now, and in my presence
    They are too thin and bare to hide offences.

    To me you cannot reach you play the spaniel,
    And think with wagging of your tongue to win me;
    But whatsoe'er thou tak'st me for, I'm sure
    Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody.

    [To CRANMER]  Good man, sit down.

    By all that's holy, he had better starve
    Than but once think this place becomes thee not.

  SURREY.
 No, sir, it does not please me.

    I had thought I had had men of some understanding  
    And wisdom of my Council; but I find none.

    Was it discretion, lords, to let this man,
    This good man-few of you deserve that title-
    This honest man, wait like a lousy footboy
    At chamber door? and one as great as you are?
    Why, what a shame was this! Did my commission
    Bid ye so far forget yourselves? I gave ye
    Power as he was a councillor to try him,
    Not as a groom.
 There's some of ye, I see,
    More out of malice than integrity,
    Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean;
    Which ye shall never have while I live.
 Thus far,
    My most dread sovereign, may it like your Grace
    To let my tongue excuse all.
 What was purpos'd
    concerning his imprisonment was rather-
    If there be faith in men-meant for his trial
    And fair purgation to the world, than malice,
    I'm sure, in me.

  KING.
 Well, well, my lords, respect him;  
    Take him, and use him well, he's worthy of it.

    I will say thus much for him: if a prince
    May be beholding to a subject,
    Am for his love and service so to him.

    Make me no more ado, but all embrace him;
    Be friends, for shame, my lords! My Lord of Canterbury,
    I have a suit which you must not deny me:
    That is, a fair young maid that yet wants baptism;
    You must be godfather, and answer for her.
 The greatest monarch now alive may glory
    In such an honour; how may I deserve it,
    That am a poor and humble subject to you?
  KING.

  GARDINER.
  
  CRANMER.

    The common voice, I see, is verified
    Of thee, which says thus: 'Do my Lord of Canterbury
    A shrewd turn and he's your friend for ever.
'
    Come, lords, we trifle time away; I long
    To have this young one made a Christian.

    As I have made ye one, lords, one remain;
    So I grow stronger, you more honour gain.
                  Exeunt




ACT V.


The palace yard

Noise and tumult within.
 You'll leave your noise anon, ye rascals.
]
  PORTER.
 Belong to th' gallows, and be hang'd, ye rogue! Is
    this a place to roar in? Fetch me a dozen crab-tree staves,
    and strong ones; these are but switches to 'em.
 You must be seeing christenings? Do you look
    for ale and cakes here, you rude rascals?
  MAN.
 Pray, sir, be patient; 'tis as much impossible,
    Unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannons,
    To scatter 'em as 'tis to make 'em sleep
    On May-day morning; which will never be.

  PORTER.
 How got they in, and be hang'd?
  MAN.

  PORTER.
 I am not Samson, nor Sir Guy, nor Colbrand,
    To mow 'em down before me; but if I spar'd any
    That had a head to hit, either young or old,
    He or she, cuckold or cuckold-maker,
    Let me ne'er hope to see a chine again;
    And that I would not for a cow, God save her!
    [ Within: Do you hear, master porter?]
  PORTER.

    Keep the door close, sirrah.
 What would you have me do?
  PORTER.
 There is a fellow
    somewhat near the door, he should be a brazier by his
    face, for, o' my conscience, twenty of the dog-days now
    reign in's nose; all that stand about him are under the line,
    they need no other penance.
 That fire-drake did I hit three
    times on the head, and three times was his nose discharged
    against me; he stands there like a mortar-piece, to blow us.

    There was a haberdasher's wife of small wit near him, that
    rail'd upon me till her pink'd porringer fell off her head,
    for kindling such a combustion in the state.
 They fell on; I made good my place.
  
  PORTER.
 These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse
    and fight for bitten apples; that no audience but the tribulation
    of Tower-hill or the limbs of Limehouse, their dear
    brothers, are able to endure.
 I have some of 'em in Limbo
    Patrum, and there they are like to dance these three days;
    besides the running banquet of two beadles that is to come.
 Mercy o' me, what a multitude are here!
    They grow still too; from all parts they are coming,
    As if we kept a fair here! Where are these porters,
    These lazy knaves? Y'have made a fine hand, fellows.

    There's a trim rabble let in: are all these
    Your faithful friends o' th' suburbs? We shall have
    Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies,
    When they pass back from the christening.

  PORTER.
  
    An army cannot rule 'em.

  CHAMBERLAIN.
 Y'are lazy knaves;
    And here ye lie baiting of bombards, when
    Ye should do service.
 Hark! the trumpets sound;
    Th' are come already from the christening.

    Go break among the press and find a way out
    To let the troops pass fairly, or I'll find
    A Marshalsea shall hold ye play these two months.
 Make way there for the Princess.

  MAN.
                         Exeunt




ACT V.


The palace

Enter TRUMPETS, sounding; then two ALDERMEN, LORD MAYOR, GARTER, CRANMER,
DUKE OF NORFOLK, with his marshal's staff, DUKE OF SUFFOLK,
two Noblemen bearing great standing-bowls for the christening gifts;
then four Noblemen bearing a canopy, under which the DUCHESS OF NORFOLK,
godmother, bearing the CHILD richly habited in a mantle, etc.
,
train borne by a LADY; then follows the MARCHIONESS DORSET,
the other godmother, and LADIES.
 Heaven, from thy endless goodness, send prosperous
    life, long and ever-happy, to the high and mighty
    Princess of England, Elizabeth!

           Flourish.
 Enter KING and guard
  
  CRANMER.

    What is her name?
  CRANMER.
 Elizabeth.

  KING.
 Stand up, lord.
                   [The KING kisses the child]
    With this kiss take my blessing: God protect thee!
    Into whose hand I give thy life.
 Amen.
 My noble gossips, y'have been too prodigal;
    I thank ye heartily.

  CRANMER.
 Let me speak, sir,
    For heaven now bids me; and the words I utter
    Let none think flattery, for they'll find 'em truth.

    This royal infant-heaven still move about her!-  
    Though in her cradle, yet now promises
    Upon this land a thousand blessings,
    Which time shall bring to ripeness.
 All princely graces
    That mould up such a mighty piece as this is,
    With all the virtues that attend the good,
    Shall still be doubled on her.

    Nor shall this peace sleep with her; but as when
    The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix
    Her ashes new create another heir
    As great in admiration as herself,
    So shall she leave her blessedness to one-
    When heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness-
    Who from the sacred ashes of her honour
    Shall star-like rise, as great in fame as she was,
    And so stand fix'd.
 Peace, plenty, love, truth, terror,
    That were the servants to this chosen infant,
    Shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him;
    Wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine,
    His honour and the greatness of his name
    Shall be, and make new nations; he shall flourish,
    And like a mountain cedar reach his branches
    To all the plains about him; our children's children
    Shall see this and bless heaven.

  KING.
 Thou speakest wonders.

  CRANMER.

    Would I had known no more! But she must die-
    She must, the saints must have her-yet a virgin;
    A most unspotted lily shall she pass
    To th' ground, and all the world shall mourn her.
 O Lord Archbishop,
    Thou hast made me now a man; never before
    This happy child did I get anything.

    This oracle of comfort has so pleas'd me
    That when I am in heaven I shall desire
    To see what this child does, and praise my Maker.

    I thank ye all.
 Lead the way, lords;
    Ye must all see the Queen, and she must thank ye,
    She will be sick else.
 This day, no man think
    Has business at his house; for all shall stay.

    This little one shall make it holiday.
                     Exeunt

KING_HENRY_VIII|EPILOGUE
              THE EPILOGUE.
 If they smile
    And say 'twill do, I know within a while
    All the best men are ours; for 'tis ill hap
    If they hold when their ladies bid 'em clap.


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1597

KING JOHN

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

    KING JOHN
    PRINCE HENRY, his son
    ARTHUR, DUKE OF BRITAINE, son of Geffrey, late Duke of
      Britaine, the elder brother of King John
    EARL OF PEMBROKE
    EARL OF ESSEX
    EARL OF SALISBURY
    LORD BIGOT
    HUBERT DE BURGH
    ROBERT FAULCONBRIDGE, son to Sir Robert Faulconbridge
    PHILIP THE BASTARD, his half-brother
    JAMES GURNEY, servant to Lady Faulconbridge
    PETER OF POMFRET, a prophet

    KING PHILIP OF FRANCE
    LEWIS, the Dauphin
    LYMOGES, Duke of Austria
    CARDINAL PANDULPH, the Pope's legate
    MELUN, a French lord
    CHATILLON, ambassador from France to King John  

    QUEEN ELINOR, widow of King Henry II and mother to
      King John
    CONSTANCE, Mother to Arthur
    BLANCH OF SPAIN, daughter to the King of Castile
      and niece to King John
    LADY FAULCONBRIDGE, widow of Sir Robert Faulconbridge

    Lords, Citizens of Angiers, Sheriff, Heralds, Officers,
      Soldiers, Executioners, Messengers, Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



SCENE:
England and France



ACT I.
 A strange beginning- 'borrowed majesty'!
  KING JOHN.
 Silence, good mother; hear the embassy.

  CHATILLON.
  
  KING JOHN.
 The proud control of fierce and bloody war,
    To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld.
 Then take my king's defiance from my mouth-
    The farthest limit of my embassy.

  KING JOHN.
 Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace;
    Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France;
    For ere thou canst report I will be there,
    The thunder of my cannon shall be heard.

    So hence! Be thou the trumpet of our wrath
    And sullen presage of your own decay.

    An honourable conduct let him have-
    Pembroke, look to 't.

                                        Exeunt CHATILLON and PEMBROKE
  ELINOR.
 What now, my son! Have I not ever said
    How that ambitious Constance would not cease
    Till she had kindled France and all the world
    Upon the right and party of her son?  
    This might have been prevented and made whole
    With very easy arguments of love,
    Which now the manage of two kingdoms must
    With fearful bloody issue arbitrate.

  KING JOHN.
 Our strong possession and our right for us!
  ELINOR.
 Your strong possession much more than your right,
    Or else it must go wrong with you and me;
    So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
    Which none but heaven and you and I shall hear.
 My liege, here is the strangest controversy
    Come from the country to be judg'd by you
    That e'er I heard.

  KING JOHN.
 What art thou?
  ROBERT.
 The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge.
 Is that the elder, and art thou the heir?
    You came not of one mother then, it seems.
 Most certain of one mother, mighty king-
    That is well known- and, as I think, one father;
    But for the certain knowledge of that truth
    I put you o'er to heaven and to my mother.

  BASTARD.
 I, madam? No, I have no reason for it-  
    That is my brother's plea, and none of mine;
    The which if he can prove, 'a pops me out
    At least from fair five hundred pound a year.

    Heaven guard my mother's honour and my land!
  KING JOHN.
 A good blunt fellow.
 I know not why, except to get the land.

    But once he slander'd me with bastardy;
    But whe'er I be as true begot or no,
    That still I lay upon my mother's head;
    But that I am as well begot, my liege-
    Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me!-
    Compare our faces and be judge yourself.
 He hath a trick of Coeur-de-lion's face;
    The accent of his tongue affecteth him.
  
    Do you not read some tokens of my son
    In the large composition of this man?
  KING JOHN.
 Mine eye hath well examined his parts
    And finds them perfect Richard.
 Sirrah, speak,
    What doth move you to claim your brother's land?
  BASTARD.
 Because he hath a half-face, like my father.
 Well, sir, by this you cannot get my land:
    Your tale must be how he employ'd my mother.
 And once dispatch'd him in an embassy
    To Germany, there with the Emperor
    To treat of high affairs touching that time.

    Upon his death-bed he by will bequeath'd
    His lands to me, and took it on his death
    That this my mother's son was none of his;
    And if he were, he came into the world
    Full fourteen weeks before the course of time.
 Sirrah, your brother is legitimate:
    Your father's wife did after wedlock bear him,
    And if she did play false, the fault was hers;
    Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands
    That marry wives.
 Shall then my father's will be of no force
    To dispossess that child which is not his?
  BASTARD.
 Of no more force to dispossess me, sir,
    Than was his will to get me, as I think.

  ELINOR.
 Madam, an if my brother had my shape
    And I had his, Sir Robert's his, like him;
    And if my legs were two such riding-rods,
    My arms such eel-skins stuff'd, my face so thin
    That in mine ear I durst not stick a rose
    Lest men should say 'Look where three-farthings goes!'
    And, to his shape, were heir to all this land-
    Would I might never stir from off this place,
    I would give it every foot to have this face!  
    I would not be Sir Nob in any case.

  ELINOR.
 I like thee well.
 Wilt thou forsake thy fortune,
    Bequeath thy land to him and follow me?
    I am a soldier and now bound to France.

  BASTARD.
 Brother, take you my land, I'll take my chance.

    Madam, I'll follow you unto the death.

  ELINOR.
 Nay, I would have you go before me thither.
 Our country manners give our betters way.

  KING JOHN.

  KING JOHN.
 Brother by th' mother's side, give me your hand;
    My father gave me honour, yours gave land.
 The very spirit of Plantagenet!
    I am thy grandam, Richard: call me so.
 Madam, by chance, but not by truth; what though?
    Something about, a little from the right,
    In at the window, or else o'er the hatch;
    Who dares not stir by day must walk by night;
    And have is have, however men do catch.

    Near or far off, well won is still well shot;
    And I am I, howe'er I was begot.
 Go, Faulconbridge; now hast thou thy desire:
    A landless knight makes thee a landed squire.

    Come, madam, and come, Richard, we must speed
    For France, for France, for it is more than need.
 Brother, adieu.

                                           Exeunt all but the BASTARD
    A foot of honour better than I was;
    But many a many foot of land the worse.

    Well, now can I make any Joan a lady.
'
    And so, ere answer knows what question would,
    Saving in dialogue of compliment,
    And talking of the Alps and Apennines,
    The Pyrenean and the river Po-
    It draws toward supper in conclusion so.

    But this is worshipful society,  
    And fits the mounting spirit like myself;
    For he is but a bastard to the time
    That doth not smack of observation-
    And so am I, whether I smack or no;
    And not alone in habit and device,
    Exterior form, outward accoutrement,
    But from the inward motion to deliver
    Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age's tooth;
    Which, though I will not practise to deceive,
    Yet, to avoid deceit, I mean to learn;
    For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising.

    But who comes in such haste in riding-robes?
    What woman-post is this? Hath she no husband
    That will take pains to blow a horn before her?

      Enter LADY FAULCONBRIDGE, and JAMES GURNEY

    O me, 'tis my mother! How now, good lady!
    What brings you here to court so hastily?
  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE.
 My brother Robert, old Sir Robert's son?
    Colbrand the giant, that same mighty man?
    Is it Sir Robert's son that you seek so?
  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE.
 Sir Robert's son! Ay, thou unreverend boy,
    Sir Robert's son! Why scorn'st thou at Sir Robert?
    He is Sir Robert's son, and so art thou.

  BASTARD.
 Good leave, good Philip.
 Therefore, good mother,
    To whom am I beholding for these limbs?  
    Sir Robert never holp to make this leg.

  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE.

    What! I am dubb'd; I have it on my shoulder.

    But, mother, I am not Sir Robert's son:
    I have disclaim'd Sir Robert and my land;
    Legitimation, name, and all is gone.
 Who was it, mother?
  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE.

  LADY FAULCONBRIDGE.
 King Richard Coeur-de-lion was thy father.
 Now, by this light, were I to get again,  
    Madam, I would not wish a better father.

    He that perforce robs lions of their hearts
    May easily win a woman's.
 Ay, my mother,
    With all my heart I thank thee for my father!
    Who lives and dares but say thou didst not well
    When I was got, I'll send his soul to hell.

    Who says it was, he lies; I say 'twas not.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.
 SCENE 1

France.
 Before Angiers

Enter, on one side, AUSTRIA and forces; on the other, KING PHILIP OF FRANCE,
LEWIS the Dauphin, CONSTANCE, ARTHUR, and forces

  KING PHILIP.
 Before Angiers well met, brave Austria.

  ARTHUR.
 God shall forgive you Coeur-de-lion's death
    The rather that you give his offspring life,
    Shadowing their right under your wings of war.

  KING PHILIP.

  CONSTANCE.
 The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords  
    In such a just and charitable war.
 Well then, to work! Our cannon shall be bent
    Against the brows of this resisting town;
    Call for our chiefest men of discipline,
    To cull the plots of best advantages.

    We'll lay before this town our royal bones,
    Wade to the market-place in Frenchmen's blood,
    But we will make it subject to this boy.


                  Enter CHATILLON

  KING PHILIP.
 A wonder, lady! Lo, upon thy wish,
    Our messenger Chatillon is arriv'd.

    What England says, say briefly, gentle lord;  
    We coldly pause for thee.
 Chatillon, speak.

  CHATILLON.

    England, impatient of your just demands,
    Hath put himself in arms.
 The adverse winds,
    Whose leisure I have stay'd, have given him time
    To land his legions all as soon as I;
    His marches are expedient to this town,
    His forces strong, his soldiers confident.

    In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits  
    Than now the English bottoms have waft o'er
    Did never float upon the swelling tide
    To do offence and scathe in Christendom.
             [Drum beats]
    The interruption of their churlish drums
    Cuts off more circumstance: they are at hand;
    To parley or to fight, therefore prepare.

  KING PHILIP.
 By how much unexpected, by so much
    We must awake endeavour for defence,
    For courage mounteth with occasion.


       Enter KING JOHN, ELINOR, BLANCH, the BASTARD,
                 PEMBROKE, and others

  KING JOHN.
 Peace be to France, if France in peace permit
    Our just and lineal entrance to our own!
    If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven,
    Whiles we, God's wrathful agent, do correct
    Their proud contempt that beats His peace to heaven!  
  KING PHILIP.
 Peace be to England, if that war return
    From France to England, there to live in peace!
    England we love, and for that England's sake
    With burden of our armour here we sweat.

    This toil of ours should be a work of thine;
    But thou from loving England art so far
    That thou hast under-wrought his lawful king,
    Cut off the sequence of posterity,
    Outfaced infant state, and done a rape
    Upon the maiden virtue of the crown.
 From whom hast thou this great commission, France,
    To draw my answer from thy articles?
  KING PHILIP.
 From that supernal judge that stirs good thoughts
    In any breast of strong authority
    To look into the blots and stains of right.
 Alack, thou dost usurp authority.

  KING PHILIP.
 Excuse it is to beat usurping down.
 Who is it thou dost call usurper, France?
  CONSTANCE.
 Let me make answer: thy usurping son.

  ELINOR.
 Out, insolent! Thy bastard shall be king,
    That thou mayst be a queen and check the world!
  CONSTANCE.
  
    My boy a bastard! By my soul, I think
    His father never was so true begot;
    It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother.

  ELINOR.
 There's a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.
 There's a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.

  AUSTRIA.
 Hear the crier.

  AUSTRIA.
 One that will play the devil, sir, with you,
    An 'a may catch your hide and you alone.
 It lies as sightly on the back of him
    As great Alcides' shows upon an ass;
    But, ass, I'll take that burden from your back,
    Or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack.

  KING PHILIP.
 Women and fools, break off your conference.
 My life as soon.

    Arthur of Britaine, yield thee to my hand,
    And out of my dear love I'll give thee more
    Than e'er the coward hand of France can win.
 Come to thy grandam, child.

  CONSTANCE.
 Good my mother, peace!
    I would that I were low laid in my grave:  
    I am not worth this coil that's made for me.

  ELINOR.
 His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps.

  CONSTANCE.

  ELINOR.
 Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and earth,
    Call not me slanderer! Thou and thine usurp
    The dominations, royalties, and rights,
    Of this oppressed boy; this is thy eldest son's son,
    Infortunate in nothing but in thee.

    Thy sins are visited in this poor child;
    The canon of the law is laid on him,
    Being but the second generation
    Removed from thy sin-conceiving womb.
 Bedlam, have done.
 I have but this to say-  
    That he is not only plagued for her sin,
    But God hath made her sin and her the plague
    On this removed issue, plagued for her
    And with her plague; her sin his injury,
    Her injury the beadle to her sin;
    All punish'd in the person of this child,
    And all for her-a plague upon her!
  ELINOR.
 Thou unadvised scold, I can produce
    A will that bars the title of thy son.

  CONSTANCE.
 Ay, who doubts that? A will, a wicked will;
    A woman's will; a cank'red grandam's will!
  KING PHILIP.
 Peace, lady! pause, or be more temperate.

    It ill beseems this presence to cry aim
    To these ill-tuned repetitions.

    Some trumpet summon hither to the walls
    These men of Angiers; let us hear them speak
    Whose title they admit, Arthur's or John's.


      Trumpet sounds.
 Enter citizens upon the walls
  
  CITIZEN.
 Who is it that hath warn'd us to the walls?
  KING PHILIP.

  KING JOHN.

    You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects-
  KING PHILIP.
 You loving men of Angiers, Arthur's subjects,
    Our trumpet call'd you to this gentle parle-
  KING JOHN.

    These flags of France, that are advanced here
    Before the eye and prospect of your town,
    Have hither march'd to your endamagement;
    The cannons have their bowels full of wrath,
    And ready mounted are they to spit forth
    Their iron indignation 'gainst your walls;
    All preparation for a bloody siege
    And merciless proceeding by these French
    Confront your city's eyes, your winking gates;
    And but for our approach those sleeping stones
    That as a waist doth girdle you about
    By the compulsion of their ordinance
    By this time from their fixed beds of lime  
    Had been dishabited, and wide havoc made
    For bloody power to rush upon your peace.

    But on the sight of us your lawful king,
    Who painfully with much expedient march
    Have brought a countercheck before your gates,
    To save unscratch'd your city's threat'ned cheeks-
    Behold, the French amaz'd vouchsafe a parle;
    And now, instead of bullets wrapp'd in fire,
    To make a shaking fever in your walls,
    They shoot but calm words folded up in smoke,
    To make a faithless error in your cars;
    Which trust accordingly, kind citizens,
    And let us in-your King, whose labour'd spirits,
    Forwearied in this action of swift speed,
    Craves harbourage within your city walls.

  KING PHILIP.
 When I have said, make answer to us both.
 Be pleased then
    To pay that duty which you truly owe
    To him that owes it, namely, this young prince;
    And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear,
    Save in aspect, hath all offence seal'd up;
    Our cannons' malice vainly shall be spent
    Against th' invulnerable clouds of heaven;
    And with a blessed and unvex'd retire,
    With unhack'd swords and helmets all unbruis'd,
    We will bear home that lusty blood again
    Which here we came to spout against your town,
    And leave your children, wives, and you, in peace.

    But if you fondly pass our proffer'd offer,
    'Tis not the roundure of your old-fac'd walls  
    Can hide you from our messengers of war,
    Though all these English and their discipline
    Were harbour'd in their rude circumference.

    Then tell us, shall your city call us lord
    In that behalf which we have challeng'd it;
    Or shall we give the signal to our rage,
    And stalk in blood to our possession?
  CITIZEN.
 That can we not; but he that proves the King,
    To him will we prove loyal.
 Till that time
    Have we ramm'd up our gates against the world.

  KING JOHN.
 Doth not the crown of England prove the King?
    And if not that, I bring you witnesses:
    Twice fifteen thousand hearts of England's breed-
  BASTARD.
 To verify our title with their lives.

  KING PHILIP.
  
  KING PHILIP.
 Stand in his face to contradict his claim.

  CITIZEN.
 Till you compound whose right is worthiest,
    We for the worthiest hold the right from both.

  KING JOHN.
 Then God forgive the sin of all those souls
    That to their everlasting residence,
    Before the dew of evening fall shall fleet
    In dreadful trial of our kingdom's king!
  KING PHILIP.
 Saint George, that swing'd the dragon, and e'er since
    Sits on's horse back at mine hostess' door,
    Teach us some fence!  [To AUSTRIA]  Sirrah, were I at home,
    At your den, sirrah, with your lioness,
    I would set an ox-head to your lion's hide,
    And make a monster of you.

  AUSTRIA.
 Peace! no more.
 Speed then to take advantage of the field.
 It shall be so; and at the other hill  
    Command the rest to stand.
 God and our right!              Exeunt

    Here, after excursions, enter the HERALD OF FRANCE,
              with trumpets, to the gates

  FRENCH HERALD.
 You men of Angiers, open wide your gates
    And let young Arthur, Duke of Britaine, in,
    Who by the hand of France this day hath made
    Much work for tears in many an English mother,
    Whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground;
    Many a widow's husband grovelling lies,
    Coldly embracing the discoloured earth;
    And victory with little loss doth play
    Upon the dancing banners of the French,
    Who are at hand, triumphantly displayed,
    To enter conquerors, and to proclaim
    Arthur of Britaine England's King and yours.


         Enter ENGLISH HERALD, with trumpet
  
  ENGLISH HERALD.

    There stuck no plume in any English crest
    That is removed by a staff of France;
    Our colours do return in those same hands
    That did display them when we first march'd forth;
    And like a jolly troop of huntsmen come
    Our lusty English, all with purpled hands,
    Dy'd in the dying slaughter of their foes.

  CITIZEN.

    Blood hath bought blood, and blows have answer'd blows;
    Strength match'd with strength, and power confronted power;
    Both are alike, and both alike we like.
  
    One must prove greatest.
 While they weigh so even,
    We hold our town for neither, yet for both.

  KING PHILIP.
 England, thou hast not sav'd one drop of blood
    In this hot trial more than we of France;
    Rather, lost more.
 And by this hand I swear,
    That sways the earth this climate overlooks,
    Before we will lay down our just-borne arms,
    We'll put thee down, 'gainst whom these arms we bear,
    Or add a royal number to the dead,
    Gracing the scroll that tells of this war's loss  
    With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.
 Ha, majesty! how high thy glory tow'rs
    When the rich blood of kings is set on fire!
    O, now doth Death line his dead chaps with steel;
    The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his fangs;
    And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men,
    In undetermin'd differences of kings.
 Till then, blows, blood, and death!
  KING JOHN.
 Speak, citizens, for England; who's your king?
  CITIZEN.
 The King of England, when we know the King.
 Know him in us that here hold up his right.

  KING JOHN.
 In us that are our own great deputy
    And bear possession of our person here,
    Lord of our presence, Angiers, and of you.

  CITIZEN.

  BASTARD.
 By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings,
    And stand securely on their battlements
    As in a theatre, whence they gape and point
    At your industrious scenes and acts of death.

    Your royal presences be rul'd by me:
    Do like the mutines of Jerusalem,
    Be friends awhile, and both conjointly bend
    Your sharpest deeds of malice on this town.

    By east and west let France and England mount
    Their battering cannon, charged to the mouths,
    Till their soul-fearing clamours have brawl'd down
    The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city.

    That done, dissever your united strengths  
    And part your mingled colours once again,
    Turn face to face and bloody point to point;
    Then in a moment Fortune shall cull forth
    Out of one side her happy minion,
    To whom in favour she shall give the day,
    And kiss him with a glorious victory.

    How like you this wild counsel, mighty states?
    Smacks it not something of the policy?
  KING JOHN.
 France, shall we knit our pow'rs
    And lay this Angiers even with the ground;
    Then after fight who shall be king of it?
  BASTARD.
 An if thou hast the mettle of a king,
    Being wrong'd as we are by this peevish town,
    Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,
    As we will ours, against these saucy walls;
    And when that we have dash'd them to the ground,
    Why then defy each other, and pell-mell
    Make work upon ourselves, for heaven or hell.

  KING PHILIP.
 Let it be so.

  AUSTRIA.
  [Aside]  O prudent discipline! From north to south,
    Austria and France shoot in each other's mouth.
-Come, away, away!
  CITIZEN.
 Hear us, great kings: vouchsafe awhile to stay,
    And I shall show you peace and fair-fac'd league;
    Win you this city without stroke or wound;
    Rescue those breathing lives to die in beds
    That here come sacrifices for the field.
 Speak on with favour; we are bent to hear.

  CITIZEN.
 That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanch,
    Is niece to England; look upon the years
    Of Lewis the Dauphin and that lovely maid.

    If lusty love should go in quest of beauty,
    Where should he find it fairer than in Blanch?  
    If zealous love should go in search of virtue,
    Where should he find it purer than in Blanch?
    If love ambitious sought a match of birth,
    Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady Blanch?
    Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth,
    Is the young Dauphin every way complete-
    If not complete of, say he is not she;
    And she again wants nothing, to name want,
    If want it be not that she is not he.

    O, two such silver currents, when they join,
    Do glorify the banks that bound them in;
    And two such shores to two such streams made one,
    Two such controlling bounds, shall you be, Kings,
    To these two princes, if you marry them.

    This union shall do more than battery can
    To our fast-closed gates; for at this match  
    With swifter spleen than powder can enforce,
    The mouth of passage shall we fling wide ope
    And give you entrance; but without this match,
    The sea enraged is not half so deaf,
    Lions more confident, mountains and rocks
    More free from motion-no, not Death himself
    In mortal fury half so peremptory
    As we to keep this city.

  BASTARD.

    Zounds! I was never so bethump'd with words  
    Since I first call'd my brother's father dad.

  ELINOR.
 Son, list to this conjunction, make this match;
    Give with our niece a dowry large enough;
    For by this knot thou shalt so surely tie
    Thy now unsur'd assurance to the crown
    That yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe
    The bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit.
 Urge them while their souls
    Are capable of this ambition,
    Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath
    Of soft petitions, pity, and remorse,
    Cool and congeal again to what it was.
 Speak England first, that hath been forward first
    To speak unto this city: what say you?
  KING JOHN.
 If that the Dauphin there, thy princely son,
    Can in this book of beauty read 'I love,'
    Her dowry shall weigh equal with a queen;  
    For Anjou, and fair Touraine, Maine, Poictiers,
    And all that we upon this side the sea-
    Except this city now by us besieg'd-
    Find liable to our crown and dignity,
    Shall gild her bridal bed, and make her rich
    In titles, honours, and promotions,
    As she in beauty, education, blood,
    Holds hand with any princess of the world.
 What say'st thou, boy? Look in the lady's face.

  LEWIS.
 I do, my lord, and in her eye I find
    A wonder, or a wondrous miracle,
    The shadow of myself form'd in her eye;
    Which, being but the shadow of your son,
    Becomes a sun, and makes your son a shadow.
 This is pity now,
    That hang'd and drawn and quarter'd there should be
    In such a love so vile a lout as he.

    Further I will not flatter you, my lord,
    That all I see in you is worthy love,
    Than this: that nothing do I see in you-
    Though churlish thoughts themselves should be your judge-
    That I can find should merit any hate.

  KING JOHN.
 What say these young ones? What say you, my niece?
  BLANCH.
 That she is bound in honour still to do
    What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.
 Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love;  
    For I do love her most unfeignedly.

  KING JOHN.

    Philip of France, if thou be pleas'd withal,
    Command thy son and daughter to join hands.

  KING PHILIP.
 It likes us well; young princes, close your hands.

  AUSTRIA.
 And your lips too; for I am well assur'd
    That I did so when I was first assur'd.

  KING PHILIP.
 Now, citizens of Angiers, ope your gates,
    Let in that amity which you have made;
    For at Saint Mary's chapel presently
    The rites of marriage shall be solemniz'd.

    Is not the Lady Constance in this troop?
    I know she is not; for this match made up
    Her presence would have interrupted much.

  LEWIS.
 She is sad and passionate at your Highness' tent.

  KING PHILIP.

  KING JOHN.
 We will heal up all,
    For we'll create young Arthur Duke of Britaine,
    And Earl of Richmond; and this rich fair town
    We make him lord of.
 Call the Lady Constance;
    Some speedy messenger bid her repair
    To our solemnity.
 I trust we shall,
    If not fill up the measure of her will,
    Yet in some measure satisfy her so
    That we shall stop her exclamation.

                                           Exeunt all but the BASTARD
  BASTARD.
 Mad world! mad kings! mad composition!
    John, to stop Arthur's tide in the whole,
    Hath willingly departed with a part;  
    And France, whose armour conscience buckled on,
    Whom zeal and charity brought to the field
    As God's own soldier, rounded in the ear
    With that same purpose-changer, that sly devil,
    That broker that still breaks the pate of faith,
    That daily break-vow, he that wins of all,
    Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids,
    Who having no external thing to lose
    But the word 'maid,' cheats the poor maid of that;
    That smooth-fac'd gentleman, tickling commodity,
    Commodity, the bias of the world-
    The world, who of itself is peised well,
    Made to run even upon even ground,
    Till this advantage, this vile-drawing bias,
    This sway of motion, this commodity,
    Makes it take head from all indifferency,
    From all direction, purpose, course, intent-
    And this same bias, this commodity,
    This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word,
    Clapp'd on the outward eye of fickle France,  
    Hath drawn him from his own determin'd aid,
    From a resolv'd and honourable war,
    To a most base and vile-concluded peace.

    And why rail I on this commodity?
    But for because he hath not woo'd me yet;
    Not that I have the power to clutch my hand
    When his fair angels would salute my palm,
    But for my hand, as unattempted yet,
    Like a poor beggar raileth on the rich.
                   Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 The FRENCH KING'S camp

Enter CONSTANCE, ARTHUR, and SALISBURY

  CONSTANCE.
 Gone to be married! Gone to swear a peace!
    False blood to false blood join'd! Gone to be friends!
    Shall Lewis have Blanch, and Blanch those provinces?
    It is not so; thou hast misspoke, misheard;
    Be well advis'd, tell o'er thy tale again.

    It cannot be; thou dost but say 'tis so;
    I trust I may not trust thee, for thy word
    Is but the vain breath of a common man:
    Believe me I do not believe thee, man;
    I have a king's oath to the contrary.

    What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head?
    Why dost thou look so sadly on my son?
    What means that hand upon that breast of thine?
    Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum,
    Like a proud river peering o'er his bounds?
    Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words?
    Then speak again-not all thy former tale,
    But this one word, whether thy tale be true.

  SALISBURY.
 As true as I believe you think them false
    That give you cause to prove my saying true.

  CONSTANCE.
 O, if thou teach me to believe this sorrow,
    Teach thou this sorrow how to make me die;
    And let belief and life encounter so
    As doth the fury of two desperate men
    Which in the very meeting fall and die!
    Lewis marry Blanch! O boy, then where art thou?
    France friend with England; what becomes of me?
    Fellow, be gone: I cannot brook thy sight;  
    This news hath made thee a most ugly man.

  SALISBURY.
 What other harm have I, good lady, done
    But spoke the harm that is by others done?
  CONSTANCE.

  ARTHUR.

  CONSTANCE.
 If thou that bid'st me be content wert grim,
    Ugly, and sland'rous to thy mother's womb,
    Full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains,
    Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious,
    Patch'd with foul moles and eye-offending marks,
    I would not care, I then would be content;
    For then I should not love thee; no, nor thou
    Become thy great birth, nor deserve a crown.

  CONSTANCE.
 Thou mayst, thou shalt; I will not go with thee;
    I will instruct my sorrows to be proud,
    For grief is proud, and makes his owner stoop.

    To me, and to the state of my great grief,
    Let kings assemble; for my grief's so great
    That no supporter but the huge firm earth
    Can hold it up.
                     [Seats herself on the ground]
    Here I and sorrows sit;
    Here is my throne, bid kings come bow to it.
  

       Enter KING JOHN, KING PHILIP, LEWIS, BLANCH,
       ELINOR, the BASTARD, AUSTRIA, and attendants

  KING PHILIP.
 'Tis true, fair daughter, and this blessed day
    Ever in France shall be kept festival.

    The yearly course that brings this day about
    Shall never see it but a holiday.

    Have I not pawn'd to you my majesty?
  CONSTANCE.

    The grappling vigour and rough frown of war
    Is cold in amity and painted peace,
    And our oppression hath made up this league.

    Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjur'd kings!
    A widow cries: Be husband to me, heavens!
    Let not the hours of this ungodly day
    Wear out the day in peace; but, ere sunset,  
    Set armed discord 'twixt these perjur'd kings!
    Hear me, O, hear me!
  AUSTRIA.
 War! war! no peace! Peace is to me a war.

    O Lymoges! O Austria! thou dost shame
    That bloody spoil.
 And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.
 Thou dar'st not say so, villain, for thy life.

  BASTARD.
 And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.

  KING JOHN.


                  Enter PANDULPH

  KING PHILIP.

  PANDULPH.
 Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven!
    To thee, King John, my holy errand is.

    I Pandulph, of fair Milan cardinal,
    And from Pope Innocent the legate here,
    Do in his name religiously demand
    Why thou against the Church, our holy mother,
    So wilfully dost spurn; and force perforce
    Keep Stephen Langton, chosen Archbishop
    Of Canterbury, from that holy see?
    This, in our foresaid holy father's name,
    Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.
  
  KING JOHN.

    Tell him this tale, and from the mouth of England
    Add thus much more, that no Italian priest
    Shall tithe or toll in our dominions;
    But as we under heaven are supreme head,
    So, under Him that great supremacy,
    Where we do reign we will alone uphold,
    Without th' assistance of a mortal hand.

    So tell the Pope, all reverence set apart
    To him and his usurp'd authority.

  KING PHILIP.
 Then by the lawful power that I have
    Thou shalt stand curs'd and excommunicate;
    And blessed shall he be that doth revolt
    From his allegiance to an heretic;
    And meritorious shall that hand be call'd,
    Canonized, and worshipp'd as a saint,
    That takes away by any secret course
    Thy hateful life.
 O, lawful let it be
    That I have room with Rome to curse awhile!
    Good father Cardinal, cry thou 'amen'
    To my keen curses; for without my wrong
    There is no tongue hath power to curse him right.

  PANDULPH.

  CONSTANCE.
 Philip of France, on peril of a curse,
    Let go the hand of that arch-heretic,
    And raise the power of France upon his head,
    Unless he do submit himself to Rome.
 Look'st thou pale, France? Do not let go thy hand.

  CONSTANCE.

  AUSTRIA.
 King Philip, listen to the Cardinal.

  BASTARD.
 And hang a calf's-skin on his recreant limbs.

  AUSTRIA.
 Well, ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs,
    Because-
  BASTARD.
 Your breeches best may carry them.

  KING JOHN.

    Forgo the easier.

  BLANCH.
 That's the curse of Rome.

  CONSTANCE.
 O Lewis, stand fast! The devil tempts thee here
    In likeness of a new untrimmed bride.

  BLANCH.
 The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith,
    But from her need.

  CONSTANCE.
 O, if thou grant my need,
    Which only lives but by the death of faith,
    That need must needs infer this principle-
    That faith would live again by death of need.

    O then, tread down my need, and faith mounts up:
    Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down!
  KING JOHN.

  CONSTANCE.
 Do so, King Philip; hang no more in doubt.

  BASTARD.
 I am perplex'd and know not what to say.

  PANDULPH.
 What canst thou say but will perplex thee more,  
    If thou stand excommunicate and curs'd?
  KING PHILIP.
 Good reverend father, make my person yours,
    And tell me how you would bestow yourself.

    This royal hand and mine are newly knit,
    And the conjunction of our inward souls
    Married in league, coupled and link'd together
    With all religious strength of sacred vows;
    The latest breath that gave the sound of words
    Was deep-sworn faith, peace, amity, true love,
    Between our kingdoms and our royal selves;
    And even before this truce, but new before,
    No longer than we well could wash our hands,
    To clap this royal bargain up of peace,
    Heaven knows, they were besmear'd and overstain'd
    With slaughter's pencil, where revenge did paint
    The fearful difference of incensed kings.

  PANDULPH.

    Therefore, to arms! be champion of our church,
    Or let the church, our mother, breathe her curse-
    A mother's curse-on her revolting son.

    France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue,
    A chafed lion by the mortal paw,
    A fasting tiger safer by the tooth,
    Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.
  
  PANDULPH.
 So mak'st thou faith an enemy to faith;
    And like.

    Thy tongue against thy tongue.
 O, let thy vow
    First made to heaven, first be to heaven perform'd,
    That is, to be the champion of our Church.

    It is religion that doth make vows kept;
    But thou hast sworn against religion
    By what thou swear'st against the thing thou swear'st,
    And mak'st an oath the surety for thy truth  
    Against an oath; the truth thou art unsure
    To swear swears only not to be forsworn;
    Else what a mockery should it be to swear!
    But thou dost swear only to be forsworn;
    And most forsworn to keep what thou dost swear.
 But if not, then know
    The peril of our curses fight on thee
    So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off,
    But in despair die under the black weight.
 Rebellion, flat rebellion!
  BASTARD.
 Will't not be?
    Will not a calf's-skin stop that mouth of thine?
  LEWIS.
 Father, to arms!
  BLANCH.
 Upon thy wedding-day?  
    Against the blood that thou hast married?
    What, shall our feast be kept with slaughtered men?
    Shall braying trumpets and loud churlish drums,
    Clamours of hell, be measures to our pomp?
    O husband, hear me! ay, alack, how new
    Is 'husband' in my mouth! even for that name,
    Which till this time my tongue did ne'er pronounce,
    Upon my knee I beg, go not to arms
    Against mine uncle.
 O, upon my knee,
    Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee,
    Thou virtuous Dauphin, alter not the doom
    Forethought by heaven!
  BLANCH.
 Now shall I see thy love.
 That which upholdeth him that thee upholds,
    His honour.
 I muse your Majesty doth seem so cold,
    When such profound respects do pull you on.

  PANDULPH.
 I will denounce a curse upon his head.
  
  KING PHILIP.
 England, I will fall from thee.
 O fair return of banish'd majesty!
  ELINOR.
 Fair day, adieu!
    Which is the side that I must go withal?
    I am with both: each army hath a hand;
    And in their rage, I having hold of both,
    They whirl asunder and dismember me.

    Husband, I cannot pray that thou mayst win;
    Uncle, I needs must pray that thou mayst lose;
    Father, I may not wish the fortune thine;
    Grandam, I will not wish thy wishes thrive.
 Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.

  BLANCH.

  KING JOHN.
  
                                                         Exit BASTARD
    France, I am burn'd up with inflaming wrath,
    A rage whose heat hath this condition
    That nothing can allay, nothing but blood,
    The blood, and dearest-valu'd blood, of France.

  KING PHILIP.
 No more than he that threats.


France.
 Enter the BASTARD with AUSTRIA'S head

  BASTARD.
 Now, by my life, this day grows wondrous hot;
    Some airy devil hovers in the sky
    And pours down mischief.


          Enter KING JOHN, ARTHUR, and HUBERT

  KING JOHN.
 Philip, make up:
    My mother is assailed in our tent,
    And ta'en, I fear.
                    Exeunt




SCENE 3.

  ARTHUR.
 O, this will make my mother die with grief!
  KING JOHN.
  [To the BASTARD]  Cousin, away for England! haste
      before,
    And, ere our coming, see thou shake the bags
    Of hoarding abbots; imprisoned angels
    Set at liberty; the fat ribs of peace
    Must by the hungry now be fed upon.

    Use our commission in his utmost force.
 Bell, book, and candle, shall not drive me back,
    When gold and silver becks me to come on.
  
    I leave your Highness.
 So, I kiss your hand.

  ELINOR.
 Farewell, gentle cousin.

  KING JOHN.
 Coz, farewell.
 Come hither, little kinsman; hark, a word.
 Come hither, Hubert.
 O my gentle Hubert,
    We owe thee much! Within this wall of flesh
    There is a soul counts thee her creditor,
    And with advantage means to pay thy love;
    And, my good friend, thy voluntary oath
    Lives in this bosom, dearly cherished.
 I had a thing to say-
    But I will fit it with some better time.

    By heaven, Hubert, I am almost asham'd
    To say what good respect I have of thee.
 I am much bounden to your Majesty.
 Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet,
    But thou shalt have; and creep time ne'er so slow,  
    Yet it shall come for me to do thee good.

    I had a thing to say-but let it go:
    The sun is in the heaven, and the proud day,
    Attended with the pleasures of the world,
    Is all too wanton and too full of gawds
    To give me audience.

    But, ah, I will not! Yet I love thee well;
    And, by my troth, I think thou lov'st me well.

  HUBERT.
 So well that what you bid me undertake,
    Though that my death were adjunct to my act,
    By heaven, I would do it.
 Do not I know thou wouldst?
    Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert, throw thine eye
    On yon young boy.
 I'll tell thee what, my friend,
    He is a very serpent in my way;
    And wheresoe'er this foot of mine doth tread,
    He lies before me.

  HUBERT.
 Death.
 My lord?
  KING JOHN.
 A grave.

  HUBERT.
 He shall not live.
 Enough!
    I could be merry now.
 Hubert, I love thee.

    Well, I'll not say what I intend for thee.

    Remember.
 My blessing go with thee!
  KING JOHN.
 On toward Calais, ho!                  Exeunt




SCENE 4.


France.
 The FRENCH KING's camp

Enter KING PHILIP, LEWIS, PANDULPH, and attendants

  KING PHILIP.
 Courage and comfort! All shall yet go well.

  KING PHILIP.
 he hath won, that hath he fortified;
    So hot a speed with such advice dispos'd,
    Such temperate order in so fierce a cause,
    Doth want example; who hath read or heard
    Of any kindred action like to this?
  KING PHILIP.
 Well could I bear that England had this praise,
    So we could find some pattern of our shame.
  

                   Enter CONSTANCE

    Look who comes here! a grave unto a soul;
    Holding th' eternal spirit, against her will,
    In the vile prison of afflicted breath.

    I prithee, lady, go away with me.
 Patience, good lady! Comfort, gentle Constance!
  CONSTANCE.
 No, I defy all counsel, all redress,
    But that which ends all counsel, true redress-
    Death, death; O amiable lovely death!
    Thou odoriferous stench! sound rottenness!
    Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,
    Thou hate and terror to prosperity,
    And I will kiss thy detestable bones,
    And put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows,
    And ring these fingers with thy household worms,
    And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust,
    And be a carrion monster like thyself.
  
    Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smil'st,
    And buss thee as thy wife.
 O fair affliction, peace!
  CONSTANCE.

    O that my tongue were in the thunder's mouth!
    Then with a passion would I shake the world,
    And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy
    Which cannot hear a lady's feeble voice,
    Which scorns a modern invocation.
 Lady, you utter madness and not sorrow.

  CONSTANCE.
 Thou art not holy to belie me so.

    I am not mad: this hair I tear is mine;
    My name is Constance; I was Geffrey's wife;
    Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost.

    O, if I could, what grief should I forget!
    Preach some philosophy to make me mad,
    And thou shalt be canoniz'd, Cardinal;  
    For, being not mad, but sensible of grief,
    My reasonable part produces reason
    How I may be deliver'd of these woes,
    And teaches me to kill or hang myself.

    If I were mad I should forget my son,
    Or madly think a babe of clouts were he.

  KING PHILIP.
 Bind up those tresses.

  CONSTANCE.
 Bind up your hairs.

    And, father Cardinal, I have heard you say
    That we shall see and know our friends in heaven;
    If that be true, I shall see my boy again;
    For since the birth of Cain, the first male child,
    To him that did but yesterday suspire,
    There was not such a gracious creature born.

  PANDULPH.

  CONSTANCE.
 Grief fills the room up of my absent child,
    Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
    Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,
    Remembers me of all his gracious parts,
    Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form;
    Then have I reason to be fond of grief.

    I will not keep this form upon my head,
                                                   [Tearing her hair]
    When there is such disorder in my wit.

    O Lord! my boy, my Arthur, my fair son!
    My life, my joy, my food, my ail the world!
    My widow-comfort, and my sorrows' cure!                      Exit
  KING PHILIP.

    Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale
    Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;
    And bitter shame hath spoil'd the sweet world's taste,  
    That it yields nought but shame and bitterness.
 All days of glory, joy, and happiness.

  PANDULPH.
 If you had won it, certainly you had.

    No, no; when Fortune means to men most good,
    She looks upon them with a threat'ning eye.

    'Tis strange to think how much King John hath lost
    In this which he accounts so clearly won.
 As heartily as he is glad he hath him.

  PANDULPH.

    Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit;
    For even the breath of what I mean to speak
    Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub,
    Out of the path which shall directly lead
    Thy foot to England's throne.
 And therefore mark:  
    John hath seiz'd Arthur; and it cannot be
    That, whiles warm life plays in that infant's veins,
    The misplac'd John should entertain an hour,
    One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest.

  LEWIS.
 But what shall I gain by young Arthur's fall?
  PANDULPH.
 You, in the right of Lady Blanch your wife,
    May then make all the claim that Arthur did.

  PANDULPH.
 How green you are and fresh in this old world!
    John lays you plots; the times conspire with you;
    For he that steeps his safety in true blood
    Shall find but bloody safety and untrue.

  LEWIS.
 May be he will not touch young Arthur's life,
    But hold himself safe in his prisonment.
 O, Sir, when he shall hear of your approach,
    If that young Arthur be not gone already,
    Even at that news he dies; and then the hearts
    Of all his people shall revolt from him,
    And kiss the lips of unacquainted change,
    And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath
    Out of the bloody fingers' ends of john.
 O noble Dauphin,
    Go with me to the King.

  LEWIS.
 Let us go;
    If you say ay, the King will not say no.
                   Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE 1.
 Heat me these irons hot; and look thou stand
    Within the arras.
 When I strike my foot
    Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth
    And bind the boy which you shall find with me
    Fast to the chair.
 Be heedful; hence, and watch.
 I hope your warrant will bear out the deed.

  HUBERT.
 Uncleanly scruples! Fear not you.

                                                  Exeunt EXECUTIONERS
    Young lad, come forth; I have to say with you.


                    Enter ARTHUR

  ARTHUR.
 Good morrow, little Prince.
 You are sad.

  ARTHUR.
 Mercy on me!
    Methinks no body should be sad but I;
    Yet, I remember, when I was in France,
    Young gentlemen would be as sad as night,
    Only for wantonness.
 By my christendom,
    So I were out of prison and kept sheep,
    I should be as merry as the day is long;
    And so I would be here but that I doubt
    My uncle practises more harm to me;
    He is afraid of me, and I of him.

    Is it my fault that I was Geffrey's son?
    No, indeed, ist not; and I would to heaven
    I were your son, so you would love me, Hubert.

  HUBERT.
  [Aside]  If I talk to him, with his innocent prate
    He will awake my mercy, which lies dead;
    Therefore I will be sudden and dispatch.

  ARTHUR.
 Are you sick, Hubert? You look pale to-day;
    In sooth, I would you were a little sick,
    That I might sit all night and watch with you.
  [Aside]  His words do take possession of my bosom.
-
    Read here, young Arthur.
                        [Showing a paper]
      [Aside]  How now, foolish rheum!
    Turning dispiteous torture out of door!
    I must be brief, lest resolution drop
    Out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears.
-
    Can you not read it? Is it not fair writ?
  ARTHUR.
 Too fairly, Hubert, for so foul effect.

    Must you with hot irons burn out both mine eyes?
  HUBERT.
 Young boy, I must.
 And will you?
  HUBERT.
 Do, an if you will.

    If heaven be pleas'd that you must use me ill,
    Why, then you must.
 I have sworn to do it;
    And with hot irons must I burn them out.
 Ah, none but in this iron age would do it!
    The iron of itself, though heat red-hot,
    Approaching near these eyes would drink my tears,
    And quench his fiery indignation
    Even in the matter of mine innocence;
    Nay, after that, consume away in rust
    But for containing fire to harm mine eye.
  
    Are you more stubborn-hard than hammer'd iron?
    An if an angel should have come to me
    And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes,
    I would not have believ'd him-no tongue but Hubert's.

  HUBERT.
  [Stamps]  Come forth.


    Do as I bid you do.

  ARTHUR.
 Give me the iron, I say, and bind him here.

  ARTHUR.

  HUBERT.
 Go, stand within; let me alone with him.

  EXECUTIONER.

                                                  Exeunt EXECUTIONERS
  ARTHUR.
 Alas, I then have chid away my friend!
    He hath a stern look but a gentle heart.

    Let him come back, that his compassion may
    Give life to yours.

  HUBERT.
 Come, boy, prepare yourself.

  ARTHUR.
 None, but to lose your eyes.

  HUBERT.
 Is this your promise? Go to, hold your tongue.
 Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues
    Must needs want pleading for a pair of eyes.
 I can heat it, boy.
 No, in good sooth; the fire is dead with grief,
    Being create for comfort, to be us'd
    In undeserved extremes.
 But with my breath I can revive it, boy.

  ARTHUR.

    All things that you should use to do me wrong
    Deny their office; only you do lack  
    That mercy which fierce fire and iron extends,
    Creatures of note for mercy-lacking uses.

    Yet I am sworn, and I did purpose, boy,
    With this same very iron to burn them out.

  ARTHUR.

  HUBERT.
 Peace; no more.

  ARTHUR.

  HUBERT.
 Silence; no more.
 Go closely in with me.
 KING JOHN'S palace

Enter KING JOHN, PEMBROKE, SALISBURY, and other LORDS

  KING JOHN.
 Here once again we sit, once again crown'd,
    And look'd upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes.
 Therefore, to be possess'd with double pomp,
    To guard a title that was rich before,
    To gild refined gold, to paint the lily,
    To throw a perfume on the violet,
    To smooth the ice, or add another hue
    Unto the rainbow, or with taper-light
    To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish,
    Is wasteful and ridiculous excess.

  PEMBROKE.
 But that your royal pleasure must be done,
    This act is as an ancient tale new told  
    And, in the last repeating, troublesome,
    Being urged at a time unseasonable.

  SALISBURY.

  SALISBURY.
 Some reasons of this double coronation
    I have possess'd you with, and think them strong;
    And more, more strong, when lesser is my fear,
    I shall indue you with.
 Meantime but ask
    What you would have reform'd that is not well,
    And well shall you perceive how willingly
    I will both hear and grant you your requests.
 Let it be so.
 I do commit his youth
    To your direction.


                     Enter HUBERT

    [Aside]  Hubert, what news with you?
  PEMBROKE.
 This is the man should do the bloody deed:
    He show'd his warrant to a friend of mine;
    The image of a wicked heinous fault
    Lives in his eye; that close aspect of his
    Doth show the mood of a much troubled breast,
    And I do fearfully believe 'tis done  
    What we so fear'd he had a charge to do.

  SALISBURY.

  PEMBROKE.
 We cannot hold mortality's strong hand.

  SALISBURY.
 Indeed, we fear'd his sickness was past cure.

  PEMBROKE.

  KING JOHN.
 Why do you bend such solemn brows on me?
    Think you I bear the shears of destiny?
    Have I commandment on the pulse of life?
  SALISBURY.
 It is apparent foul-play; and 'tis shame
    That greatness should so grossly offer it.

  PEMBROKE.
 Stay yet, Lord Salisbury, I'll go with thee
    And find th' inheritance of this poor child,
    His little kingdom of a forced grave.

    That blood which ow'd the breadth of all this isle
    Three foot of it doth hold-bad world the while!
    This must not be thus borne: this will break out
    To all our sorrows, and ere long I doubt.
 I repent.

    The copy of your speed is learn'd by them,
    For when you should be told they do prepare,
    The tidings comes that they are all arriv'd.

  KING JOHN.
 O, where hath our intelligence been drunk?
    Where hath it slept? Where is my mother's care,
    That such an army could be drawn in France,
    And she not hear of it?
  MESSENGER.
 My liege, her ear
    Is stopp'd with dust: the first of April died
    Your noble mother; and as I hear, my lord,
    The Lady Constance in a frenzy died
    Three days before; but this from rumour's tongue
    I idly heard-if true or false I know not.

  KING JOHN.
 Under the Dauphin.
 Thou hast made me giddy
    With these in tidings.


         Enter the BASTARD and PETER OF POMFRET

    Now! What says the world
    To your proceedings? Do not seek to stuff
    My head with more ill news, for it is fun.
 But if you be afear'd to hear the worst,
    Then let the worst, unheard, fall on your head.

  KING JOHN.
 How I have sped among the clergymen
    The sums I have collected shall express.
  
    Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear;
    And here's a prophet that I brought with me
    From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found
    With many hundreds treading on his heels;
    To whom he sung, in rude harsh-sounding rhymes,
    That, ere the next Ascension-day at noon,
    Your Highness should deliver up your crown.

  KING JOHN.
 Thou idle dreamer, wherefore didst thou so?
  PETER.
 Foreknowing that the truth will fall out so.

                                               Exit HUBERT with PETER
    O my gentle cousin,
    Hear'st thou the news abroad, who are arriv'd?
  BASTARD.
 Gentle kinsman, go
    And thrust thyself into their companies.

    I have a way to will their loves again;
    Bring them before me.
 I Will seek them out.

  KING JOHN.
 Nay, but make haste; the better foot before.

    O, let me have no subject enemies
    When adverse foreigners affright my towns
    With dreadful pomp of stout invasion!
    Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels,
    And fly like thought from them to me again.

  BASTARD.
 The spirit of the time shall teach me speed.
  
  MESSENGER.
 With all my heart, my liege.
                        Exit
  KING JOHN.
 My lord, they say five moons were seen to-night;
    Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about
    The other four in wondrous motion.
 Five moons!
  HUBERT.

    Another lean unwash'd artificer
    Cuts off his tale, and talks of Arthur's death.
 Why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears?
    Why urgest thou so oft young Arthur's death?
    Thy hand hath murd'red him.

  HUBERT.
 No had, my lord! Why, did you not provoke me?
  KING JOHN.
 It is the curse of kings to be attended
    By slaves that take their humours for a warrant
    To break within the bloody house of life,
    And on the winking of authority
    To understand a law; to know the meaning
    Of dangerous majesty, when perchance it frowns
    More upon humour than advis'd respect.

  HUBERT.
 Here is your hand and seal for what I did.
 Hadst thou but shook thy head or made pause,
    When I spake darkly what I purposed,
    Or turn'd an eye of doubt upon my face,
    As bid me tell my tale in express words,
    Deep shame had struck me dumb, made me break off,  
    And those thy fears might have wrought fears in me.

    Out of my sight, and never see me more!
    My nobles leave me; and my state is braved,
    Even at my gates, with ranks of foreign pow'rs;
    Nay, in the body of the fleshly land,
    This kingdom, this confine of blood and breath,
    Hostility and civil tumult reigns
    Between my conscience and my cousin's death.

  HUBERT.
 Arm you against your other enemies,
    I'll make a peace between your soul and you.

    Young Arthur is alive.

  KING JOHN.
 Doth Arthur live? O, haste thee to the peers,
    Throw this report on their incensed rage
    And make them tame to their obedience!
    Forgive the comment that my passion made
    Upon thy feature; for my rage was blind,
    And foul imaginary eyes of blood
    Presented thee more hideous than thou art.
                  Exeunt




SCENE 3.
 The wall is high, and yet will I leap down.

    Good ground, be pitiful and hurt me not!
    There's few or none do know me; if they did,
    This ship-boy's semblance hath disguis'd me quite.

    Heaven take my soul, and England keep my bones!
    [Dies]

          Enter PEMBROKE, SALISBURY, and BIGOT

  SALISBURY.
 Lords, I will meet him at Saint Edmundsbury;
    It is our safety, and we must embrace  
    This gentle offer of the perilous time.
 The Count Melun, a noble lord of France,
    Whose private with me of the Dauphin's love
    Is much more general than these lines import.

  BIGOT.
 To-morrow morning let us meet him then.

  SALISBURY.
 Or rather then set forward; for 'twill be
    Two long days' journey, lords, or ere we meet.

  SALISBURY.
 The King hath dispossess'd himself of us.
 We know the worst.

  SALISBURY.
 Our griefs, and not our manners, reason now.
 But there is little reason in your grief;
    Therefore 'twere reason you had manners now.

  PEMBROKE.
 Sir, sir, impatience hath his privilege.

  BASTARD.
 'Tis true-to hurt his master, no man else.
 This is the prison.
 O death, made proud with pure and princely beauty!
    The earth had not a hole to hide this deed.

  SALISBURY.

  BIGOT.
 Or, when he doom'd this beauty to a grave,
    Found it too precious-princely for a grave.

  SALISBURY.
 Sir Richard, what think you? Have you beheld,
    Or have you read or heard, or could you think?
    Or do you almost think, although you see,
    That you do see? Could thought, without this object,
    Form such another? This is the very top,
    The height, the crest, or crest unto the crest,
    Of murder's arms; this is the bloodiest shame,
    The wildest savagery, the vilest stroke,
    That ever wall-ey'd wrath or staring rage  
    Presented to the tears of soft remorse.

  PEMBROKE.
 All murders past do stand excus'd in this;
    And this, so sole and so unmatchable,
    Shall give a holiness, a purity,
    To the yet unbegotten sin of times,
    And prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest,
    Exampled by this heinous spectacle.
 It is a damned and a bloody work;
    The graceless action of a heavy hand,
    If that it be the work of any hand.

    It is the shameful work of Hubert's hand;
    The practice and the purpose of the King;
    From whose obedience I forbid my soul
    Kneeling before this ruin of sweet life,
    And breathing to his breathless excellence
    The incense of a vow, a holy vow,
    Never to taste the pleasures of the world,
    Never to be infected with delight,  
    Nor conversant with ease and idleness,
    Till I have set a glory to this hand
    By giving it the worship of revenge.
 and BIGOT.
 Lords, I am hot with haste in seeking you.

    Arthur doth live; the King hath sent for you.
 I am no villain.

  SALISBURY.
 Must I rob the law?                  [Drawing his sword]
  BASTARD.
 Your sword is bright, sir; put it up again.

  SALISBURY.
 Not till I sheathe it in a murderer's skin.

  HUBERT.
 Stand back, Lord Salisbury, stand back, I say;
    By heaven, I think my sword's as sharp as yours.

    I would not have you, lord, forget yourself,
    Nor tempt the danger of my true defence;
    Lest I, by marking of your rage, forget  
    Your worth, your greatness and nobility.
 Out, dunghill! Dar'st thou brave a nobleman?
  HUBERT.
 Not for my life; but yet I dare defend
    My innocent life against an emperor.
 Thou art a murderer.

  HUBERT.
 Do not prove me so.

  PEMBROKE.

  SALISBURY.
 Thou wert better gall the devil, Salisbury.

    If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot,
    Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame,
    I'll strike thee dead.
 Put up thy sword betime;
    Or I'll so maul you and your toasting-iron
    That you shall think the devil is come from hell.
 Lord Bigot, I am none.

    I honour'd him, I lov'd him, and will weep
    My date of life out for his sweet life's loss.

  SALISBURY.
 Trust not those cunning waters of his eyes,
    For villainy is not without such rheum;
    And he, long traded in it, makes it seem
    Like rivers of remorse and innocency.

    Away with me, all you whose souls abhor
    Th' uncleanly savours of a slaughter-house;
    For I am stifled with this smell of sin.

  BIGOT.
 Away toward Bury, to the Dauphin there!
  PEMBROKE.
 There tell the King he may inquire us out.

                                                         Exeunt LORDS
  BASTARD.

  HUBERT.
 Do but hear me, sir.

  BASTARD.
 If thou didst but consent
    To this most cruel act, do but despair;
    And if thou want'st a cord, the smallest thread
    That ever spider twisted from her womb
    Will serve to strangle thee; a rush will be a beam
    To hang thee on; or wouldst thou drown thyself,
    Put but a little water in a spoon
    And it shall be as all the ocean,
    Enough to stifle such a villain up
    I do suspect thee very grievously.

  HUBERT.
 If I in act, consent, or sin of thought,
    Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath
    Which was embounded in this beauteous clay,
    Let hell want pains enough to torture me!
    I left him well.
  
  BASTARD.
 Go, bear him in thine arms.

    Now for the bare-pick'd bone of majesty
    Doth dogged war bristle his angry crest
    And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace;
    Now powers from home and discontents at home
    Meet in one line; and vast confusion waits,
    As doth a raven on a sick-fall'n beast,
    The imminent decay of wrested pomp.
 I'll to the King;
    A thousand businesses are brief in hand,  
    And heaven itself doth frown upon the land.
                Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT V.

England.
 KING JOHN'S palace

Enter KING JOHN, PANDULPH, and attendants

  KING JOHN.
 Thus have I yielded up into your hand
    The circle of my glory.

  PANDULPH.
  [Gives back the crown]  Take again
    From this my hand, as holding of the Pope,
    Your sovereign greatness and authority.

  KING JOHN.

    Our discontented counties do revolt;
    Our people quarrel with obedience,
    Swearing allegiance and the love of soul
    To stranger blood, to foreign royalty.

    This inundation of mistemp'red humour
    Rests by you only to be qualified.

    On this Ascension-day, remember well,
    Upon your oath of service to the Pope,
    Go I to make the French lay down their arms.

    I did suppose it should be on constraint;
    But, heaven be thank'd, it is but voluntary.


                 Enter the BASTARD

  BASTARD.
 London hath receiv'd,
    Like a kind host, the Dauphin and his powers.
 Would not my lords return to me again
    After they heard young Arthur was alive?
    BASTARD.
 That villain Hubert told me he did live.

  BASTARD.
 So, on my soul, he did, for aught he knew.

    Be stirring as the time; be fire with fire;
    Threaten the threat'ner, and outface the brow
    Of bragging horror; so shall inferior eyes,
    That borrow their behaviours from the great,
    Grow great by your example and put on  
    The dauntless spirit of resolution.

    Away, and glister like the god of war
    When he intendeth to become the field;
    Show boldness and aspiring confidence.

  KING JOHN.

  BASTARD.
 O inglorious league!
    Shall we, upon the footing of our land,
    Send fair-play orders, and make compromise,
    Insinuation, parley, and base truce,
    To arms invasive? Shall a beardless boy,
    A cock'red silken wanton, brave our fields
    And flesh his spirit in a warlike soil,  
    Mocking the air with colours idly spread,
    And find no check? Let us, my liege, to arms.

    Perchance the Cardinal cannot make your peace;
    Or, if he do, let it at least be said
    They saw we had a purpose of defence.

  KING JOHN.

  BASTARD.
 Away, then, with good courage!
    Yet, I know
    Our party may well meet a prouder foe.
                     Exeunt




SCENE 2.

England.
 The DAUPHIN'S camp at Saint Edmundsbury

Enter, in arms, LEWIS, SALISBURY, MELUN, PEMBROKE, BIGOT, and soldiers

  LEWIS.

  SALISBURY.

    And, noble Dauphin, albeit we swear
    A voluntary zeal and an unurg'd faith
    To your proceedings; yet, believe me, Prince,
    I am not glad that such a sore of time
    Should seek a plaster by contemn'd revolt,
    And heal the inveterate canker of one wound
    By making many.
 O, it grieves my soul  
    That I must draw this metal from my side
    To be a widow-maker! O, and there
    Where honourable rescue and defence
    Cries out upon the name of Salisbury!
    But such is the infection of the time
    That, for the health and physic of our right,
    We cannot deal but with the very hand
    Of stern injustice and confused wrong.

    And is't not pity, O my grieved friends!
    That we, the sons and children of this isle,
    Were born to see so sad an hour as this;
    Wherein we step after a stranger-march
    Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up
    Her enemies' ranks-I must withdraw and weep
    Upon the spot of this enforced cause-
    To grace the gentry of a land remote
    And follow unacquainted colours here?
    What, here? O nation, that thou couldst remove!
    That Neptune's arms, who clippeth thee about,
    Would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself  
    And grapple thee unto a pagan shore,
    Where these two Christian armies might combine
    The blood of malice in a vein of league,
    And not to spend it so unneighbourly!
  LEWIS.
 A noble temper dost thou show in this;
    And great affections wrestling in thy bosom
    Doth make an earthquake of nobility.

    O, what a noble combat hast thou fought
    Between compulsion and a brave respect!
    Let me wipe off this honourable dew
    That silverly doth progress on thy cheeks.
 So, nobles, shall you all,
    That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.


                Enter PANDULPH

    And even there, methinks, an angel spake:
    Look where the holy legate comes apace,
    To give us warrant from the hand of heaven
    And on our actions set the name of right
    With holy breath.

    Therefore thy threat'ning colours now wind up
    And tame the savage spirit of wild war,
    That, like a lion fostered up at hand,
    It may lie gently at the foot of peace
    And be no further harmful than in show.

    Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars
    Between this chastis'd kingdom and myself
    And brought in matter that should feed this fire;
    And now 'tis far too huge to be blown out
    With that same weak wind which enkindled it.

    You taught me how to know the face of right,
    Acquainted me with interest to this land,
    Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart;
    And come ye now to tell me John hath made  
    His peace with Rome? What is that peace to me?
    I, by the honour of my marriage-bed,
    After young Arthur, claim this land for mine;
    And, now it is half-conquer'd, must I back
    Because that John hath made his peace with Rome?
    Am I Rome's slave? What penny hath Rome borne,
    What men provided, what munition sent,
    To underprop this action? Is 't not I
    That undergo this charge? Who else but I,
    And such as to my claim are liable,
    Sweat in this business and maintain this war?
    Have I not heard these islanders shout out
    'Vive le roi!' as I have bank'd their towns?
    Have I not here the best cards for the game
    To will this easy match, play'd for a crown?
    And shall I now give o'er the yielded set?
    No, no, on my soul, it never shall be said.

  PANDULPH.
 You look but on the outside of this work.
 Outside or inside, I will not return
    Till my attempt so much be glorified  
    As to my ample hope was promised
    Before I drew this gallant head of war,
    And cull'd these fiery spirits from the world
    To outlook conquest, and to will renown
    Even in the jaws of danger and of death.
 According to the fair play of the world,
    Let me have audience: I am sent to speak.

    My holy lord of Milan, from the King
    I come, to learn how you have dealt for him;
    And, as you answer, I do know the scope
    And warrant limited unto my tongue.

  PANDULPH.

  BASTARD.
 By all the blood that ever fury breath'd,  
    The youth says well.
 Now hear our English King;
    For thus his royalty doth speak in me.

    He is prepar'd, and reason too he should.

    That hand which had the strength, even at your door.
 Know the gallant monarch is in arms
    And like an eagle o'er his aery tow'rs
    To souse annoyance that comes near his nest.

    And you degenerate, you ingrate revolts,
    You bloody Neroes, ripping up the womb
    Of your dear mother England, blush for shame;
    For your own ladies and pale-visag'd maids,
    Like Amazons, come tripping after drums,
    Their thimbles into armed gauntlets change,
    Their needles to lances, and their gentle hearts
    To fierce and bloody inclination.
 There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace;
    We grant thou canst outscold us.

  PANDULPH.
 Give me leave to speak.
 No, I will speak.

  LEWIS.
 We will attend to neither.

    Strike up the drums; and let the tongue of war,
    Plead for our interest and our being here.

  LEWIS.
 Strike up our drums to find this danger out.


England.
 Enter KING JOHN and HUBERT

  KING JOHN.
 How goes the day with us? O, tell me, Hubert.
 This fever that hath troubled me so long
    Lies heavy on me.
 O, my heart is sick!

                  Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER.
 Tell him, toward Swinstead, to the abbey there.

    The French fight coldly, and retire themselves.
  
  KING JOHN.
 Ay me, this tyrant fever burns me up
    And will not let me welcome this good news.

    Set on toward Swinstead; to my litter straight;
    Weakness possesseth me, and I am faint.
                    Exeunt




SCENE 4.
 Another part of the battlefield

Enter SALISBURY, PEMBROKE, and BIGOT

  SALISBURY.
 I did not think the King so stor'd with friends.
 Up once again; put spirit in the French;
    If they miscarry, we miscarry too.

  SALISBURY.

  PEMBROKE.


                 Enter MELUN, wounded

  MELUN.

  SALISBURY.
 When we were happy we had other names.
 It is the Count Melun.

  SALISBURY.
 Wounded to death.

  MELUN.
 Fly, noble English, you are bought and sold;
    Unthread the rude eye of rebellion,
    And welcome home again discarded faith.
  
    Seek out King John, and fall before his feet;
    For if the French be lords of this loud day,
    He means to recompense the pains you take
    By cutting off your heads.
 Thus hath he sworn,
    And I with him, and many moe with me,
    Upon the altar at Saint Edmundsbury;
    Even on that altar where we swore to you
    Dear amity and everlasting love.
 May this be possible? May this be true?
  MELUN.

    If Lewis by your assistance win the day.

    In lieu whereof, I pray you, bear me hence
    From forth the noise and rumour of the field,
    Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts
    In peace, and part this body and my soul
    With contemplation and devout desires.
 We do believe thee; and beshrew my soul
    But I do love the favour and the form
    Of this most fair occasion, by the which
    We will untread the steps of damned flight,  
    And like a bated and retired flood,
    Leaving our rankness and irregular course,
    Stoop low within those bounds we have o'erlook'd,
    And calmly run on in obedience
    Even to our ocean, to great King John.
 Away, my friends! New flight,
    And happy newness, that intends old right.

                                            Exeunt, leading off MELUN




SCENE 5.


England.
 The French camp

Enter LEWIS and his train

  LEWIS.
 Where is my prince, the Dauphin?
  LEWIS.
 The Count Melun is slain; the English lords
    By his persuasion are again fall'n off,
    And your supply, which you have wish'd so long,  
    Are cast away and sunk on Goodwin Sands.

  LEWIS.
 Ah, foul shrewd news! Beshrew thy very heart!
    I did not think to be so sad to-night
    As this hath made me.
 Whoever spoke it, it is true, my lord.

  LEWIS.
                    Exeunt




SCENE 6.


An open place wear Swinstead Abbey

Enter the BASTARD and HUBERT, severally

  HUBERT.

  BASTARD.
 What art thou?
  HUBERT.
 What's that to thee? Why may I not demand
    Of thine affairs as well as thou of mine?
  BASTARD.
 Hubert, I think.

    I will upon all hazards well believe
    Thou art my friend that know'st my tongue so well.

    Who art thou?
  BASTARD.
 Unkind remembrance! thou and eyeless night
    Have done me shame.
 Brave soldier, pardon me  
    That any accent breaking from thy tongue
    Should scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.

  BASTARD.
 Come, come; sans compliment, what news abroad?
  HUBERT.
 Why, here walk I in the black brow of night
    To find you out.

  BASTARD.

  HUBERT.
 A monk, I tell you; a resolved villain,
    Whose bowels suddenly burst out.
 The King
    Yet speaks, and peradventure may recover.

  BASTARD.
 Who didst thou leave to tend his Majesty?  
  HUBERT.

  BASTARD.

    Away, before! conduct me to the King;
    I doubt he will be dead or ere I come.
                     Exeunt




SCENE 7.
 It is too late; the life of all his blood
    Is touch'd corruptibly, and his pure brain.


                   Enter PEMBROKE

  PEMBROKE.
 His Highness yet doth speak, and holds belief
    That, being brought into the open air,
    It would allay the burning quality
    Of that fell poison which assaileth him.

  PRINCE HENRY.
 Let him be brought into the orchard here.

    Doth he still rage?                                    Exit BIGOT
  PEMBROKE.
 He is more patient
    Than when you left him; even now he sung.
 O vanity of sickness! Fierce extremes
    In their continuance will not feel themselves.
 'Tis strange that death should sing.

    I am the cygnet to this pale faint swan
    Who chants a doleful hymn to his own death,
    And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings
    His soul and body to their lasting rest.

  SALISBURY.


       Re-enter BIGOT and attendants, who bring in
                KING JOHN in a chair

  KING JOHN.
 Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room;  
    It would not out at windows nor at doors.

    There is so hot a summer in my bosom
    That all my bowels crumble up to dust.
 How fares your Majesty?
  KING JOHN.
 Poison'd-ill-fare! Dead, forsook, cast off;
    And none of you will bid the winter come
    To thrust his icy fingers in my maw,
    Nor let my kingdom's rivers take their course
    Through my burn'd bosom, nor entreat the north
    To make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips
    And comfort me with cold.
 I do not ask you much;
    I beg cold comfort; and you are so strait
    And so ingrateful you deny me that.

  PRINCE HENRY.
 O that there were some virtue in my tears,
    That might relieve you!
  KING JOHN.
 The salt in them is hot.
 O cousin, thou art come to set mine eye!
    The tackle of my heart is crack'd and burnt,
    And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail
    Are turned to one thread, one little hair;
    My heart hath one poor string to stay it by,
    Which holds but till thy news be uttered;
    And then all this thou seest is but a clod
    And module of confounded royalty.
 The Dauphin is preparing hitherward,
    Where God He knows how we shall answer him;
    For in a night the best part of my pow'r,
    As I upon advantage did remove,
    Were in the Washes all unwarily  
    Devoured by the unexpected flood.
                 [The KING dies]
  SALISBURY.
 You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear.

    My liege! my lord! But now a king-now thus.

  PRINCE HENRY.
 Even so must I run on, and even so stop.
 Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind
    To do the office for thee of revenge,
    And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven,
    As it on earth hath been thy servant still.

    Now, now, you stars that move in your right spheres,
    Where be your pow'rs? Show now your mended faiths,
    And instantly return with me again
    To push destruction and perpetual shame
    Out of the weak door of our fainting land.

    Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought;
    The Dauphin rages at our very heels.

  SALISBURY.

  BASTARD.
 He will the rather do it when he sees
    Ourselves well sinewed to our defence.

  SALISBURY.

  BASTARD.
 Let it be so.
 At Worcester must his body be interr'd;
    For so he will'd it.

  BASTARD.
 And the like tender of our love we make,
    To rest without a spot for evermore.

  BASTARD.

    Now these her princes are come home again,
    Come the three corners of the world in arms,
    And we shall shock them.
 Nought shall make us rue,
    If England to itself do rest but true.
                     Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

Rome.
 A street.

    Is this a holiday? What, know you not,
    Being mechanical, you ought not walk
    Upon a laboring day without the sign
    Of your profession? Speak, what trade art thou?
  FIRST COMMONER.
 Why, sir, a carpenter.
 Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am
    but, as you would say, a cobbler.

  MARULLUS.

  SECOND COMMONER.

  MARULLUS.
 What trade, thou knave? Thou naughty knave, what trade?
  SECOND COMMONER.
 Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me; yet,
    if you be out, sir, I can mend you.
  
  MARULLUS.
 Why, sir, cobble you.
 I am indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes; when they are in
    great danger, I recover them.
 As proper men as ever trod upon
    neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork.
 But indeed, sir, we make holiday to see Caesar
    and to rejoice in his triumph.

  MARULLUS.

    And when you saw his chariot but appear,
    Have you not made an universal shout
    That Tiber trembled underneath her banks
    To hear the replication of your sounds
    Made in her concave shores?
    And do you now put on your best attire?
    And do you now cull out a holiday?
    And do you now strew flowers in his way
    That comes in triumph over Pompey's blood?
    Be gone!
    Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
    Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
    That needs must light on this ingratitude.

  FLAVIUS.
 Go, go, good countrymen, and, for this fault,
    Assemble all the poor men of your sort,
    Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears  
    Into the channel, till the lowest stream
    Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.

                                           Exeunt all Commoners.
 Disrobe the images
    If you do find them deck'd with ceremonies.

  MARULLUS.
 May we do so?
    You know it is the feast of Lupercal.
 It is no matter; let no images
    Be hung with Caesar's trophies.
 I'll about
    And drive away the vulgar from the streets;
    So do you too, where you perceive them thick.

    These growing feathers pluck'd from Caesar's wing
    Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
    Who else would soar above the view of men
    And keep us all in servile fearfulness.





SCENE II.

A public place.


Flourish.
 Enter Caesar; Antony, for the course; Calpurnia, Portia,
Decius, Cicero, Brutus, Cassius, and Casca; a great crowd follows,
among them a Soothsayer.
 Calpurnia!
  CASCA.

                                                   Music ceases.
 Here, my lord.
 Antonio!
  ANTONY.
 Caesar, my lord?
  CAESAR.

  ANTONY.
 I shall remember.

    When Caesar says "Do this," it is perform'd.

  CAESAR.
 Set on, and leave no ceremony out.
           Flourish.
 Caesar!
  CAESAR.
 Ha! Who calls?
  CASCA.
 Bid every noise be still.

  SOOTHSAYER.

  CAESAR.
 What man is that?
  BRUTUS.
 A soothsayer you beware the ides of March.
 Set him before me let me see his face.
 Fellow, come from the throng; look upon Caesar.
 Beware the ides of March.

  CAESAR.
 He is a dreamer; let us leave him.
 Pass.

                      Sennet.
 Exeunt all but Brutus and Cassius.

  CASSIUS.
 Will you go see the order of the course?
  BRUTUS.
 Not I.

  CASSIUS.
 I pray you, do.
  
    Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires;
    I'll leave you.
 Brutus, I do observe you now of late;
    I have not from your eyes that gentleness
    And show of love as I was wont to have;
    You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
    Over your friend that loves you.
 Cassius,
    Be not deceived; if I have veil'd my look,
    I turn the trouble of my countenance
    Merely upon myself.
 Vexed I am
    Of late with passions of some difference,
    Conceptions only proper to myself,
    Which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors;
    But let not therefore my good friends be grieved-
    Among which number, Cassius, be you one-
    Nor construe any further my neglect
    Than that poor Brutus with himself at war
    Forgets the shows of love to other men.

  CASSIUS.
 Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion,  
    By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried
    Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
 'Tis just,
    And it is very much lamented, Brutus,
    That you have no such mirrors as will turn
    Your hidden worthiness into your eye
    That you might see your shadow.
 I have heard
    Where many of the best respect in Rome,
    Except immortal Caesar, speaking of Brutus
    And groaning underneath this age's yoke,
    Have wish'd that noble Brutus had his eyes.

  BRUTUS.
 Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,
    That you would have me seek into myself
    For that which is not in me?
  CASSIUS.
 Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear,
    And since you know you cannot see yourself
    So well as by reflection, I your glass  
    Will modestly discover to yourself
    That of yourself which you yet know not of.

    And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus;
    Were I a common laugher, or did use
    To stale with ordinary oaths my love
    To every new protester, if you know
    That I do fawn on men and hug them hard
    And after scandal them, or if you know
    That I profess myself in banqueting
    To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.

                                             Flourish and shout.
 Ay, do you fear it?
    Then must I think you would not have it so.

  CASSIUS.
 I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,
    As well as I do know your outward favor.

    Well, honor is the subject of my story.

    I cannot tell what you and other men
    Think of this life, but, for my single self,
    I had as lief not be as live to be
    In awe of such a thing as I myself.

    I was born free as Caesar, so were you;
    We both have fed as well, and we can both
    Endure the winter's cold as well as he.

    For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
    The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,
    Caesar said to me, "Darest thou, Cassius, now
    Leap in with me into this angry flood
    And swim to yonder point?" Upon the word,
    Accoutred as I was, I plunged in
    And bade him follow.
 So indeed he did.

    But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
    Caesar cried, "Help me, Cassius, or I sink!
    I, as Aeneas our great ancestor
    Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
    The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber
    Did I the tired Caesar.
 And this man
    Is now become a god, and Cassius is
    A wretched creature and must bend his body
    If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.

    He had a fever when he was in Spain,
    And when the fit was on him I did mark
    How he did shake.
 I did hear him groan.

    Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans
    Mark him and write his speeches in their books,  
    Alas, it cried, "Give me some drink, Titinius,"
    As a sick girl.
                    Flourish.

  CASSIUS.
 Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world
    Like a Colossus, and we petty men
    Walk under his huge legs and peep about
    To find ourselves dishonorable graves.

    Men at some time are masters of their fates:
    The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
    But in ourselves that we are underlings.

    Brutus and Caesar: what should be in that "Caesar"?
    Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
    Write them together, yours is as fair a name;
    Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;
    Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with 'em,  
    "Brutus" will start a spirit as soon as "Caesar.

    O, you and I have heard our fathers say
    There was a Brutus once that would have brook'd
    The eternal devil to keep his state in Rome
    As easily as a king.

  BRUTUS.

    How I have thought of this and of these times,
    I shall recount hereafter; for this present,
    I would not, so with love I might entreat you,  
    Be any further moved.
 What you have said
    I will consider; what you have to say
    I will with patience hear, and find a time
    Both meet to hear and answer such high things.

    Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
    Brutus had rather be a villager
    Than to repute himself a son of Rome
    Under these hard conditions as this time
    Is like to lay upon us.

  CASSIUS.

  CASSIUS.
 As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
    And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
    What hath proceeded worthy note today.
 But, look you, Cassius,
    The angry spot doth glow on Caesar's brow,  
    And all the rest look like a chidden train:
    Calpurnia's cheek is pale, and Cicero
    Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
    As we have seen him in the Capitol,
    Being cross'd in conference by some senators.

  CAESAR.
 Caesar?
  CAESAR.
 Would he were fatter! But I fear him not,
    Yet if my name were liable to fear,
    I do not know the man I should avoid
    So soon as that spare Cassius.
 He loves no plays,  
    As thou dost, Antony; he hears no music;
    Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort
    As if he mock'd himself and scorn'd his spirit
    That could be moved to smile at anything.

    Such men as he be never at heart's ease
    Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
    And therefore are they very dangerous.

    I rather tell thee what is to be fear'd
    Than what I fear, for always I am Caesar.

    Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
    And tell me truly what thou think'st of him.

              Sennet.

  CASCA.
 You pull'd me by the cloak; would you speak with me?
  BRUTUS.

  CASCA.
 Why, you were with him, were you not?
  BRUTUS.
 I should not then ask Casca what had chanced.
 Why, for that too.
 They shouted thrice.
 What was the last cry for?
  CASCA.

  BRUTUS.
 Was the crown offered him thrice?
  CASCA.
 Ay, marry, wast, and he put it by thrice, every time gentler
    than other, and at every putting by mine honest neighbors
    shouted.

  CASSIUS.
 Who offered him the crown?
  CASCA.

  BRUTUS.

  CASCA.
 I saw Mark Antony offer him a
    crown (yet 'twas not a crown neither, 'twas one of these
    coronets) and, as I told you, he put it by once.
 But for all
    that, to my thinking, he would fain have had it.
 Then he offered
    it to him again; then he put it by again.
 But, to my thinking, he
    was very loath to lay his fingers off it.
 And
    for mine own part, I durst not laugh for fear of opening my lips
    and receiving the bad air.

  CASSIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 'Tis very like.
 He hath the falling sickness.

  CASSIUS.

  CASCA.
 I know not what you mean by that, but I am sure Caesar fell
    down.
 If the tagrag people did not clap him and hiss him
    according as he pleased and displeased them, as they use to do
    the players in the theatre, I am no true man.
 Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common
    herd was glad he refused the crown, he plucked me ope his doublet
    and offered them his throat to cut.
 And so he fell.
 When he came
    to himself again, he said, if he had done or said anything amiss,
    he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity.

  BRUTUS.
 And after that he came, thus sad, away?
  CASCA.

  CASSIUS.
 Did Cicero say anything?
  CASCA.
 Ay, he spoke Greek.

  CASSIUS.
 Nay, an I tell you that, I'll ne'er look you i' the face
    again; but those that understood him smiled at one another and
    shook their heads; but for mine own part, it was Greek to me.
 I
    could tell you more news too: Marullus and Flavius, for pulling
    scarfs off Caesar's images, are put to silence.
 Fare you well.

    There was more foolery yet, if could remember it.
 Will you sup with me tonight, Casca?
  CASCA.
 No, I am promised forth.
  
  CASSIUS.
 Ay, if I be alive, and your mind hold, and your dinner worth
    the eating.

  CASSIUS.

  CASCA.

  BRUTUS.

  CASSIUS.
 So is he now in execution
    Of any bold or noble enterprise,
    However he puts on this tardy form.

  BRUTUS.
 And so it is.
 For this time I will leave you.

    Tomorrow, if you please to speak with me,
    I will come home to you, or, if you will,
    Come home to me and I will wait for you.

  CASSIUS.

                                                    Exit Brutus.

    If I were Brutus now and he were Cassius,
    He should not humor me.
 I will this night,
    In several hands, in at his windows throw,
    As if they came from several citizens,
    Writings, all tending to the great opinion
    That Rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely
    Caesar's ambition shall be glanced at.

    And after this let Caesar seat him sure;
    For we will shake him, or worse days endure.
           Exit.





SCENE III.
 Thunder and lightning.


Enter, from opposite sides, Casca, with his sword drawn, and Cicero.


  CICERO.
 Brought you Caesar home?
    Why are you breathless, and why stare you so?
  CASCA.

    Either there is a civil strife in heaven,
    Or else the world too saucy with the gods
    Incenses them to send destruction.
 Why, saw you anything more wonderful?
  CASCA.

    Besides- I ha' not since put up my sword-
    Against the Capitol I met a lion,
    Who glaz'd upon me and went surly by
    Without annoying me.
 And there were drawn
    Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women
    Transformed with their fear, who swore they saw
    Men all in fire walk up and down the streets.

    And yesterday the bird of night did sit
    Even at noonday upon the marketplace,
    Howling and shrieking.

  CICERO.

    Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?  
  CASCA.
 He doth, for he did bid Antonio
    Send word to you he would be there tomorrow.

  CICERO.
 This disturbed sky
    Is not to walk in.
                          Exit Cicero.


                        Enter Cassius.
 Who's there?
  CASCA.
 A Roman.
 Casca, by your voice.
 Your ear is good.
 Cassius, what night is this!
  CASSIUS.

  CASCA.
 Who ever knew the heavens menace so?
  CASSIUS.
 Those that have known the earth so full of faults.
 But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?
    It is the part of men to fear and tremble
    When the most mighty gods by tokens send
    Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.
 You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life
    That should be in a Roman you do want,
    Or else you use not.
 You look pale and gaze
    And put on fear and cast yourself in wonder
    To see the strange impatience of the heavens.

    Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man
    Most like this dreadful night,
    That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars
    As doth the lion in the Capitol,
    A man no mightier than thyself or me
    In personal action, yet prodigious grown
    And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.

  CASCA.
 'Tis Caesar that you mean, is it not, Cassius?
  CASSIUS.

  CASSIUS.
 I know where I will wear this dagger then:
    Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius.

    Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
    Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron
    Can be retentive to the strength of spirit;
    But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
    Never lacks power to dismiss itself.

    If I know this, know all the world besides,
    That part of tyranny that I do bear
    I can shake off at pleasure.
                  Thunder still.

  CASCA.

    So every bondman in his own hand bears
    The power to cancel his captivity.

  CASSIUS.

    He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.

    Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
    Begin it with weak straws.
 What trash is Rome,
    What rubbish, and what offal, when it serves  
    For the base matter to illuminate
    So vile a thing as Caesar? But, O grief,
    Where hast thou led me? I perhaps speak this
    Before a willing bondman; then I know
    My answer must be made.
 You speak to Casca, and to such a man
    That is no fleering tell-tale.
 Hold, my hand.

    Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
    And I will set this foot of mine as far
    As who goes farthest.
 There's a bargain made.
 For now, this fearful night,
    There is no stir or walking in the streets,
    And the complexion of the element  
    In favor's like the work we have in hand,
    Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.


                       Enter Cinna.


  CASCA.
 'Tis Cinna, I do know him by his gait;
    He is a friend.
 Cinna, where haste you so?
  CINNA.
 To find out you.
 Who's that? Metellus Cimber?
  CASSIUS.
 No, it is Casca, one incorporate
    To our attempts.
 I am glad on't.
 What a fearful night is this!
    There's two or three of us have seen strange sights.

  CASSIUS.
 Am I not stay'd for? Tell me.

  CINNA.
 Yes, you are.

    O Cassius, if you could
    But win the noble Brutus to our party-
  CASSIUS.
 Good Cinna, take this paper,
    And look you lay it in the praetor's chair,
    Where Brutus may but find it; and throw this  
    In at his window; set this up with wax
    Upon old Brutus' statue.
 All this done,
    Repair to Pompey's Porch, where you shall find us.
 All but Metellus Cimber, and he's gone
    To seek you at your house.
 Well, I will hie
    And so bestow these papers as you bade me.

  CASSIUS.
 That done, repair to Pompey's Theatre.

                                                     Exit Cinna.

    Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day
    See Brutus at his house.
 Three parts of him
    Is ours already, and the man entire
    Upon the next encounter yields him ours.
 O, he sits high in all the people's hearts,
    And that which would appear offense in us,
    His countenance, like richest alchemy,
    Will change to virtue and to worthiness.

  CASSIUS.
 Let us go,
    For it is after midnight, and ere day  
    We will awake him and be sure of him.
                Exeunt.
>>



ACT II.
 SCENE I.


Enter Brutus in his orchard.

    When, Lucius, when? Awake, I say! What, Lucius!

                            Enter Lucius.
 Get me a taper in my study, Lucius.
 I will, my lord.

  BRUTUS.
 He would be crown'd:
    How that might change his nature, there's the question.

  
                        Re-enter Lucius.


  LUCIUS.
 The taper burneth in your closet, sir.

    Searching the window for a flint I found
    This paper thus seal'd up, and I am sure
    It did not lie there when I went to bed.

  BRUTUS.
 I know not, sir.

  BRUTUS.
 I will, sir.

  BRUTUS.
 The exhalations whizzing in the air
    Give so much light that I may read by them.

    "Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake and see thyself!
    Shall Rome, etc.
 Speak, strike, redress!"

    "Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake!"
    Such instigations have been often dropp'd  
    Where I have took them up.

    "Shall Rome, etc.
" Thus must I piece it out.


  LUCIUS.

                                                Knocking within.

  BRUTUS.
 Go to the gate, somebody knocks.

    Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar
    I have not slept.


  LUCIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 Is he alone?
  LUCIUS.
 No, sir, there are more with him.
 Do you know them?
  LUCIUS.
 No, sir, their hats are pluck'd about their ears,
    And half their faces buried in their cloaks,
    That by no means I may discover them
    By any mark of favor.

  BRUTUS.
                            Exit Lucius.
 O Conspiracy,
    Shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,  
    When evils are most free? O, then, by day
    Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
    To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, Conspiracy;
    Hide it in smiles and affability;
    For if thou path, thy native semblance on,
    Not Erebus itself were dim enough
    To hide thee from prevention.


  CASSIUS.
 I think we are too bold upon your rest.
 I have been up this hour, awake all night.

    Know I these men that come along with you?
  CASSIUS.
  
  BRUTUS.

  CASSIUS.
 This, Decius Brutus.
 He is welcome too.

CASSIUS.
 This, Casca; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus Cimber.

  BRUTUS.
 Shall I entreat a word?                 They whisper.

  DECIUS.
 Here lies the east.
 No.

  CINNA.
 O, pardon, sir, it doth, and yongrey lines
    That fret the clouds are messengers of day.
 You shall confess that you are both deceived.

  BRUTUS.
 Give me your hands all over, one by one.
 And let us swear our resolution.
 No, not an oath.
 If not the face of men,
    The sufferance of our souls, the time's abuse-
    If these be motives weak, break off betimes,
    And every man hence to his idle bed;
    So let high-sighted tyranny range on
    Till each man drop by lottery.
 But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?
    I think he will stand very strong with us.

  CINNA.
 No, by no means.
 O, let us have him, for his silver hairs
    Will purchase us a good opinion,
    And buy men's voices to commend our deeds.

    It shall be said his judgement ruled our hands;
    Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
    But all be buried in his gravity.

  BRUTUS.
 O, name him not; let us not break with him,
    For he will never follow anything
    That other men begin.
 Then leave him out.
 Indeed he is not fit.
 I think it is not meet
    Mark Antony, so well beloved of Caesar,
    Should outlive Caesar.
 We shall find of him
    A shrewd contriver; and you know his means,
    If he improve them, may well stretch so far
    As to annoy us all, which to prevent,
    Let Antony and Caesar fall together.

    Let us be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius.

    We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,
    And in the spirit of men there is no blood.

    O, that we then could come by Caesar's spirit,
    And not dismember Caesar! But, alas,
    Caesar must bleed for it! And, gentle friends,  
    Let's kill him boldly, but not wrathfully;
    Let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
    Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds;
    And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
    Stir up their servants to an act of rage
    And after seem to chide 'em.

    And for Mark Antony, think not of him,
    For he can do no more than Caesar's arm
    When Caesar's head is off.

  CASSIUS.
 Yet I fear him,
    For in the ingrated love he bears to Caesar-
  BRUTUS.
 Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him.

    If he love Caesar, all that he can do
    Is to himself, take thought and die for Caesar.

  TREBONIUS.

                                                  Clock strikes.

  BRUTUS.

  CASSIUS.

  TREBONIUS.
 'Tis time to part.

  CASSIUS.

    It may be these apparent prodigies,
    The unaccustom'd terror of this night,
    And the persuasion of his augurers
    May hold him from the Capitol today.

  DECIUS.
 Never fear that.
 If he be so resolved,
    I can o'ersway him, for he loves to hear
    That unicorns may be betray'd with trees,
    And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
    Lions with toils, and men with flatterers;
    But when I tell him he hates flatterers,  
    He says he does, being then most flattered.

    Let me work;
    For I can give his humor the true bent,
    And I will bring him to the Capitol.

  BRUTUS.
 Is that the utter most?
  CINNA.

  METELLUS.
 Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,
    Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey.
 Now, good Metellus, go along by him.

  CASSIUS.
 The morning comes upon 's.

  BRUTUS.
  
    And so, good morrow to you every one.

                                          Exeunt all but Brutus.

    Boy! Lucius! Fast asleep? It is no matter.


                           Enter Portia.


  PORTIA.
 Brutus, my lord!
  BRUTUS.
 Portia, what mean you? Wherefore rise you now?
    It is not for your health thus to commit
    Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.

  PORTIA.
 have ungently, Brutus,
    Stole from my bed; and yesternight at supper
    You suddenly arose and walk'd about,
    Musing and sighing, with your arms across;
    And when I ask'd you what the matter was,
    You stared upon me with ungentle looks.

    Yet I insisted, yet you answer'd not,
    But with an angry waiter of your hand
    Gave sign for me to leave you.
 So I did,
    Fearing to strengthen that impatience
    Which seem'd too much enkindled, and withal
    Hoping it was but an effect of humor,
    Which sometime hath his hour with every man.
 Dear my lord,
    Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.
 I am not well in health, and that is all.

  PORTIA.
 Brutus is wise, and, were he not in health,
    He would embrace the means to come by it.

  BRUTUS.
 Why, so I do.
 Good Portia, go to bed.

  PORTIA.
 Is Brutus sick, and is it physical
    To walk unbraced and suck up the humors  
    Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick,
    And will he steal out of his wholesome bed
    To dare the vile contagion of the night
    And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air
    To add unto his sickness? No, my Brutus,
    You have some sick offense within your mind,
    Which by the right and virtue of my place
    I ought to know of; and, upon my knees,
    I charm you, by my once commended beauty,
    By all your vows of love and that great vow
    Which did incorporate and make us one,
    That you unfold to me, yourself, your half,
    Why you are heavy and what men tonight
    Have had resort to you; for here have been
    Some six or seven, who did hide their faces
    Even from darkness.

    Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,
    Is it excepted I should know no secrets  
    That appertain to you? Am I yourself
    But, as it were, in sort or limitation,
    To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,
    And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the suburbs
    Of your good pleasure? If it be no more,
    Portia is Brutus' harlot, not his wife.

  BRUTUS.
 You are my true and honorable wife,
    As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
    That visit my sad heart.

  PORTIA.
 If this were true, then should I know this secret.

    I grant I am a woman, but withal
    A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife.

    I grant I am a woman, but withal
    A woman well reputed, Cato's daughter.

    Think you I am no stronger than my sex,
    Being so father'd and so husbanded?
    Tell me your counsels, I will not disclose 'em.
 Can I bear that with patience  
    And not my husband's secrets?
  BRUTUS.

    Hark, hark, one knocks.
 Portia, go in awhile,
    And by and by thy bosom shall partake
    The secrets of my heart.

    All my engagements I will construe to thee,
    All the charactery of my sad brows.
 [Exit Portia.
] Lucius, who's that knocks?

                  Re-enter Lucius with Ligarius.


  LUCIUS.
 Here is a sick man that would speak with you.

  BRUTUS.
 Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of.
 Caius Ligarius, how?
  LIGARIUS.
 Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.

  BRUTUS.
 O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius,
    To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick!
  LIGARIUS.
 I am not sick, if Brutus have in hand
    Any exploit worthy the name of honor.
  
  BRUTUS.
 Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
    Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.

  LIGARIUS.
 By all the gods that Romans bow before,
    I here discard my sickness! Soul of Rome!
    Brave son, derived from honorable loins!
    Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up
    My mortified spirit.
 What's to do?
  BRUTUS.
 A piece of work that will make sick men whole.

  LIGARIUS.
 That must we also.
 What it is, my Caius,
    I shall unfold to thee, as we are going
    To whom it must be done.
 Set on your foot,
    And with a heart new-fired I follow you,
    To do I know not what; but it sufficeth
    That Brutus leads me on.
                                Exeunt.





SCENE II.

Caesar's house.
 Thunder and lightning.


Enter Caesar, in his nightgown.

    Thrice hath Calpurnia in her sleep cried out,
    "Help, ho! They murther Caesar!" Who's within?

                         Enter a Servant.


  SERVANT.
 I will, my lord.


  CALPURNIA.
 What mean you, Caesar? Think you to walk forth?
    You shall not stir out of your house today.
 Caesar, I I stood on ceremonies,
    Yet now they fright me.

    A lioness hath whelped in the streets;
    And graves have yawn'd, and yielded up their dead;
    Fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds,
    In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,
    Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol;
    The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
    Horses did neigh and dying men did groan,
    And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.

    O Caesar! These things are beyond all use,
    And I do fear them.

  CAESAR.
 What can be avoided
    Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?
    Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions
    Are to the world in general as to Caesar.

  CALPURNIA.

  CAESAR.
 They would not have you to stir forth today.

  CAESAR.

    Caesar should be a beast without a heart
    If he should stay at home today for fear.

    Do not go forth today.
 Call it my fear
    That keeps you in the house and not your own.

  CAESAR.


                        Enter Decius.


    Here's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so.

  CAESAR.
  
    Cannot, is false, and that I dare not, falser:
    I will not come today.
 Tell them so, Decius.

  CAESAR.
 Shall Caesar send a lie?
    Have I in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far
    To be afeard to tell greybeards the truth?
    Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.

  DECIUS.
 The cause is in my will: I will not come,
    That is enough to satisfy the Senate.

    But, for your private satisfaction,
    Because I love you, I will let you know.

    Calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home;
    She dreamt tonight she saw my statue,
    Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,
    Did run pure blood, and many lusty Romans
    Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it.

  DECIUS.
 This dream is all amiss interpreted;
    It was a vision fair and fortunate.
 I have, when you have heard what I can say.

    If you shall send them word you will not come,
    Their minds may change.

  CAESAR.

    Give me my robe, for I will go.


    And look where Publius is come to fetch me.

  PUBLIUS.
 Good morrow,Caesar.

  CAESAR.
 Welcome, Publius.
 Caius Ligarius,
    Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy
    As that same ague which hath made you lean.

  CAESAR.
 I thank you for your pains and courtesy.


    See, Antony, that revels long o' nights,
    Is notwithstanding up.
 Good morrow, Antony.

  ANTONY.
 So to most noble Caesar.

  CAESAR.
 Bid them prepare within.

    I am to blame to be thus waited for.

    Now, Cinna; now, Metellus; what, Trebonius,
    I have an hour's talk in store for you;
    Remember that you call on me today;
    Be near me, that I may remember you.
 Caesar, I will.
] And so near will I be
    That your best friends shall wish I had been further.
 Good friends, go in and taste some wine with me,
    And we like friends will straightway go together.

  BRUTUS.
] That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
    The heart of Brutus yearns to think upon!            Exeunt.

A street near the Capitol.


Enter Artemidorus, reading paper.
 "Caesar, beware of Brutus; take heed of Cassius; come
    not near Casca; have an eye to Cinna; trust not Trebonius; mark
    well Metellus Cimber; Decius Brutus loves thee not; thou hast
    wronged Caius Ligarius.
 There is but one mind in all these men,
    and it is bent against Caesar.
 If thou beest not immortal, look
    about you.
 Security gives way to conspiracy.
 The mighty gods
    defend thee!
                                        Thy lover, Artemidorus.
"
    Here will I stand till Caesar pass along,
    And as a suitor will I give him this.

    My heart laments that virtue cannot live
    Out of the teeth of emulation.

    If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayest live;
    If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.


  PORTIA.
 To know my errand, madam.

  PORTIA.
 I would have had thee there, and here again,
    Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.

    How hard it is for women to keep counsel!
    Art thou here yet?
  LUCIUS.
 Madam, what should I do?
    Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
    And so return to you, and nothing else?
  PORTIA.
 Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,
    For he went sickly forth; and take good note
    What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him.
  
    Hark, boy, what noise is that?
  LUCIUS.
 I hear none, madam.

  PORTIA.
 Prithee, listen well.

    I heard a bustling rumor like a fray,
    And the wind brings it from the Capitol.


  PORTIA.
 At mine own house, good lady.
 What is't o'clock?
  SOOTHSAYER.
 About the ninth hour, lady.

  PORTIA.
 Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
  SOOTHSAYER.
 I go to take my stand
    To see him pass on to the Capitol.

  PORTIA.
 That I have, lady.
 If it will please Caesar
    To be so good to Caesar as to hear me,  
    I shall beseech him to befriend himself.

  PORTIA.
 Why, know'st thou any harm's intended towards him?
  SOOTHSAYER.
 None that I know will be, much that I fear may chance.

    Good morrow to you.
 Here the street is narrow,
    The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,
    Of senators, of praetors, common suitors,
    Will crowd a feeble man almost to death.
               Exit.

  PORTIA.
 I must go in.
 Ay me, how weak a thing
    The heart of woman is! O Brutus,
    The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
    Sure, the boy heard me.
 O, I grow faint.

    Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord;
    Say I am merry.
 Come to me again,
    And bring me word what he doth say to thee.

                                               Exeunt severally.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
 SCENE I.

Rome.
 Before the Capitol; the Senate sitting above.


Flourish.


  CAESAR.
 The ides of March are come.

  SOOTHSAYER.
 Ay, Caesar, but not gone.

  A Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule.

  DECIUS.
 Trebonius doth desire you to o'er read,
    At your best leisure, this his humble suit.

  CAESAR.
 What touches us ourself shall be last served.

  CAESAR.
 What, urge you your petitions in the street?
    Come to the Capitol.

  
      Caesar goes up to the Senate House, the rest follow.
 I wish your enterprise today may thrive.

  CASSIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 What said Popilius Lena?
  CASSIUS.
 He wish'd today our enterprise might thrive.

    I fear our purpose is discovered.
 Look, how he makes to Caesar.
 Mark him.

    Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,
    Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
    For I will slay myself.

  BRUTUS.
 Cassius, be constant.
 Trebonius knows his time, for, look you, Brutus,
    He draws Mark Antony out of the way.
 Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him
    And presently prefer his suit to Caesar.

  BRUTUS.
 He is address'd; press near and second him.

  CINNA.
 Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.

  CAESAR.
 Are we all ready? What is now amiss
    That Caesar and his Senate must redress?
  METELLUS.
 Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,
    Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat
    An humble heart.

  CAESAR.

    These couchings and these lowly courtesies
    Might fire the blood of ordinary men
    And turn preordinance and first decree
    Into the law of children.
 Is there no voice more worthy than my own,
    To sound more sweetly in great Caesar's ear
    For the repealing of my banish'd brother?
  BRUTUS.
 Pardon, Caesar! Caesar, pardon!
    As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall
    To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.

    The skies are painted with unnumber'd sparks;  
    They are all fire and every one doth shine;
    But there's but one in all doth hold his place.

  CINNA.
 Hence! Wilt thou lift up Olympus?
  DECIUS.

  CAESAR.
 Et tu, Brute?- Then fall, Caesar! Dies.

  CINNA.
  
  CASSIUS.
 Some to the common pulpits and cry out
    "Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!"
  BRUTUS.
 And Cassius too.

  BRUTUS.
 Where's Publius?
  CINNA.
 Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
 Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar's
    Should chance-
  BRUTUS.
 Talk not of standing.

  CASSIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 Do so, and let no man abide this deed
    But we the doers.


                        Re-enter Trebonius.

  
  CASSIUS.
 Fled to his house amazed.

    Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run
    As it were doomsday.

  BRUTUS.

  CASSIUS.
 Grant that, and then is death a benefit;
    So are we Caesar's friends that have abridged
    His time of fearing death.
 Stoop, Romans, stoop,
    And let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood
    Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords;
    Then walk we forth, even to the marketplace,
    And waving our red weapons o'er our heads,
    Let's all cry, "Peace, freedom, and liberty!"
  CASSIUS.
 How many ages hence
    Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
    In states unborn and accents yet unknown!  
  BRUTUS.
 How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
    That now on Pompey's basis lies along
    No worthier than the dust!
  CASSIUS.
 Soft, who comes here? A friend of Antony's.

  SERVANT.
 Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel,
    Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down,
    And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:
    Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
    Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving.

    Say I love Brutus and I honor him;  
    Say I fear'd Caesar, honor'd him, and loved him.

  BRUTUS.
 Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman;
    I never thought him worse.

    Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
    He shall be satisfied and, by my honor,
    Depart untouch'd.

  SERVANT.
 I'll fetch him presently.
                       Exit.

  CASSIUS.
 I wish we may, but yet have I a mind
    That fears him much, and my misgiving still
    Falls shrewdly to the purpose.
 Welcome, Mark Antony.

  ANTONY.
 O mighty Caesar! Dost thou lie so low?
    Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
    Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.

    I know not, gentlemen, what you intend,
    Who else must be let blood, who else is rank.

    If I myself, there is no hour so fit
    As Caesar's death's hour, nor no instrument
    Of half that worth as those your swords, made rich
    With the most noble blood of all this world.
 O Antony, beg not your death of us!  
    Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
    As, by our hands and this our present act
    You see we do, yet see you but our hands
    And this the bleeding business they have done.

    Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
    And pity to the general wrong of Rome-
    As fire drives out fire, so pity pity-
    Hath done this deed on Caesar.
 Your voice shall be as strong as any man's
    In the disposing of new dignities.

  BRUTUS.
 Only be patient till we have appeased
    The multitude, beside themselves with fear,
    And then we will deliver you the cause
    Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,
    Have thus proceeded.

  ANTONY.

    First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you;
    Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand;
    Now, Decius Brutus, yours; now yours, Metellus;
    Yours, Cinna; and, my valiant Casca, yours;
    Though last, not least in love, yours, good Trebonius.
  
    Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bay'd, brave hart,
    Here didst thou fall, and here thy hunters stand,
    Sign'd in thy spoil, and crimson'd in thy Lethe.

    How like a deer strucken by many princes
    Dost thou here lie!
  CASSIUS.
 Mark Antony-
  ANTONY.
 Pardon me, Caius Cassius.

    The enemies of Caesar shall say this:
    Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.

  CASSIUS.
 I blame you not for praising Caesar so;
    But what compact mean you to have with us?
    Will you be prick'd in number of our friends,
    Or shall we on, and not depend on you?
  ANTONY.
 Therefore I took your hands, but was indeed
    Sway'd from the point by looking down on Caesar.

    Friends am I with you all and love you all,
    Upon this hope that you shall give me reasons
    Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.
  
  BRUTUS.

    Our reasons are so full of good regard
    That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,
    You should be satisfied.

  ANTONY.
 That's all I seek;
    And am moreover suitor that I may
    Produce his body to the marketplace,
    And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
    Speak in the order of his funeral.

  BRUTUS.

  CASSIUS.
 Brutus, a word with you.

    [Aside to Brutus.

    Know you how much the people may be moved
    By that which he will utter?
  BRUTUS.
 By your pardon,
    I will myself into the pulpit first,
    And show the reason of our Caesar's death.

    What Antony shall speak, I will protest
    He speaks by leave and by permission,  
    And that we are contented Caesar shall
    Have all true rites and lawful ceremonies.

  CASSIUS.
 I know not what may fall; I like it not.

  BRUTUS.
 Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar's body.

    You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
    But speak all good you can devise of Caesar,
    And say you do't by our permission,
    Else shall you not have any hand at all
    About his funeral.
 And you shall speak
    In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
    After my speech is ended.
 Be it so,
    I do desire no more.

  BRUTUS.
 O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
    That I am meek and gentle with these butchers!
    Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
    That ever lived in the tide of times.


                        Enter a Servant.
  

    You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?
  SERVANT.

  ANTONY.
 Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
 He did receive his letters, and is coming,
    And bid me say to you by word of mouth-
    O Caesar!                                     Sees the body.

  ANTONY.

  ANTONY.
 Post back with speed and tell him what hath chanced.

    Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
    No Rome of safety for Octavius yet;
    Hie hence, and tell him so.
 Yet stay awhile,
    Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse
    Into the marketplace.
 There shall I try,
    In my oration, how the people take
    The cruel issue of these bloody men,  
    According to the which thou shalt discourse
    To young Octavius of the state of things.

    Lend me your hand.
                Exeunt with Caesar's body.


Enter Brutus and Cassius, and a throng of Citizens.
 We will be satisfied! Let us be satisfied!
  BRUTUS.

    Cassius, go you into the other street
    And part the numbers.

    Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;
    Those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
    And public reasons shall be rendered
    Of Caesar's death.

  FIRST CITIZEN.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 I will hear Cassius and compare their reasons,
    When severally we hear them rendered.

                               Exit Cassius, with some Citizens.
 Silence!
  BRUTUS.
 Be patient till the last.
 Censure me in your
    wisdom, and awake your senses, that you may the better judge.
 If
    then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is
    my answer: Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome
    more.
 There
    is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his valor,
    and death for his ambition.
 Who is here so base that would be a
    bondman? If any, speak, for him have I offended.

  ALL.

  BRUTUS.
 Then none have I offended.
 I have done no more to Caesar
    than you shall do to Brutus.


              Enter Antony and others, with Caesar's body.


    Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony, who, though he had
    no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying, a
    place in the commonwealth, as which of you shall not? With this I
    depart- that, as I slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I
    have the same dagger for myself, when it shall please my country
    to need my death.

  ALL.
 Live, Brutus, live, live!
  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Bring him with triumph home unto his house.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 Give him a statue with his ancestors.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Let him be Caesar.
 Caesar's better parts
    Shall be crown'd in Brutus.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 We'll bring him to his house with shouts and
    clamors.
 My countrymen-
  SECOND CITIZEN.
  
  FIRST CITIZEN.

    I do entreat you, not a man depart,
    Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.
                  Exit.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Stay, ho, and let us hear Mark Antony.
 Let him go up into the public chair;
    We'll hear him.
 Noble Antony, go up.
 For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you.

  FOURTH CITIZEN.
 'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Nay, that's certain.
 Peace! Let us hear what Antony can say.
 You gentle Romans-
  ALL.

  ANTONY.
 Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears!
    I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.

    The evil that men do lives after them,
    The good is oft interred with their bones;
    So let it be with Caesar.
 The noble Brutus
    Hath told you Caesar was ambitious;
    If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
    And grievously hath Caesar answer'd it.

    Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest-
    For Brutus is an honorable man;
    So are they all, all honorable men-
    Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral.

    He was my friend, faithful and just to me;
    But Brutus says he was ambitious,
    And Brutus is an honorable man.

    He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
    Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.
  
    Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
    When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
    Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
    Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
    And Brutus is an honorable man.

    You all did see that on the Lupercal
    I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
    Which he did thrice refuse.
 Bear with me;
    My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
    And I must pause till it come back to me.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Has he, masters?
    I fear there will a worse come in his place.

  FOURTH CITIZEN.
 Mark'd ye his words? He would not take the crown;
    Therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 If it be found so, some will dear abide it.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 Poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.

  THIRD CITIZEN.

  FOURTH CITIZEN.
 But yesterday the word of Caesar might
    Have stood against the world.
 Now lies he there,
    And none so poor to do him reverence.

    I will not do them wrong; I rather choose
    To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
    Than I will wrong such honorable men.

    But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar;  
    I found it in his closet, 'tis his will.
 We'll hear the will.
 Read it, Mark Antony.

  ALL.
 The will, the will! We will hear Caesar's will.
 Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it;
    It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.

    You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;
    And, being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
    It will inflame you, it will make you mad.

    'Tis good you know not that you are his heirs,
    For if you should, O, what would come of it!
  FOURTH CITIZEN.
  
  ANTONY.
 Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile?
    I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it.

    I fear I wrong the honorable men
    Whose daggers have stabb'd Caesar; I do fear it.
 They were traitors.
 The will!
    Read the will!
  ANTONY.
 You will compel me then to read the will?
    Then make a ring about the corse of Caesar,
    And let me show you him that made the will.
 Descend.

                                  He comes down from the pulpit.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 You shall have leave.

  FOURTH CITIZEN.
 A ring, stand round.
 Stand from the hearse, stand from the body.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 Room for Antony, most noble Antony.
 If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
 I remember
    The first time ever Caesar put it on;
    'Twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,
    That day he overcame the Nervii.

    Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through;
    See what a rent the envious Casca made;
    Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb'd;
    And as he pluck'd his cursed steel away,
    Mark how the blood of Caesar follow'd it,
    As rushing out of doors, to be resolved
    If Brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no;
    For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar's angel.

    Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him!
    This was the most unkindest cut of all;
    For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
    Ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms,
    Quite vanquish'd him.

    O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!
    Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,
    Whilst bloody treason flourish'd over us.

    O, now you weep, and I perceive you feel
    The dint of pity.
 These are gracious drops.

    Kind souls, what weep you when you but behold
    Our Caesar's vesture wounded? Look you here,
    Here is himself, marr'd, as you see, with traitors.
 O piteous spectacle!
  SECOND CITIZEN.
 O traitors villains!
  FIRST CITIZEN.
 O most bloody sight!
  SECOND CITIZEN.

  ALL.
 Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire! Kill!
    Slay! Let not a traitor live!
  ANTONY.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Peace there! Hear the noble Antony.
  
  SECOND CITIZEN.

  ANTONY.
 Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
    To such a sudden flood of mutiny.

    They that have done this deed are honorable.
 They are wise and honorable,
    And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.

    I am no orator, as Brutus is;
    But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
    That love my friend, and that they know full well
    That gave me public leave to speak of him.

    For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
    Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
    To stir men's blood.
 But were I Brutus,
    And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony  
    Would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue
    In every wound of Caesar that should move
    The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.

  ALL.
 We'll mutiny.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 We'll burn the house of Brutus.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Yet hear me, countrymen; yet hear me speak.

  ALL.
 Peace, ho! Hear Antony, most noble Antony!
  ANTONY.
 Why, friends, you go to do you know not what.

    You have forgot the will I told you of.

  ANTONY.

    To every Roman citizen he gives,
    To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.

  SECOND CITIZEN.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 O royal Caesar!
  ANTONY.
 Hear me with patience.
 Moreover, he hath left you all his walks,
    His private arbors, and new-planted orchards,
    On this side Tiber; he hath left them you,
    And to your heirs forever- common pleasures,
    To walk abroad and recreate yourselves.
 Never, never.
 Come, away, away!
    We'll burn his body in the holy place
    And with the brands fire the traitors' houses.

    Take up the body.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 Go fetch fire.

  THIRD CITIZEN.

  FOURTH CITIZEN.
 Pluck down forms, windows, anything.

                                  Exeunt Citizens with the body.

  ANTONY.
 Mischief, thou art afoot,
    Take thou what course thou wilt.


                        Enter a Servant.


    How now, fellow?  
  SERVANT.

  ANTONY.

  ANTONY.
 And thither will I straight to visit him.
 Fortune is merry,
    And in this mood will give us anything.
 I heard him say Brutus and Cassius
    Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.

  ANTONY.
 Bring me to Octavius.
          Exeunt.





SCENE III.

    I have no will to wander forth of doors,
    Yet something leads me forth.
 What is your name?
  SECOND CITIZEN.
 Whither are you going?
  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Are you a married man or a bachelor?
  SECOND CITIZEN.
 Answer every man directly.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Ay, and wisely.

  THIRD CITIZEN.

  CINNA.

    You'll bear me a bang for that, I fear.
 Proceed directly.

  CINNA.
 Directly, I am going to Caesar's funeral.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 As a friend or an enemy?
  CINNA.
 As a friend.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 That matter is answered directly.
 Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.

  THIRD CITIZEN.

  CINNA.
 Truly, my name is Cinna.
 Tear him to pieces, he's a conspirator.

  FOURTH CITIZEN.
 Tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his bad
    verses.

  CINNA.
 I am not Cinna the conspirator.

  FOURTH CITIZEN.
 Pluck but his
    name out of his heart, and turn him going.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Tear him, tear him! Come, brands, ho, firebrands.
 To
    Brutus', to Cassius'; burn all.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE I.


  ANTONY.
 These many then shall die, their names are prick'd.

  OCTAVIUS.
 I do consent-
  OCTAVIUS.

  LEPIDUS.
 Upon condition Publius shall not live,
    Who is your sister's son, Mark Antony.
 He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him.

    But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar's house,
    Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
    How to cut off some charge in legacies.
 What, shall I find you here?
  OCTAVIUS.
 Or here, or at the Capitol.
            Exit Lepidus.

  ANTONY.
 This is a slight unmeritable man,
    Meet to be sent on errands.
 Is it fit,
    The three-fold world divided, he should stand
    One of the three to share it?
  OCTAVIUS.
 So you thought him,
    And took his voice who should be prick'd to die  
    In our black sentence and proscription.

  ANTONY.

  OCTAVIUS.
 You may do your will,
    But he's a tried and valiant soldier.
 So is my horse, Octavius, and for that
    I do appoint him store of provender.

    It is a creature that I teach to fight,
    To wind, to stop, to run directly on,
    His corporal motion govern'd by my spirit.

    And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so:
    He must be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth;  
    A barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds
    On objects, arts, and imitations,
    Which, out of use and staled by other men,
    Begin his fashion.
 And now, Octavius,
    Listen great things.
 Let us do so, for we are at the stake,
    And bay'd about with many enemies;
    And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
    Millions of mischiefs.





SCENE II.

Camp near Sardis.
 Before Brutus' tent.
 Drum.


  BRUTUS.
 Give the word, ho, and stand.

  BRUTUS.
 What now, Lucilius, is Cassius near?
  LUCILIUS.
 He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
    To do you salutation from his master.
 He greets me well.
 Your master, Pindarus,
    In his own change, or by ill officers,
    Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
    Things done undone; but if he be at hand,
    I shall be satisfied.
 I do not doubt
    But that my noble master will appear
    Such as he is, full of regard and honor.

  BRUTUS.
 He is not doubted.

  LUCILIUS.
 Comes his army on?
  LUCILIUS.
 They meant his night in Sard is to be quarter'd;
    The greater part, the horse in general,
    Are come with Cassius.
                     Low march within.

  BRUTUS.
  

  CASSIUS.
 Stand, ho! Speak the word along.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 Stand!
  THIRD SOLDIER.
 Stand!
  CASSIUS.
 Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
 Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs,
    And when you do them-
  BRUTUS.
 Bid them move away;
    Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs,
    And I will give you audience.

  CASSIUS.
 Lucilius, do you the like, and let no man
    Come to our tent till we have done our conference.

    Let Lucius and Titinius guard our door.
             Exeunt.

Brutus' tent.


Enter Brutus and Cassius.

  BRUTUS.
 You wrong'd yourself to write in such a case.

  CASSIUS.
 In such a time as this it is not meet
    That every nice offense should bear his comment.

  BRUTUS.
 Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
    Are much condemn'd to have an itching palm,
    To sell and mart your offices for gold
    To undeservers.

  CASSIUS.
 I an itching palm?
    You know that you are Brutus that speaks this,
    Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
 Chastisement?
  BRUTUS.
 Remember March, the ides of March remember.

    Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?
    What villain touch'd his body, that did stab,
    And not for justice? What, shall one of us,
    That struck the foremost man of all this world
    But for supporting robbers, shall we now
    Contaminate our fingers with base bribes
    And sell the mighty space of our large honors
    For so much trash as may be grasped thus?
    I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
    Than such a Roman.

  CASSIUS.
 Brutus, bait not me,
    I'll not endure it.
 I am a soldier, I,
    Older in practice, abler than yourself
    To make conditions.

  BRUTUS.

  CASSIUS.
 I am.

  BRUTUS.
 I say you are not.
 Urge me no more, I shall forget myself;
    Have mind upon your health, tempt me no farther.

    Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
    Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
  CASSIUS.
 O gods, ye gods! Must I endure all this?
  BRUTUS.
 All this? Ay, more.
 Fret till your proud heart break.

    Go show your slaves how choleric you are,
    And make your bondmen tremble.
 Must I bouge?
    Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
    Under your testy humor? By the gods,
    You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
    Though it do split you, for, from this day forth,
    I'll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
    When you are waspish.
 Is it come to this?
  BRUTUS.
 You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus.

    Did I say "better"?
  BRUTUS.
 If you did, I care not.

  BRUTUS.
 Peace, peace! You durst not so have tempted him.

  CASSIUS.
 No.

  CASSIUS.
 What, durst not tempt him?
  BRUTUS.

  CASSIUS.
 Do not presume too much upon my love;
    I may do that I shall be sorry for.

    There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats,
    For I am arm'd so strong in honesty,
    That they pass by me as the idle wind
    Which I respect not.
 I did send to you
    For certain sums of gold, which you denied me,  
    For I can raise no money by vile means.

    By heaven, I had rather coin my heart
    And drop my blood for drachmas than to wring
    From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
    By any indirection.
 I did send
    To you for gold to pay my legions,
    Which you denied me.
 Was that done like Cassius?
    Should I have answer'd Caius Cassius so?
    When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous
    To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
    Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
    Dash him to pieces!
  CASSIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 You did.

  CASSIUS.
 Brutus hath rived my heart.

    A friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
    But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.

  BRUTUS.
 You love me not.
 I do not like your faults.

  CASSIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 A flatterer's would not, though they do appear
    As huge as high Olympus.

  CASSIUS.
 O, I could weep
    My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
    And here my naked breast; within, a heart
    Dearer than Pluto's mine, richer than gold.

    If that thou best a Roman, take it forth;
    I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
 Sheathe your dagger.

  CASSIUS.
 When I spoke that, I was ill-temper'd too.

  CASSIUS.
 Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.

  BRUTUS.
 And my heart too.

  CASSIUS.
 What's the matter?
  CASSIUS.
 Have not you love enough to bear with me
    When that rash humor which my mother gave me
    Makes me forgetful?
  BRUTUS.
 Yes, Cassius, and from henceforth,
    When you are overearnest with your Brutus,
    He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.
  
  POET.
] Let me go in to see the generals.

  LUCILIUS.

  POET.
] Nothing but death shall stay me.


  CASSIUS.
 Ha, ha! How vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
  BRUTUS.
 Bear with him, Brutus; 'tis his fashion.
 Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders  
    Prepare to lodge their companies tonight.
 And come yourselves and bring Messala with you
    Immediately to us.
             Exeunt Lucilius and Titinius.

  BRUTUS.
 Lucius, a bowl of wine!                   Exit Lucius.
 O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.

  CASSIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 Impatient of my absence,
    And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony
    Have made themselves so strong- for with her death
    That tidings came- with this she fell distract,
    And (her attendants absent) swallow'd fire.

  CASSIUS.
 And died so?  
  BRUTUS.
 Even so.

  CASSIUS.
 Speak no more of her.
 Give me a bowl of wine.

    In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.
              Drinks.

  CASSIUS.
 My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
               Drinks.

  BRUTUS.


                 Re-enter Titinius, with Messala.


    Welcome, good Messala.

    Now sit we close about this taper here,
    And call in question our necessities.

    Messala, I have here received letters  
    That young Octavius and Mark Antony
    Come down upon us with a mighty power,
    Bending their expedition toward Philippi.
 Myself have letters of the selfsame tenure.

  BRUTUS.
 With what addition?
  MESSALA.
 That by proscription and bills of outlawry
    Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus
    Have put to death an hundred senators.

  BRUTUS.
 There in our letters do not well agree;
    Mine speak of seventy senators that died
    By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.

  CASSIUS.
 Cicero one!
  MESSALA.
 Cicero is dead,
    And by that order of proscription.
 No, Messala.

  MESSALA.
 Nothing, Messala.
 That, methinks, is strange.

  BRUTUS.
 Why ask you? Hear you aught of her in yours?  
  MESSALA.

  BRUTUS.
 Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true.

  MESSALA.
 Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell:
    For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.

  BRUTUS.

  MESSALA.
 I have as much of this in art as you,
    But yet my nature could not bear it so.

  BRUTUS.
 What do you think
    Of marching to Philippi presently?
  CASSIUS.
 I do not think it good.
 Your reason?
  CASSIUS.
  
    The people 'twixt Philippi and this ground
    Do stand but in a forced affection,
    For they have grudged us contribution.

  CASSIUS.
 Hear me, good brother.

  BRUTUS.
 Under your pardon.
 You must note beside
    That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
    Our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe:
    The enemy increaseth every day;
    We, at the height, are ready to decline.
 Then, with your will, go on;
    We'll along ourselves and meet them at Philippi.

  BRUTUS.
 The deep of night is crept upon our talk,
    And nature must obey necessity,
    Which we will niggard with a little rest.
 No more.

  BRUTUS.


    My gown.
                                        Exit Lucius.
  
    Never come such division 'tween our souls!
    Let it not, Brutus.

  BRUTUS.
 Everything is well.

  BRUTUS.

  TITINIUS.
 Good night, Lord Brutus.

  BRUTUS.
 Farewell, everyone.


    Give me the gown.
 Here in the tent.

  BRUTUS.
 What, thou speak'st drowsily?
    Poor knave, I blame thee not, thou art o'erwatch'd.
 Varro and Claudio!

                   Enter Varro and Claudio.
  

  VARRO.
 I would not have it so.
 Lie down, good sirs.

    Look Lucius, here's the book I sought for so;
    I put it in the pocket of my gown.

                                     Varro and Claudio lie down.

  LUCIUS.
 I was sure your lordship did not give it me.

  BRUTUS.

  BRUTUS.
 It does, my boy.
 It is my duty, sir.

  BRUTUS.

  LUCIUS.

  BRUTUS.
 It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again;
    I will not hold thee long.
 If I do live,
    I will be good to thee.
                   Music, and a song.

    I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee.

    If thou dost nod, thou break'st thy instrument;
    I'll take it from thee; and, good boy, good night.

    Let me see, let me see; is not the leaf turn'd down
    Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.
        Sits down.


    How ill this taper burns! Ha, who comes here?
    I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
    That shapes this monstrous apparition.

    It comes upon me.

  GHOST.

  BRUTUS.
 Why comest thou?
  GHOST.

  BRUTUS.
 Well, then I shall see thee again?
  GHOST.
 Ay, at Philippi.

    Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.

    Boy! Lucius! Varro! Claudio! Sirs, awake!
    Claudio!
  LUCIUS.
 He thinks he still is at his instrument.

    Lucius, awake!
  LUCIUS.
 My lord?
  BRUTUS.
 Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?
  LUCIUS.
 Yes, that thou didst.
] Fellow thou, awake!
  VARRO.
 My lord?
  CLAUDIO.
 My lord?
  BRUTUS.
 Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?
  VARRO.
 CLAUDIO.
 Did we, my lord?
  BRUTUS.
 No, my lord, I saw nothing.

  CLAUDIO.

  BRUTUS.
 CLAUDIO.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.
 SCENE I.


Enter Octavius, Antony, and their Army.


  OCTAVIUS.
 Now, Antony, our hopes are answered.

    You said the enemy would not come down,
    But keep the hills and upper regions.
 Their battles are at hand;
    They mean to warn us at Philippi here,
    Answering before we do demand of them.

  ANTONY.


                    Enter a Messenger.


  MESSENGER.
 Prepare you, generals.

    The enemy comes on in gallant show;  
    Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
    And something to be done immediately.

  ANTONY.

  OCTAVIUS.
 Upon the right hand I, keep thou the left.
 Why do you cross me in this exigent?
  OCTAVIUS.
 I do not cross you, but I will do so.
 Drum.
 Enter Brutus, Cassius, and their Army;
           Lucilius, Titinius, Messala, and others.


  BRUTUS.

  CASSIUS.
 No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.

    Make forth, the generals would have some words.

  OCTAVIUS.
 Stir not until the signal not until the signal.
 Is it so, countrymen?
  OCTAVIUS.
 Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.
  
  ANTONY.
 In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words.

    Witness the hole you made in Caesar's heart,
    Crying "Long live! Hail, Caesar!"
  CASSIUS.

  ANTONY.
 Not stingless too.
 O, yes, and soundless too,
    For you have stol'n their buzzing, Antony,
    And very wisely threat before you sting.

  ANTONY.
 Villains! You did not so when your vile daggers
    Hack'd one another in the sides of Caesar.

    You show'd your teeth like apes, and fawn'd like hounds,
    And bow'd like bondmen, kissing Caesar's feet;
    Whilst damned Casca, like a cur, behind
    Strooke Caesar on the neck.
 O you flatterers!
  CASSIUS.
 Flatterers? Now, Brutus, thank yourself.
 Come, come, the cause.

    Look,
    I draw a sword against conspirators;
    When think you that the sword goes up again?
    Never, till Caesar's three and thirty wounds
    Be well avenged, or till another Caesar
    Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.

  BRUTUS.
 So I hope,
    I was not born to die on Brutus' sword.

  BRUTUS.
 O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
    Young man, thou couldst not die more honorable.
 A peevish school boy, worthless of such honor,
    Join'd with a masker and a reveler!
  ANTONY.
 Old Cassius still!
  OCTAVIUS.

    If you dare fight today, come to the field;  
    If not, when you have stomachs.

                        Exeunt Octavius, Antony, and their Army.

  CASSIUS.
 Why, now, blow and, swell billow, and swim bark!
    The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.

  BRUTUS.

  LUCILIUS.
 Messala,
    This is my birthday, as this very day
    Was Cassius born.
 Give me thy hand, Messala.

    Be thou my witness that, against my will,
    As Pompey was, am I compell'd to set
    Upon one battle all our liberties.
 Now I change my mind,
    And partly credit things that do presage.

    Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign
    Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perch'd,  
    Gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands,
    Who to Philippi here consorted us.

    This morning are they fled away and gone,
    And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
    Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us,
    As we were sickly prey.
 Their shadows seem
    A canopy most fatal, under which
    Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.

  MESSALA.
 Believe not so.

  CASSIUS.
 I but believe it partly,
    For I am fresh of spirit and resolved
    To meet all perils very constantly.

  BRUTUS.

    If we do lose this battle, then is this
    The very last time we shall speak together.
  
    What are you then determined to do?
  BRUTUS.
 Even by the rule of that philosophy
    By which I did blame Cato for the death
    Which he did give himself- I know not how,
    But I do find it cowardly and vile,
    For fear of what might fall, so to prevent
    The time of life- arming myself with patience
    To stay the providence of some high powers
    That govern us below.

  CASSIUS.
 Then, if we lose this battle,
    You are contented to be led in triumph
    Thorough the streets of Rome?
  BRUTUS.
 No, Cassius, no.
 Think not, thou noble Roman,
    That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome;
    He bears too great a mind.

    And whether we shall meet again I know not.

    Forever, and forever, farewell, Cassius!
    If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;  
    If not, why then this parting was well made.

  CASSIUS.
 Forever and forever farewell, Brutus!
    If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed;
    If not, 'tis true this parting was well made.

  BRUTUS.
 Why then, lead on.





SCENE II.

The field of battle.


Alarum.
 Enter Brutus and Messala.
 Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
    Unto the legions on the other side.
             Loud alarum.
 Let them all come down.





SCENE III.

Another part of the field.


Alarums.
 Enter Cassius and Titinius.
 O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!
    Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy.

    This ensign here of mine was turning back;
    I slew the coward, and did take it from him.
 O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
    Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
    Took it too eagerly.
 His soldiers fell to spoil,
    Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.


                       Enter Pindarus.


  PINDARUS.
 Fly further off, my lord, fly further off;
    Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord;
    Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
 Look, look, Titinius:
    Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
  TITINIUS.
 They are, my lord.
  
  CASSIUS.
 I will be here again, even with a thought.

                                      Pindarus ascends the hill.

    This day I breathed first: time is come round,
    And where I did begin, there shall I end;
    My life is run his compass.
 Sirrah, what news?
  PINDARUS.
 [Above.
] O my lord!
  CASSIUS.
 What news?
  PINDARUS.
 [Above.
] Titinius is enclosed round about
    With horsemen, that make to him on the spur;
    Yet he spurs on.
 Now they are almost on him.

    Now, Titinius! Now some light.
 O, he lights too.

    He's ta'en [Shout.
] And, hark! They shout for joy.
  
  CASSIUS.

    Come hither, sirrah.

    In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,
    And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
    That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
    Thou shouldst attempt it.

    Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts;
    And when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,
    Guide thou the sword.
] Caesar, thou art
      revenged,
    Even with the sword that kill'd thee.
 O Cassius!
    Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
    Where never Roman shall take note of him.
  

                Re-enter Titinius with Messala.

  TITINIUS.

  MESSALA.
 Where did you leave him?
  TITINIUS.

  MESSALA.
 Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
  TITINIUS.
 Is not that he?
  TITINIUS.
 No, this was he, Messala,
    But Cassius is no more.
 O setting sun,
    As in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
    So in his red blood Cassius' day is set,
    The sun of Rome is set! Our day is gone;
    Clouds, dews, and dangers come; our deeds are done!
    Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.

    O hateful error, melancholy's child,
    Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
    The things that are not? O error, soon conceived,
    Thou never comest unto a happy birth,
    But kill'st the mother that engender'd thee!
  TITINIUS.
 I may say "thrusting" it,
    For piercing steel and darts envenomed
    Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
    As tidings of this sight.

  TITINIUS.
 Hie you, Messala,
    And I will seek for Pindarus the while.

    Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
    Did I not meet thy friends? And did not they
    Put on my brows this wreath of victory,
    And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts?
    Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything!  
    But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow;
    Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
    Will do his bidding.

    By your leave, gods, this is a Roman's part.

                                                  Kills himself.


       Alarum.


  BRUTUS.
 Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.

  BRUTUS.
 Titinius' face is upward.
 He is slain.
 O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!
    Thy spirit walks abroad, and turns our swords
    In our own proper entrails.

  CATO.
 Are yet two Romans living such as these?
    The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!
    It is impossible that ever Rome
    Should breed thy fellow.

    Come therefore, and to Thasos send his body;
    His funerals shall not be in our camp,
    Lest it discomfort us.
 Lucilius, come,
    And come, young Cato; let us to the field.

    Labio and Flavio, set our battles on.

    'Tis three o'clock, and Romans, yet ere night
    We shall try fortune in a second fight.
              Exeunt.


Alarum.


  BRUTUS.
 What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
    I will proclaim my name about the field.

    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
    A foe to tyrants, and my country's friend.

  LUCILIUS.
 O young and noble Cato, art thou down?
    Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,
    And mayst be honor'd, being Cato's son.

  LUCILIUS.
 Only I yield to die.

    [Offers money.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 We must not.
 Room, ho! Tell Antony, Brutus is ta'en.

  FIRST SOLDIER.
 I'll tell the news.


                         Enter Antony.
 Safe, Antony, Brutus is safe enough.

    I dare assure thee that no enemy
    Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus;
    The gods defend him from so great a shame!
    When you do find him, or alive or dead,
    He will be found like Brutus, like himself.

  ANTONY.
 This is not Brutus, friend, but, I assure you,
    A prize no less in worth.
 Keep this man safe,
    Give him all kindness; I had rather have
    Such men my friends than enemies.
 Go on,
    And see wheer Brutus be alive or dead,
    And bring us word unto Octavius' tent
    How everything is chanced.





SCENE V.

Another part of the field.


Enter Brutus, Dardanius, Clitus, Strato, and Volumnius.
 Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.

  CLITUS.
 Statilius show'd the torchlight, but, my lord,
    He came not back.

  BRUTUS.
 Hark thee, Clitus.

  CLITUS.
 What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.

  BRUTUS.

  CLITUS.
 Hark thee, Dardanius.
                        Whispers.
 Shall I do such a deed?
  CLITUS.
 What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
  DARDANIUS.
 To kill him, Clitus.
 Look, he meditates.

  BRUTUS.
 Come hither, good Volumnius, list a word.
  
  VOLUMNIUS.

    I know my hour is come.

  VOLUMNIUS.

  BRUTUS.

    Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes;
    Our enemies have beat us to the pit;            Low alarums.

    It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
    Than tarry till they push us.
 Good Volumnius,
    Thou know'st that we two went to school together;
    Even for that our love of old, I prithee,
    Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it.

  VOLUMNIUS.
 That's not an office for a friend, my lord.

                                                   Alarum still.
 Fly, fly, my lord, there is no tarrying here.

  BRUTUS.
 Farewell to you, and you, and you, Volumnius.

    Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep;  
    Farewell to thee too, Strato.

    So, fare you well at once, for Brutus' tongue
    Hath almost ended his life's history.
 Fly, my lord, fly.
 Hence! I will follow.

                        Exeunt Clitus, Dardanius, and Volumnius.

    Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
    While I do run upon it.
 Wilt thou, Strato?
  STRATO.
 Fare you well, my lord.
 Farewell, good Strato.
              Runs on his sword.

    Caesar, now be still;
    I kill'd not thee with half so good a will.
            Dies.


     Alarum.
 Retreat.
 What man is that?
  MESSALA.
 My master's man.
 Strato, where is thy master?
  STRATO.
 Free from the bondage you are in, Messala:
    The conquerors can but make a fire of him;
    For Brutus only overcame himself,
    And no man else hath honor by his death.
 So Brutus should be found.
 I thank thee, Brutus,
    That thou hast proved Lucilius' saying true.

  OCTAVIUS.
 All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.
 Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.

  OCTAVIUS.
 Do so, good Messala.

  MESSALA.
 How died my master, Strato?  
  STRATO.
 This was the noblest Roman of them all.
 According to his virtue let us use him
    With all respect and rites of burial.

    So call the field to rest, and let's away,
    To part the glories of this happy day.
              Exeunt.



THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.

      Duke of Burgundy.

      Duke of Albany.

      Earl of Gloucester.

      Edgar, son of Gloucester.

      Edmund, bastard son to Gloucester.

      Curan, a courtier.

      Lear's Fool.

      Oswald, steward to Goneril.

      Gentlemen.

      Cordelia, daughter to Lear.


      Knights attending on Lear, Officers, Messengers, Soldiers,
        Attendants.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 Scene I.

[King Lear's Palace.

Edmund stands back.
]

  Kent.
 I thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany than
     Cornwall.
 It did always seem so to us; but now, in the division of the
     kingdom, it appears not which of the Dukes he values most, for
     equalities are so weigh'd that curiosity in neither can make
     choice of either's moiety.
 His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge.
 Sir, this young fellow's mother could; whereupon she grew
     round-womb'd, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she
     had a husband for her bed.
 Do you smell a fault?
  Kent.
 Though this knave came
     something saucily into the world before he was sent for, yet was  
     his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the
     whoreson must be acknowledged.
- Do you know this noble gentleman,
     Edmund?
  Edm.
 [comes forward] No, my lord.

  Glou.
 Remember him hereafter as my honourable
     friend.

  Edm.
 My services to your lordship.
 I must love you, and sue to know you better.
 Sir, I shall study deserving.

  Glou.

                                                 Sound a sennet.


      Enter one bearing a coronet; then Lear; then the Dukes of
      Albany and Cornwall; next, Goneril, Regan, Cordelia, with
                              Followers.


  Lear.
 I shall, my liege.

                                 Exeunt [Gloucester and Edmund].
 Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.

     Give me the map there.
 Know we have divided  
     In three our kingdom; and 'tis our fast intent
     To shake all cares and business from our age,
     Conferring them on younger strengths while we
     Unburthen'd crawl toward death.
 Our son of Cornwall,
     And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
     We have this hour a constant will to publish
     Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife
     May be prevented now.
 The princes, France and Burgundy,
     Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
     Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
     And here are to be answer'd.
 Tell me, my daughters
     (Since now we will divest us both of rule,
     Interest of territory, cares of state),
     Which of you shall we say doth love us most?
     That we our largest bounty may extend
     Where nature doth with merit challenge.
 Goneril,
     Our eldest-born, speak first.

  Gon.
 Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter;
     Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty;
     Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare;  
     No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;
     As much as child e'er lov'd, or father found;
     A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable.

     Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
 [aside] What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.
 Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
     With shadowy forests and with champains rich'd,
     With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
     We make thee lady.
- What says our second daughter,
     Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwall? Speak.
 Sir, I am made
     Of the selfsame metal that my sister is,
     And prize me at her worth.
 In my true heart
     I find she names my very deed of love;
     Only she comes too short, that I profess
     Myself an enemy to all other joys
     Which the most precious square of sense possesses,
     And find I am alone felicitate
     In your dear Highness' love.
  
  Cor.
 [aside] Then poor Cordelia!
     And yet not so; since I am sure my love's
     More richer than my tongue.
 To thee and thine hereditary ever
     Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,
     No less in space, validity, and pleasure
     Than that conferr'd on Goneril.

  Cor.
 Nothing, my lord.
 Nothing.

  Cor.
 Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
     My heart into my mouth.

  Lear.
 How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,
     Lest it may mar your fortunes.
 Good my lord,
     You have begot me, bred me, lov'd me; I
     Return those duties back as are right fit,
     Obey you, love you, and most honour you.

     Why have my sisters husbands, if they say
     They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,
     That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry
     Half my love with him, half my care and duty.

  Lear.
 But goes thy heart with this?
  Cor.

  Lear.
 So young, my lord, and true.

  Lear.
 Let it be so! thy truth then be thy dower!
     For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
     The mysteries of Hecate and the night;
     By all the operation of the orbs
     From whom we do exist and cease to be;
     Here I disclaim all my paternal care,  
     Propinquity and property of blood,
     And as a stranger to my heart and me
     Hold thee from this for ever.

  Kent.
 Good my liege-
  Lear.

     I lov'd her most, and thought to set my rest
     On her kind nursery.
- Hence and avoid my sight!-
     So be my grave my peace as here I give
     Her father's heart from her! Call France! Who stirs?
     Call Burgundy! Cornwall and Albany,
     With my two daughters' dowers digest this third;
     Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.

     I do invest you jointly in my power,
     Preeminence, and all the large effects
     That troop with majesty.
 Ourself, by monthly course,  
     With reservation of an hundred knights,
     By you to be sustain'd, shall our abode
     Make with you by due turns.
 Only we still retain
     The name, and all th' additions to a king.

  Kent.
 The bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft.

  Kent.
 Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
     The region of my heart! Be Kent unmannerly
     When Lear is mad.
 Reverse thy doom;
     And in thy best consideration check
     This hideous rashness.
 Answer my life my judgment,  
     Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
     Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound
     Reverbs no hollowness.
 My life I never held but as a pawn
     To wage against thine enemies; nor fear to lose it,
     Thy safety being the motive.
 Out of my sight!
  Kent.
 See better, Lear, and let me still remain
     The true blank of thine eye.
 Now by Apollo-
  Kent.
 Now by Apollo, King,
     Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.

  Lear.
 O vassal! miscreant!
                                   [Lays his hand on his sword.
]
  Alb.
 Dear sir, forbear!
  Kent.
 Do!
     Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
     Upon the foul disease.
 Revoke thy gift,
     Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,  
     I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
 Hear me, recreant!
     On thine allegiance, hear me!
     Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow-
     Which we durst never yet- and with strain'd pride
     To come between our sentence and our power,-
     Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,-
     Our potency made good, take thy reward.

     Five days we do allot thee for provision
     To shield thee from diseases of the world,
     And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
     Upon our kingdom.
 If, on the tenth day following,
     Thy banish'd trunk be found in our dominions,
     The moment is thy death.

  Kent.
 Since thus thou wilt appear,
     Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.

Exit.


  Flourish.
 My Lord of Burgundy,
     We first address toward you, who with this king
     Hath rivall'd for our daughter.
 What in the least
     Will you require in present dower with her,
     Or cease your quest of love?
  Bur.

  Lear.
 Right noble Burgundy,
     When she was dear to us, we did hold her so;
     But now her price is fall'n.

     If aught within that little seeming substance,
     Or all of it, with our displeasure piec'd,  
     And nothing more, may fitly like your Grace,
     She's there, and she is yours.

  Bur.
 Then leave her, sir; for, by the pow'r that made me,
     I tell you all her wealth.

  France.
 This is most strange,
     That she that even but now was your best object,
     The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
     Most best, most dearest, should in this trice of time  
     Commit a thing so monstrous to dismantle
     So many folds of favour.

  Cor.

  Lear.
 Better thou
     Hadst not been born than not t' have pleas'd me better.
  
  France.

  Bur.

  Cor.
 Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor;
     Most choice, forsaken; and most lov'd, despis'd!
     Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon.
  
     Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.

     Gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect
     My love should kindle to inflam'd respect.

     Not all the dukes in wat'rish Burgundy
     Can buy this unpriz'd precious maid of me.

     Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind.
 Thou hast her, France; let her be thine; for we
     Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
     That face of hers again.
 Therefore be gone
     Without our grace, our love, our benison.
 Exeunt Lear, Burgundy, [Cornwall, Albany,
                                    Gloucester, and Attendants].
 Bid farewell to your sisters.
 The jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes
     Cordelia leaves you.
 I know you what you are;
     And, like a sister, am most loath to call  
     Your faults as they are nam'd.
 Use well our father.

     To your professed bosoms I commit him;
     But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
     I would prefer him to a better place!
     So farewell to you both.

  Gon.
 Prescribe not us our duties.

  Reg.
 Let your study
     Be to content your lord, who hath receiv'd you
     At fortune's alms.
 You have obedience scanted,
     And well are worth the want that you have wanted.

  Cor.

     Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.

     Well may you prosper!
  France.

                                     Exeunt France and Cordelia.

  Gon.
 Sister, it is not little I have to say of what most nearly
     appertains to us both.

  Reg.
 That's most certain, and with you; next month with us.
 You see how full of changes his age is.

  Reg.
 'Tis the infirmity of his age; yet he hath ever but slenderly
     known himself.
 The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then
     must we look to receive from his age, not alone the
     imperfections of long-ingraffed condition, but therewithal
     the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with
     them.
 There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and
     him.
 Pray you let's hit together.
 If our father carry authority
     with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his
     will but offend us.

  Reg.
 We shall further think on't.

  Gon.





Scene II.


Enter [Edmund the] Bastard solus, [with a letter].


  Edm.
 Thou, Nature, art my goddess; to thy law
     My services are bound.
 Wherefore should I
     Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
     The curiosity of nations to deprive me,
     For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
     Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base?
     When my dimensions are as well compact,
     My mind as generous, and my shape as true,
     As honest madam's issue? Why brand they us
     With base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?
     Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
     More composition and fierce quality
     Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
     Go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops
     Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well then,
     Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land.

     Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
     As to th' legitimate.
 Fine word- 'legitimate'!
     Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,  
     And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
     Shall top th' legitimate.


  Glou.
 So please your lordship, none.
 Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
  Edm.
 I know no news, my lord.
 Nothing, my lord.

  Glou.
 I beseech you, sir, pardon me.
 It is a letter from my brother
     that I have not all o'er-read; and for so much as I have  
     perus'd, I find it not fit for your o'erlooking.

  Glou.

  Edm.
 I shall offend, either to detain or give it.
 The contents, as
     in part I understand them, are to blame.

  Glou.
 I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote this but as
     an essay or taste of my virtue.


  Glou.
 (reads) 'This policy and reverence of age makes the world
     bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes from us
     till our oldness cannot relish them.
 I begin to find an idle
     and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways,
     not as it hath power, but as it is suffer'd.
 Come to me, that
     of this I may speak more.
 If our father would sleep till I
     wak'd him, you should enjoy half his revenue for ever, and live
     the beloved of your brother,
                                                        'EDGAR.
'

     Hum! Conspiracy? 'Sleep till I wak'd him, you should enjoy half
     his revenue.
' My son Edgar! Had he a hand to write this? a heart
     and brain to breed it in? When came this to you? Who brought it?
  Edm.
 It was not brought me, my lord: there's the cunning of it.
 I  
     found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.

  Glou.
 You know the character to be your brother's?
  Edm.

  Edm.
 Hath he never before sounded you in this business?
  Edm.

  Glou.
 O villain, villain! His very opinion in the letter! Abhorred
     villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish villain! worse than
     brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him.
 I'll apprehend him.
 Abominable
     villain! Where is he?
  Edm.
 I do not well know, my lord.
 If it shall please you to suspend
     your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him
     better testimony of his intent, you should run a certain course;
     where, if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his
     purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honour and shake  
     in pieces the heart of his obedience.
 I dare pawn down my life
     for him that he hath writ this to feel my affection to your
     honour, and to no other pretence of danger.

  Glou.
 He cannot be such a monster.

  Edm.
 Nor is not, sure.

  Glou.
 To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him.

     Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him out; wind me into him, I pray
     you; frame the business after your own wisdom.

  Edm.
 These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to
     us.
 Though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet
     nature finds itself scourg'd by the sequent effects.
 In cities, mutinies; in  
     countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond crack'd
     'twixt son and father.
 Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all
     ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves.
 Find out
     this villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it
     carefully.
 And the noble and true-hearted Kent banish'd! his
     offence, honesty! 'Tis strange.
                       Exit.

  Edm.
 This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are
     sick in fortune, often the surfeit of our own behaviour, we make
     guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as if
     we were villains on necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion;
     knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical pre-dominance;
     drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforc'd obedience of
     planetary influence; and all that we are evil in, by a divine
     thrusting on.
 Fut! I should have been that I am, had the
     maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing.

     Edgar-

                             Enter Edgar.


     and pat! he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy.
 My
     cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o' Bedlam.

     O, these eclipses do portend these divisions! Fa, sol, la, mi.

  Edg.
 How now, brother Edmund? What serious contemplation are you
     in?
  Edm.
 I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day,
     what should follow these eclipses.

  Edg.
 Do you busy yourself with that?
  Edm.

  Edg.
 How long have you been a sectary astronomical?
  Edm.

  Edm.
 Ay, two hours together.
 Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him by
     word or countenance
  Edg.
 Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him; and at my
     entreaty forbear his presence until some little time hath
     qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so
     rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would
     scarcely allay.

  Edg.
 Some villain hath done me wrong.
 Pray ye, go! There's my key.
 If you do stir abroad,
     go arm'd.

  Edg.
 Arm'd, brother?
  Edm.
 Go arm'd.
 I have told you what I  
     have seen and heard; but faintly, nothing like the image and
     horror of it.
 Pray you, away!
  Edg.
 Shall I hear from you anon?
  Edm.
 I do serve you in this business.

Exit.

The Duke of Albany's Palace.


  Gon.
 Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
  Osw.

  Gon.
 By day and night, he wrongs me! Every hour
     He flashes into one gross crime or other
     That sets us all at odds.
 I'll not endure it.
 When he returns from hunting,
     I will not speak with him.
 Say I am sick.

     If you come slack of former services,
     You shall do well; the fault of it I'll answer.

                                                 [Horns within.
]
  Osw.
 He's coming, madam; I hear him.

  Gon.
 I'd have it come to question.
 Idle old man,  
     That still would manage those authorities
     That he hath given away! Now, by my life,
     Old fools are babes again, and must be us'd
     With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abus'd.

     Remember what I have said.

  Osw.

  Gon.

     What grows of it, no matter.
 I'll write straight to my sister
     To hold my very course.
 Prepare for dinner.

                                                         Exeunt.





Scene IV.

The Duke of Albany's Palace.


  Kent.


         Horns within.
 Enter Lear, [Knights,] and Attendants.
] How now? What art thou?
  Kent.
 A man, sir.

  Lear.
 What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou with us?
  Kent.
 I do profess to be no less than I seem, to serve him truly
     that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to
     converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear  
     judgment, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
 A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.

  Lear.
 If thou be'st as poor for a subject as he's for a king, thou
     art poor enough.
 What wouldst thou?
  Kent.

  Lear.
 No, sir; but you have that in your countenance which I would
     fain call master.

  Lear.
 Authority.
 If I like thee no worse after
     dinner, I will not part from thee yet.
 Dinner, ho, dinner!
     Where's my knave? my fool? Go you and call my fool hither.
]

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.


     You, you, sirrah, where's my daughter?
  Osw.

  Lear.

  Lear.
 Why came not the slave back to me when I call'd him?  
  Knight.
 Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.
 My lord, I know not what the matter is; but to my judgment
     your Highness is not entertain'd with that ceremonious affection
     as you were wont.
 There's a great abatement of kindness appears
     as well in the general dependants as in the Duke himself also
     and your daughter.
 Ha! say'st thou so?
  Knight.
 I have
     perceived a most faint neglect of late, which I have rather
     blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretence
     and purpose of unkindness.
 But
     where's my fool? I have not seen him this two days.

  Knight.
 Since my young lady's going into France, sir, the fool
     hath much pined away.

  Lear.
 No more of that; I have noted it well.
 [Exit Knight.
] Go you, call
     hither my fool.
]

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

  Lear.
 'My lady's father'? My lord's knave! You whoreson dog! you
     slave! you cur!
  Osw.
 I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.
 Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?
                                                  [Strikes him.
]
  Osw.

  Lear.
 Thou serv'st me, and I'll love thee.

  Kent.
 Away,
     away! If you will measure your lubber's length again, tarry; but
     away! Go to! Have you wisdom? So.
 Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee.
                                     [Gives money.
 Here's my coxcomb.

                                          [Offers Kent his cap.
]
  Lear.
 How now, my pretty knave? How dost thou?
  Fool.
 Why? For taking one's part that's out of favour.
- How now,
     nuncle? Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters!
  Lear.
 If I gave them all my living, I'ld keep my coxcombs myself.

  Lear.
 Take heed, sirrah- the whip.

  Fool.
 Truth's a dog must to kennel; he must be whipp'd out, when  
     Lady the brach may stand by th' fire and stink.

  Lear.
 Sirrah, I'll teach thee a speech.

  Fool.
 Mark it, nuncle.

          Have more than thou showest,
          Speak less than thou knowest,
          Lend less than thou owest,
          Ride more than thou goest,
          Learn more than thou trowest,
          Set less than thou throwest;
          Leave thy drink and thy whore,
          And keep in-a-door,
          And thou shalt have more
          Than two tens to a score.

  Kent.
 This is nothing, fool.

  Fool.
 Can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?
  Lear.
 Why, no, boy.
 Nothing can be made out of nothing.

  Fool.
 He will not believe a fool.
 A bitter fool!
  Fool.
 Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter
     fool and a sweet fool?
  Lear.

  Fool.

  Kent.
 This is not altogether fool, my lord.
 No, faith; lords and great men will not let me.
 If I had a
     monopoly out, they would have part on't.

  Lear.
 What two crowns shall they be?
  Fool.
 Thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown
     when thou gav'st thy golden one away.
 If I speak like myself in
     this, let him be whipp'd that first finds it so.


     [Sings]    Fools had ne'er less grace in a year,
                  For wise men are grown foppish;
                They know not how their wits to wear,
                  Their manners are so apish.
 When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?
  Fool.


     Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to
     lie.
 I would fain learn to lie.

  Lear.

  Fool.
 They'll have me
     whipp'd for speaking true; thou'lt have me whipp'd for lying;
     and sometimes I am whipp'd for holding my peace.
 Thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides and left nothing
     i' th' middle.
 Here comes one o' the parings.


  Lear.
 How now, daughter? What makes that frontlet on? Methinks you
     are too much o' late i' th' frown.

  Fool.
 Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for  
     her frowning.
 Now thou art an O without a figure.
 I am better
     than thou art now: I am a fool, thou art nothing.
 So your face
     bids me, though you say nothing.
 Mum, mum!

            He that keeps nor crust nor crum,
            Weary of all, shall want some.
-

     [Points at Lear] That's a sheal'd peascod.
 Not only, sir, this your all-licens'd fool,
     But other of your insolent retinue
     Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth
     In rank and not-to-be-endured riots.
 Sir,
     I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
     To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful,
     By what yourself, too, late have spoke and done,
     That you protect this course, and put it on
     By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
     Would not scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
     Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,  
     Might in their working do you that offence
     Which else were shame, that then necessity
     Must call discreet proceeding.
 For you know, nuncle,

          The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long
          That it had it head bit off by it young.


     So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.

  Lear.
 Are you our daughter?
  Gon.
 Come, sir,
     I would you would make use of that good wisdom
     Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away
     These dispositions that of late transform you
     From what you rightly are.

  Fool.
 May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse?
     Whoop, Jug, I love thee!
  Lear.
 Doth any here know me? This is not Lear.

     Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?
     Either his notion weakens, his discernings  
     Are lethargied- Ha! waking? 'Tis not so!
     Who is it that can tell me who I am?
  Fool.
 Lear's shadow.

  Lear.

  Fool.
 This admiration, sir, is much o' th' savour
     Of other your new pranks.
 I do beseech you
     To understand my purposes aright.

     As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.
 The shame itself doth speak
     For instant remedy.

  Lear.
 Darkness and devils!
     Saddle my horses! Call my train together!
     Degenerate bastard, I'll not trouble thee;
     Yet have I left a daughter.
 You strike my people, and your disorder'd rabble
     Make servants of their betters.


                            Enter Albany.


  Lear.
 Woe that too late repents!- O, sir, are you come?
     Is it your will? Speak, sir!- Prepare my horses.
 Pray, sir, be patient.
- O most small fault,
     How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!
     Which, like an engine, wrench'd my frame of nature
     From the fix'd place; drew from my heart all love
     And added to the gall.
 O Lear, Lear, Lear!
     Beat at this gate that let thy folly in  [Strikes his head.

  Alb.
 My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
     Of what hath mov'd you.

  Lear.

     Hear, Nature, hear! dear goddess, hear!
     Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend
     To make this creature fruitful.

     Into her womb convey sterility;
     Dry up in her the organs of increase;
     And from her derogate body never spring
     A babe to honour her! If she must teem,  
     Create her child of spleen, that it may live
     And be a thwart disnatur'd torment to her.

     Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth,
     With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,
     Turn all her mother's pains and benefits
     To laughter and contempt, that she may feel
     How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
     To have a thankless child! Away, away!                Exit.

  Alb.


                             Enter Lear.


  Lear.
 What's the matter, sir?
  Lear.
 [To Goneril] Life and death! I am asham'd
     That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;  
     That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
     Should make thee worth them.
 Blasts and fogs upon thee!
     Th' untented woundings of a father's curse
     Pierce every sense about thee!- Old fond eyes,
     Beweep this cause again, I'll pluck ye out,
     And cast you, with the waters that you lose,
     To temper clay.
 Yet have I left a daughter,
     Who I am sure is kind and comfortable.

     When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
     She'll flay thy wolvish visage.
 Thou shalt find
     That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think
     I have cast off for ever; thou shalt, I warrant thee.

                            Exeunt [Lear, Kent, and Attendants].

  Gon.
 Do you mark that, my lord?
  Alb.
 Pray you, content.

          So the fool follows after.
                       Exit.
 This man hath had good counsel! A hundred knights?
     'Tis politic and safe to let him keep
     At point a hundred knights; yes, that on every dream,
     Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
     He may enguard his dotage with their pow'rs
     And hold our lives in mercy.
- Oswald, I say!
  Alb.

  Gon.
 Safer than trust too far.
 I know his heart.

     What he hath utter'd I have writ my sister.

     If she sustain him and his hundred knights,
     When I have show'd th' unfitness-
  
                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.


     How now, Oswald?
     What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
  Osw.

  Gon.
 Get you gone,
     And hasten your return.
 [Exit Oswald.
] No, no, my lord!
     This milky gentleness and course of yours,
     Though I condemn it not, yet, under pardon,
     You are much more at task for want of wisdom
     Than prais'd for harmful mildness.

  Alb.

  Gon.


  Lear.
 Acquaint my
     daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her
     demand out of the letter.

  Kent.

Exit.
 If a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in danger of
     kibes?
  Lear.
 Ay, boy.
 Thy wit shall ne'er go slip-shod.
 Ha, ha, ha!
  Fool.
 Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly; for though
     she's as like this as a crab's like an apple, yet I can tell
     what I can tell.

  Lear.
 What canst tell, boy?
  Fool.
 She'll taste as like this as a crab does to a crab.
 Thou
     canst tell why one's nose stands i' th' middle on's face?  
  Lear.
 No.

  Fool.
 Why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose, that what a
     man cannot smell out, 'a may spy into.

  Lear.
 I did her wrong.
 Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
  Lear.
 No.

  Fool.

  Lear.

  Lear.
 I will forget my nature.
 So kind a father!- Be my horses
     ready?
  Fool.
 Thy asses are gone about 'em.

  Lear.
 Because they are not eight?
  Fool.
 Yes indeed.
 Thou wouldst make a good fool.
 To tak't again perforce! Monster ingratitude!
  Fool.

  Lear.
 How's that?  
  Fool.
 O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven!
     Keep me in temper; I would not be mad!

                         [Enter a Gentleman.
 Ready, my lord.

  Lear.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.

A court within the Castle of the Earl of Gloucester.


  Edm.

  Edm.
 How comes that?
  Cur.
 Nay, I know not.
 Not I.
 Fare you well, sir.
      Exit.

  Edm.
 The Duke be here to-night? The better! best!
     This weaves itself perforce into my business.

     My father hath set guard to take my brother;
     And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
     Which I must act.
 Briefness and fortune, work!  
     Brother, a word! Descend! Brother, I say!

                             Enter Edgar.


     My father watches.
 O sir, fly this place!
     Intelligence is given where you are hid.

     You have now the good advantage of the night.
 Have you nothing said
     Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany?
     Advise yourself.

  Edg.

  Edm.
 I hear my father coming.
 Pardon me!
     In cunning I must draw my sword upon you.
- Torches, torches!- So farewell.

                                                     Exit Edgar.
 Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
     Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
     To stand 's auspicious mistress.

  Glou.
 Look, sir, I bleed.

  Glou.
 Where is the villain, Edmund?
  Edm.
 Fled this way, sir.
 When by no means he could-
  Glou.
 Pursue him, ho! Go after.
        [Exeunt some Servants].

     By no means what?
  Edm.
 Persuade me to the murther of your lordship;
     But that I told him the revenging gods
     'Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;  
     Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond
     The child was bound to th' father- sir, in fine,
     Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
     To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
     With his prepared sword he charges home
     My unprovided body, lanch'd mine arm;
     But when he saw my best alarum'd spirits,
     Bold in the quarrel's right, rous'd to th' encounter,
     Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
     Full suddenly he fled.
 Let him fly far.

     Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;
     And found- dispatch.

     By his authority I will proclaim it
     That he which find, him shall deserve our thanks,
     Bringing the murderous caitiff to the stake;
     He that conceals him, death.

  Edm.
 When I dissuaded him from his intent
     And found him pight to do it, with curst speech  
     I threaten'd to discover him.
 He replied,
     'Thou unpossessing bastard, dost thou think,
     If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
     Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
     Make thy words faith'd? No.
 Strong and fast'ned villain!
     Would he deny his letter? I never got him.

                                                  Tucket within.

     Hark, the Duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes.

     All ports I'll bar; the villain shall not scape;
     The Duke must grant me that.
 Besides, his picture
     I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
     May have due note of him, and of my land,  
     Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means
     To make thee capable.
 How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither
     (Which I can call but now) I have heard strange news.

  Reg.
 How dost, my lord?
  Glou.
 O lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
  Reg.
 Was he not companion with the riotous knights
     That tend upon my father?
  Glou.
 I know not, madam.
 'Tis too bad, too bad!
  Edm.
 Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
 No marvel then though he were ill affected.

     'Tis they have put him on the old man's death,
     To have th' expense and waste of his revenues.

  Corn.

     Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
     A childlike office.
 He did bewray his practice, and receiv'd
     This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.

  Corn.
 Is he pursued?
  Glou.

  Corn.
 If he be taken, he shall never more
     Be fear'd of doing harm.
 Make your own purpose,
     How in my strength you please.

  Edm.
 I shall serve you, sir,  
     Truly, however else.
 For him I thank your Grace.

  Corn.
 You know not why we came to visit you-
  Reg.
 Thus out of season, threading dark-ey'd night.

     Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
     Of differences, which I best thought it fit
     To answer from our home.
 The several messengers
     From hence attend dispatch.
 Our good old friend,
     Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow
     Your needful counsel to our business,
     Which craves the instant use.





Scene II.

Before Gloucester's Castle.


Enter Kent and [Oswald the] Steward, severally.


  Osw.
 Good dawning to thee, friend.
 Art of this house?
  Kent.
 Ay.
 Where may we set our horses?
  Kent.
 I love thee not.

  Osw.
 Why then, I care not for thee.

  Osw.

  Kent.
 What dost thou know me for?
  Kent.
 A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a base, proud,
     shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy,
     worsted-stocking knave; a lily-liver'd, action-taking, whoreson,
     glass-gazing, superserviceable, finical rogue;
     one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of
     good service, and art nothing but the composition of a knave,  
     beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch;
     one whom I will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deny the
     least syllable of thy addition.
 Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one
     that's neither known of thee nor knows thee!
  Kent.
] Draw, you rogue! for, though
     it be night, yet the moon shines.
 I'll make a sop o' th'
     moonshine o' you.
 Draw, you whoreson cullionly barbermonger!
     draw!
  Osw.
 Away! I have nothing to do with thee.

  Kent.

     Draw, you rogue, or I'll so carbonado your shanks! Draw, you
     rascal! Come your ways!
  Osw.
 Help, ho! murther! help!
  Kent.
 Strike, you slave! Stand, rogue! Stand, you neat slave!
     Strike!                                        [Beats him.
]  
  Osw.
 Help, ho! murther! murther!

      Enter Edmund, with his rapier drawn, Gloucester, Cornwall,
                           Regan, Servants.


  Edm.
 How now? What's the matter?                 Parts [them].
 With you, goodman boy, an you please! Come, I'll flesh ye!
     Come on, young master!
  Glou.
 What is the matter?
  Reg.

  Osw.
 I am scarce in breath, my lord.

  Corn.
 Thou art a strange fellow.
 Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My lord, if
     you'll give me leave, I will tread this unbolted villain into
     mortar and daub the walls of a jakes with him.
 Peace, sirrah!
     You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
  Kent.

  Corn.
 That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
     Who wears no honesty.
 Such smiling rogues as these,
     Like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain
     Which are too intrinse t' unloose; smooth every passion
     That in the natures of their lords rebel,
     Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
     Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
     With every gale and vary of their masters,
     Knowing naught (like dogs) but following.

  Corn.

  Kent.

  Corn.
 Why dost thou call him knave? What is his fault?
  Kent.
 His countenance likes me not.

  Kent.

     I have seen better faces in my time
     Than stands on any shoulder that I see
     Before me at this instant.

  Corn.
 This is some fellow
     Who, having been prais'd for bluntness, doth affect
     A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
     Quite from his nature.
 He cannot flatter, he!
     An honest mind and plain- he must speak truth!
     An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.
  
     These kind of knaves I know which in this plainness
     Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
     Than twenty silly-ducking observants
     That stretch their duties nicely.

  Kent.
 Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
     Under th' allowance of your great aspect,
     Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
     On flickering Phoebus' front-
  Corn.
 What mean'st by this?
  Kent.
 To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much.
 I
     know, sir, I am no flatterer.

  Corn.
 What was th' offence you gave him?
  Osw.

     It pleas'd the King his master very late
     To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
     When he, conjunct, and flattering his displeasure,
     Tripp'd me behind; being down, insulted, rail'd
     And put upon him such a deal of man  
     That worthied him, got praises of the King
     For him attempting who was self-subdu'd;
     And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
     Drew on me here again.

  Corn.
 Fetch forth the stocks!
     You stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,
     We'll teach you-
  Kent.

     Call not your stocks for me.

     You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
     Against the grace and person of my master,
     Stocking his messenger.

  Corn.

  Reg.
  
  Reg.
 Sir, being his knave, I will.
 This is a fellow of the selfsame colour
     Our sister speaks of.
 Come, bring away the stocks!
                                             Stocks brought out.
 Let me beseech your Grace not to do so.

     His fault is much, and the good King his master
     Will check him for't.
 Your purpos'd low correction
     Is such as basest and contemn'dest wretches
     For pilf'rings and most common trespasses
     Are punish'd with.
 The King must take it ill
     That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,
     Should have him thus restrain'd.

  Reg.
 My sister may receive it much more worse,
     To have her gentleman abus'd, assaulted,
     For following her affairs.
 Put in his legs.
-
                                    [Kent is put in the stocks.
]
     Come, my good lord, away.
 'Tis the Duke's pleasure,  
     Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
     Will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd.

  Kent.
 Pray do not, sir.
 I have watch'd and travell'd hard.

     Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.

     A good man's fortune may grow out at heels.

     Give you good morrow!
  Glou.
 The Duke 's to blame in this; 'twill be ill taken.

  Kent.
 Nothing almost sees miracles
     But misery.

     Fortune, good night; smile once more, turn thy wheel.

                                                         Sleeps.





Scene III.


Enter Edgar.
 I heard myself proclaim'd,
     And by the happy hollow of a tree
     Escap'd the hunt.
 My face I'll grime with filth,
     Blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots,
     And with presented nakedness outface
     The winds and persecutions of the sky.

     The country gives me proof and precedent
     Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
     Strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms
     Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
     And with this horrible object, from low farms,  
     Poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills,
     Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
     Enforce their charity.
 'Poor Turlygod! poor Tom!'
     That's something yet! Edgar I nothing am.
             Exit.





Scene IV.


  Lear.
 'Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
     And not send back my messenger.

  Gent.
 As I learn'd,
     The night before there was no purpose in them
     Of this remove.
 Hail to thee, noble master!
  Lear.
 No, my lord.

  Fool.
 Ha, ha! look! he wears cruel garters.
 Horses are tied by the
     head, dogs and bears by th' neck, monkeys by th' loins, and men
     by th' legs.
 When a man's over-lusty at legs, then he wears
     wooden nether-stocks.

  Lear.
 What's he that hath so much thy place mistook
     To set thee here?
  Kent.
 It is both he and she-
     Your son and daughter.
  
  Lear.
 No.

  Kent.
 Yes.

  Lear.

  Lear.
 Yes, they have.
 'Tis worse than murther
     To do upon respect such violent outrage.

     Resolve me with all modest haste which way
     Thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage,
     Coming from us.

  Kent.
 My lord, when at their home
     I did commend your Highness' letters to them,
     Ere I was risen from the place that show'd
     My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
     Stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
     From Goneril his mistress salutations;  
     Deliver'd letters, spite of intermission,
     Which presently they read; on whose contents,
     They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse,
     Commanded me to follow and attend
     The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks,
     And meeting here the other messenger,
     Whose welcome I perceiv'd had poison'd mine-
     Being the very fellow which of late
     Display'd so saucily against your Highness-
     Having more man than wit about me, drew.

     He rais'd the house with loud and coward cries.

  Fool.
 Winter's not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way.

          Fortune, that arrant whore,  
          Ne'er turns the key to th' poor.


     But for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours for thy
     daughters as thou canst tell in a year.
 O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
     Hysterica passio! Down, thou climbing sorrow!
     Thy element's below! Where is this daughter?
  Kent.
 With the Earl, sir, here within.
 Follow me not;
     Stay here.
                                            Exit.
 None.

     How chance the King comes with so small a number?
  Fool.
 An thou hadst been set i' th' stocks for that question,
     thou'dst well deserv'd it.

  Kent.
 Why, fool?
  Fool.
 All that follow their noses are led by
     their eyes but blind men, and there's not a nose among twenty
     but can smell him that's stinking.
 Let go thy hold when a great  
     wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following
     it; but the great one that goes upward, let him draw thee after.

     When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again.

          That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
            And follows but for form,
          Will pack when it begins to rain
            And leave thee in the storm.

  Kent.
 Where learn'd you this, fool?
  Fool.
 Not i' th' stocks, fool.


                      Enter Lear and Gloucester

  Lear.
 Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?
     They have travell'd all the night? Mere fetches-
     The images of revolt and flying off!  
     Fetch me a better answer.

  Glou.
 My dear lord,
     You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
     How unremovable and fix'd he is
     In his own course.

  Lear.
 Vengeance! plague! death! confusion!
     Fiery? What quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,
     I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.

  Lear.
 Inform'd them? Dost thou understand me, man?
  Glou.
 Ay, my good lord.

  Lear.

     Are they inform'd of this? My breath and blood!
     Fiery? the fiery Duke? Tell the hot Duke that-
     No, but not yet! May be he is not well.
 We are not ourselves
     When nature, being oppress'd, commands the mind
     To suffer with the body.
 I'll forbear;  
     And am fallen out with my more headier will,
     To take the indispos'd and sickly fit
     For the sound man.

  Glou.

  Lear.
 Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she
     put 'em i' th' paste alive.


             Enter Cornwall, Regan, Gloucester, Servants.
 Good morrow to you both.
  
  Corn.

  Reg.
 I am glad to see your Highness.
 Regan, I think you are; I know what reason
     I have to think so.
 If thou shouldst not be glad,
     I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,
     Sepulchring an adultress.
 [To Kent] O, are you free?
     Some other time for that.
- Beloved Regan,
     Thy sister's naught.
 O Regan, she hath tied
     Sharp-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture, here!
                                   [Lays his hand on his heart.
]
     I can scarce speak to thee.
 Thou'lt not believe
     With how deprav'd a quality- O Regan!
  Reg.
 I pray you, sir, take patience.
 Say, how is that?
  Reg.
 I cannot think my sister in the least
     Would fail her obligation.
 You should be rul'd, and led
     By some discretion that discerns your state
     Better than you yourself.
 Ask her forgiveness?
     Do you but mark how this becomes the house:
     'Dear daughter, I confess that I am old.
]
     Age is unnecessary.
'
  Reg.

  Lear.

     All the stor'd vengeances of heaven fall
     On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,
     You taking airs, with lameness!
  Corn.
 O the blest gods! so will you wish on me
     When the rash mood is on.

  Lear.
 Her eyes are fierce; but thine
     Do comfort, and not burn.
 Thou better know'st
     The offices of nature, bond of childhood,  
     Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude.

     Thy half o' th' kingdom hast thou not forgot,
     Wherein I thee endow'd.

  Lear.
 Who put my man i' th' stocks?
  Corn.


     Is your lady come?
  Lear.
 This is a slave, whose easy-borrowed pride
     Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.

     Out, varlet, from my sight!
  Corn.
 What means your Grace?

                            Enter Goneril.
 Who stock'd my servant? Regan, I have good hope
     Thou didst not know on't.
- Who comes here? O heavens!
     If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
     Allow obedience- if yourselves are old,
     Make it your cause! Send down, and take my part!
     [To Goneril] Art not asham'd to look upon this beard?-
     O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?
  Gon.
 Why not by th' hand, sir? How have I offended?
     All's not offence that indiscretion finds
     And dotage terms so.
 O sides, you are too tough!
     Will you yet hold? How came my man i' th' stocks?
  Corn.
 You? Did you?
  Reg.
 I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.

     If, till the expiration of your month,
     You will return and sojourn with my sister,
     Dismissing half your train, come then to me.

     I am now from home, and out of that provision  
     Which shall be needful for your entertainment.

  Lear.
 Return with her?
     Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
     To this detested groom.
 At your choice, sir.

  Lear.
 Thou art a boil,
     A plague sore, an embossed carbuncle  
     In my corrupted blood.

     I do not bid the Thunder-bearer shoot
     Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove.

     Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure;
     I can be patient, I can stay with Regan,
     I and my hundred knights.

  Reg.
 Not altogether so.

  Lear.
 Is this well spoken?
  Reg.
 I dare avouch it, sir.
 What, fifty followers?
     Is it not well? What should you need of more?
     Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger
     Speak 'gainst so great a number? How in one house
     Should many people, under two commands,
     Hold amity? 'Tis hard; almost impossible.
 Why not, my lord? If then they chanc'd to slack ye,
     We could control them.
 If you will come to me
     (For now I spy a danger), I entreat you
     To bring but five-and-twenty.
 And in good time you gave it!
  Lear.
 Made you my guardians, my depositaries;
     But kept a reservation to be followed
     With such a number.
 What, must I come to you
     With five-and-twenty, Regan? Said you so?
  Reg.
 And speak't again my lord.
 Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour'd
     When others are more wicked; not being the worst
     Stands in some rank of praise.

     Thy fifty yet doth double five-and-twenty,
     And thou art twice her love.

  Gon.
 Hear, me, my lord.
 Thou art a lady:
     If only to go warm were gorgeous,
     Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st
     Which scarcely keeps thee warm.
 But, for true need-
     You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!
     You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
     As full of grief as age; wretched in both.

     I have full cause of weeping, but this heart
     Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws
     Or ere I'll weep.
 O fool, I shall go mad!
              Exeunt Lear, Gloucester, Kent, and Fool.
 Storm and
                                                        tempest.

  Corn.

  Gon.
 For his particular, I'll receive him gladly,
     But not one follower.

  Gon.

     Where is my Lord of Gloucester?
  Corn.
 Followed the old man forth.


     He is return'd.
 The King is in high rage.

  Corn.
 He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.

  Gon.
 Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds
     Do sorely ruffle.
 For many miles about
     There's scarce a bush.
 Shut up your doors.

     He is attended with a desperate train,
     And what they may incense him to, being apt
     To have his ear abus'd, wisdom bids fear.

  Corn.
 Shut up your doors, my lord: 'tis a wild night.

     My Regan counsels well.
 Come out o' th' storm.
        [Exeunt.
]




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 Scene I.

A heath.
 Enter Kent and a Gentleman at several doors.
 Who's there, besides foul weather?
  Gent.
 One minded like the weather, most unquietly.

  Kent.
 Where's the King?
  Gent.
 Contending with the fretful elements;
     Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
     Or swell the curled waters 'bove the main,
     That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,
     Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,
     Catch in their fury and make nothing of;
     Strives in his little world of man to outscorn
     The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.

     This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
     The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
     Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
     And bids what will take all.
 But who is with him?
  Gent.
 None but the fool, who labours to outjest  
     His heart-struck injuries.

  Kent.
 What hath been seen,
     Either in snuffs and packings of the Dukes,
     Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
     Against the old kind King, or something deeper,
     Whereof, perchance, these are but furnishings-
     But, true it is, from France there comes a power
     Into this scattered kingdom, who already,
     Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
     In some of our best ports and are at point
     To show their open banner.
 Now to you:
     If on my credit you dare build so far  
     To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
     Some that will thank you, making just report
     Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
     The King hath cause to plain.
 I will talk further with you.

  Kent.
 No, do not.

     For confirmation that I am much more
     Than my out-wall, open this purse and take
     What it contains.
 If you shall see Cordelia
     (As fear not but you shall), show her this ring,
     And she will tell you who your fellow is
     That yet you do not know.
 Fie on this storm!
     I will go seek the King.
 Give me your hand.
 Have you no more to say?
  Kent.
 Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet:
     That, when we have found the King (in which your pain
     That way, I'll this), he that first lights on him  
     Holla the other.


Storm still.


  Lear.
 O nuncle, court holy water in a dry house is better than this
     rain water out o' door.
 Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters
     blessing! Here's a night pities nether wise men nor fools.

  Lear.
 Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! spout, rain!
     Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters.

     I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness.

     I never gave you kingdom, call'd you children,
     You owe me no subscription.

     But yet I call you servile ministers,
     That will with two pernicious daughters join
     Your high-engender'd battles 'gainst a head
     So old and white as this! O! O! 'tis foul!
  Fool.
 He that has a house to put 's head in has a good head-piece.

          The codpiece that will house
            Before the head has any,
          The head and he shall louse:
            So beggars marry many.


                             Enter Kent.

  
  Lear.

  Kent.
 Who's there?
  Fool.
 Marry, here's grace and a codpiece; that's a wise man and a
     fool.
 Since I was man,
     Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
     Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
     Remember to have heard.
 Man's nature cannot carry
     Th' affliction nor the fear.

  Lear.
 Let the great gods,
     That keep this dreadful pudder o'er our heads,
     Find out their enemies now.
 Tremble, thou wretch,
     That hast within thee undivulged crimes
     Unwhipp'd of justice.
 Caitiff, in pieces shake  
     That under covert and convenient seeming
     Hast practis'd on man's life.
 Close pent-up guilts,
     Rive your concealing continents, and cry
     These dreadful summoners grace.
 Alack, bareheaded?
     Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
     Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest.

     Repose you there, whilst I to this hard house
     (More harder than the stones whereof 'tis rais'd,
     Which even but now, demanding after you,
     Denied me to come in) return, and force
     Their scanted courtesy.
 My wits begin to turn.

     Come on, my boy.
 Come, your hovel.
  
  Fool.
 Come, bring us to this hovel.
 I'll speak a
     prophecy ere I go:
          When priests are more in word than matter;
          When brewers mar their malt with water;
          When nobles are their tailors' tutors,
          No heretics burn'd, but wenches' suitors;
          When every case in law is right,
          No squire in debt nor no poor knight;
          When slanders do not live in tongues,
          Nor cutpurses come not to throngs;
          When usurers tell their gold i' th' field,  
          And bawds and whores do churches build:
          Then shall the realm of Albion
          Come to great confusion.

     This prophecy Merlin shall make, for I live before his time.

Gloucester's Castle.


Enter Gloucester and Edmund.
 Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing! When
     I desir'd their leave that I might pity him, they took from me
     the use of mine own house, charg'd me on pain of perpetual
     displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for him, nor any
     way sustain him.

  Edm.
 Go to; say you nothing.
 There is division betwixt the Dukes,
     and a worse matter than that.
 I have received a letter this
     night- 'tis dangerous to be spoken- I have lock'd the letter in
     my closet.
 I will seek him and privily relieve him.
 If he ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed.
 There is some strange thing toward, Edmund.

     Pray you be careful.
                                  Exit.
  
  Edm.
 This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the Duke
     Instantly know, and of that letter too.

     The younger rises when the old doth fall.
             Exit.





Scene IV.
 Before a hovel.


Storm still.
 Enter Lear, Kent, and Fool.
 Here is the place, my lord.
 Good my lord, enter.

  Lear.
 Let me alone.
 Good my lord, enter here.

  Lear.
 Good my lord, enter.

  Lear.
 The tempest in my mind
     Doth from my senses take all feeling else
     Save what beats there.
 In such a night
     'To shut me out! Pour on; I will endure.

  Kent.
 Prithee go in thyself; seek thine own ease.

     [To the Fool] In, boy; go first.
- You houseless poverty-
     Nay, get thee in.
 I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.

  Edg.
 [within] Fathom and half, fathom and half! Poor Tom!

                     Enter Fool [from the hovel].


  Fool.
 Come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit.
 Help me, help me!
  Kent.
 Give me thy hand.
 Who's there?
  Fool.

  Kent.
 Away! the foul fiend follows me! Through the sharp hawthorn
     blows the cold wind.
 Humh! go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.
 Hast thou given all to thy two daughters, and art thou come
     to this?
  Edg.
 Bless thy five
     wits! Tom 's acold.
 O, do de, do de, do de.
 Bless thee from
     whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some charity,
     whom the foul fiend vexes.
 There could I have him now- and there-
     and there again- and there!
                                                    Storm still.

  Lear.
 What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?
     Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give 'em all?
  Fool.
 Nay, he reserv'd a blanket, else we had been all sham'd.
 Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
     Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!
  Kent.
 He hath no daughters, sir.

  Lear.
 Death, traitor! nothing could have subdu'd nature
     To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
 'Allow, 'allow, loo, loo!
  Fool.

  Edg.
 Take heed o' th' foul fiend; obey thy parents: keep thy word
     justly; swear not; commit not with man's sworn spouse; set not
     thy sweet heart on proud array.
 Tom 's acold.

  Lear.
 A servingman, proud in heart and mind; that curl'd my hair,
     wore gloves in my cap; serv'd the lust of my mistress' heart and
     did the act of darkness with her; swore as many oaths as I spake
     words, and broke them in the sweet face of heaven; one that
     slept in the contriving of lust, and wak'd to do it.

     Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray
     thy poor heart to woman.
 Keep thy foot out of brothel, thy hand
     out of placket, thy pen from lender's book, and defy the foul
     fiend.
 Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind; says  
     suum, mun, hey, no, nonny.

                                                    Storm still.

  Lear.

                                         [Tears at his clothes.
]
  Fool.
 Now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher's
     heart- a small spark, all the rest on's body cold.
 Look, here
     comes a walking fire.


                    Enter Gloucester with a torch.


  Edg.
 He begins at curfew,  
     and walks till the first cock.
 He gives the web and the pin,
     squints the eye, and makes the harelip; mildews the white wheat,
     and hurts the poor creature of earth.


           Saint Withold footed thrice the 'old;
           He met the nightmare, and her nine fold;
              Bid her alight
              And her troth plight,
           And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!

  Kent.
 How fares your Grace?
  Lear.
 What's he?
  Kent.
 What are you there? Your names?
  Edg.
 Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the todpole,
     the wall-newt and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when
     the foul fiend rages, eats cow-dung for sallets, swallows the
     old rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the
     standing pool; who is whipp'd from tithing to tithing, and
     stock-punish'd and imprison'd; who hath had three suits to his  
     back, six shirts to his body, horse to ride, and weapons to
     wear;

          But mice and rats, and such small deer,
          Have been Tom's food for seven long year.
 Peace, Smulkin! peace, thou fiend!
  Glou.

  Glou.
 Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,
     That it doth hate what gets it.
 Poor Tom 's acold.

  Glou.
 Go in with me.

     Though their injunction be to bar my doors
     And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
     Yet have I ventur'd to come seek you out
     And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
 First let me talk with this philosopher.
  
     What is the cause of thunder?
  Kent.
 Good my lord, take his offer; go into th' house.

  Lear.

     What is your study?
  Edg.
 How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.

  Kent.
 Importune him once more to go, my lord.

     His wits begin t' unsettle.

  Glou.
 Canst thou blame him?
                                                    Storm still.

     His daughters seek his death.
 He sought my life
     But lately, very late.
 True to tell thee,
     The grief hath craz'd my wits.
 O, cry you mercy, sir.
 Tom's acold.

  Glou.
 Come, let's in all.

  Kent.
 This way, my lord.

  Lear.

  Kent.
 Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
 Sirrah, come on; go along with us.

  Lear.

  Glou.
 No words, no words! hush.

  Edg.
 Child Rowland to the dark tower came;
     His word was still

          Fie, foh, and fum!
          I smell the blood of a British man.

                                                         Exeunt.


Scene V.


Enter Cornwall and Edmund.


  Corn.
 I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.

  Edm.
 How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus gives way to
     loyalty, something fears me to think of.
 I now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil
     disposition made him seek his death; but a provoking merit, set
     awork by a reproveable badness in himself.
 How malicious is my fortune that I must repent to be just!
     This is the letter he spoke of, which approves him an
     intelligent party to the advantages of France.
 O heavens! that
     this treason were not- or not I the detector!
  Corn.
 Go with me to the Duchess.

  Edm.
 True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester.
 [aside] If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his  
     suspicion more fully.
 I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer
     father in my love.





Scene VI.

A farmhouse near Gloucester's Castle.


Enter Gloucester, Lear, Kent, Fool, and Edgar.


  Glou.
 Here is better than the open air; take it thankfully.
 I will not be
     long from you.

     The gods reward your kindness!
                                              Exit [Gloucester].

  Edg.
 Frateretto calls me, and tells me Nero is an angler in the
     lake of darkness.

  Fool.
 Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a
     yeoman.
 A king, a king!
  Fool.

  Lear.

  Fool.
 He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse's
     health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.
 It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.

     [To Edgar] Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer.

     [To the Fool] Thou, sapient sir, sit here.


  Fool.
      Her boat hath a leak,
             And she must not speak
           Why she dares not come over to thee.


  Edg.
 The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a nightingale.
 Croak
     not, black angel; I have no food for thee.

     Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
  Lear.
 I'll see their trial first.
 Bring in their evidence.

     [To Edgar] Thou, robed man of justice, take thy place.

  Edg.
 Let us deal justly.


          Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?
            Thy sheep be in the corn;
          And for one blast of thy minikin mouth
            Thy sheep shall take no harm.


     Purr! the cat is gray.

  Lear.

  Fool.
 Is your name Goneril?
  Lear.
 She cannot deny it.
 And here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim
     What store her heart is made on.
 Stop her there!
     Arms, arms! sword! fire! Corruption in the place!
     False justicer, why hast thou let her scape?
  Edg.
 O pity! Sir, where is the patience now
     That you so oft have boasted to retain?
  Edg.
 [aside] My tears begin to take his part so much
     They'll mar my counterfeiting.
 The little dogs and all,
     Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart, see, they bark at me.
 Tom will throw his head at them.
 Avaunt, you curs!
           Be thy mouth or black or white,
           Tooth that poisons if it bite;
           Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,
           Hound or spaniel, brach or lym,
           Bobtail tyke or trundle-tall-
           Tom will make them weep and wail;
           For, with throwing thus my head,
           Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.

     Do de, de, de.

  Lear.
 Then let them anatomize Regan.
 See what breeds about her
     heart.
 You'll
     say they are Persian attire; but let them be chang'd.

  Kent.
 Make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains.
 Come hither, friend.
 Where is the King my master?
  Kent.

  Glou.

     I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him.
 Take up thy master.

     If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
     With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
     Stand in assured loss.
 Take up, take up!
     And follow me, that will to some provision  
     Give thee quick conduct.

  Kent.
 [To the Fool] Come, help to bear thy master.
 Come, come, away!
                                         Exeunt [all but Edgar].

  Edg.
 When we our betters see bearing our woes,
     We scarcely think our miseries our foes.

     Who alone suffers suffers most i' th' mind,
     Leaving free things and happy shows behind;
     But then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip
     When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.
]




Scene VII.

Gloucester's Castle.


Enter Cornwall, Regan, Goneril, [Edmund the] Bastard, and Servants.
 [to Goneril] Post speedily to my lord your husband, show him
     this letter.
 The army of France is landed.
- Seek out the traitor
     Gloucester.

                                  [Exeunt some of the Servants.
]
  Reg.
 Hang him instantly.
 Edmund, keep you our sister
     company.
 The revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous
     father are not fit for your beholding.
 Advise the Duke where you
     are going, to a most festinate preparation.
 We are bound to the
     like.

     Farewell, dear sister; farewell, my Lord of Gloucester.


                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
 My Lord of Gloucester hath convey'd him hence.

     Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
     Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;
     Who, with some other of the lord's dependants,
     Are gone with him towards Dover, where they boast
     To have well-armed friends.
 Get horses for your mistress.

  Gon.
 Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.

  Corn.
 Edmund, farewell.

     Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
     Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
]
     Though well we may not pass upon his life
     Without the form of justice, yet our power
     Shall do a court'sy to our wrath, which men
     May blame, but not control.


            Enter Gloucester, brought in by two or three.

  
     Who's there? the traitor?
  Reg.

  Corn.
 Bind fast his corky arms.
 What mean, your Graces? Good my friends, consider
     You are my guests.
 Do me no foul play, friends.
 Bind him, I say.
]
  Reg.
 Hard, hard.
 Unmerciful lady as you are, I am none.

  Corn.
 To this chair bind him.
 Villain, thou shalt find-
                                       [Regan plucks his beard.

  Reg.
 Naughty lady,
     These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin
     Will quicken, and accuse thee.
 I am your host.

     With robber's hands my hospitable favours
     You should not ruffle thus.

  Corn.
 And what confederacy have you with the traitors
     Late footed in the kingdom?
  Reg.

  Corn.
 Cunning.

  Reg.
 And false.
 Where hast thou sent the King?
  Glou.
 To Dover.

  Reg.

  Glou.

  Reg.
 Wherefore to Dover, sir?
  Glou.

     The sea, with such a storm as his bare head  
     In hell-black night endur'd, would have buoy'd up
     And quench'd the steeled fires.

     If wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time,
     Thou shouldst have said, 'Good porter, turn the key.

  Corn.
 See't shalt thou never.
 Fellows, hold the chair.

  Glou.
 He that will think to live till he be old,
     Give me some help!- O cruel! O ye gods!
  Reg.
 One side will mock another.
 Th' other too!
  Corn.
 Serv.
 Hold your hand, my lord!
     I have serv'd you ever since I was a child;
     But better service have I never done you
     Than now to bid you hold.

  Reg.
 If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
     I'ld shake it on this quarrel.
 My villain!                               Draw and fight.

  1.
 Serv.
 Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.

  Reg.
 A peasant stand up thus?
                        She takes a sword and runs at him behind.
 Serv.
 O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left
     To see some mischief on him.
 O!                     He dies.

  Corn.
 Out, vile jelly!
     Where is thy lustre now?
  Glou.

  Reg.
 It was he
     That made the overture of thy treasons to us;
     Who is too good to pity thee.

  Glou.

     How is't, my lord? How look you?
  Corn.

     Untimely comes this hurt.

                                  Exit [Cornwall, led by Regan].

  2.
 Serv.

  3.
 Serv.
 If she live long,
     And in the end meet the old course of death,
     Women will all turn monsters.

  2.
 Serv.
 His roguish madness
     Allows itself to anything.

  3.
 Serv.
 I'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs
     To apply to his bleeding face.
 Now heaven help him!
                                                         Exeunt.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT IV.
 Scene I.


  Edg.

     The lamentable change is from the best;
     The worst returns to laughter.

  Old Man.
 O my good lord,  
     I have been your tenant, and your father's tenant,
     These fourscore years.

  Glou.
 Away, get thee away! Good friend, be gone.

     Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
     Thee they may hurt.

  Old Man.
 You cannot see your way.

  Glou.
 Full oft 'tis seen
     Our means secure us, and our mere defects
     Prove our commodities.
 How now? Who's there?
  Edg.

  Old Man.
 'Tis poor mad Tom.

  Edg.
 [aside] And worse I may be yet.
 Fellow, where goest?  
  Glou.
 Madman and beggar too.

  Glou.

     I' th' last night's storm I such a fellow saw,
     Which made me think a man a worm.
 My son
     Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
     Was then scarce friends with him.

     As flies to wanton boys are we to th' gods.

     They kill us for their sport.
 [aside] How should this be?
     Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
     Ang'ring itself and others.
 Is that the naked fellow?
  Old Man.
 Ay, my lord.
 If for my sake
     Thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain
     I' th' way toward Dover, do it for ancient love;
     And bring some covering for this naked soul,
     Who I'll entreat to lead me.

  Old Man.

     Above the rest, be gone.

  Old Man.
 I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have,
     Come on't what will.

  Glou.
 Poor Tom's acold.

  Glou.
 Come hither, fellow.

  Edg.
- Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
 Know'st thou the way to Dover?
  Edg.
 Both stile and gate, horseway and footpath.
 Poor Tom hath been
     scar'd out of his good wits.
 Bless thee, good man's son, from
     the foul fiend! Five fiends have been in poor Tom at once: of
     lust, as Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of dumbness; Mahu, of
     stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet, of mopping and
     mowing, who since possesses chambermaids and waiting women.
 That I am wretched
     Makes thee the happier.
 Dost thou know Dover?
  Edg.

  Glou.
 There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
     Looks fearfully in the confined deep.

     Bring me but to the very brim of it,
     And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
     With something rich about me.
 From that place
     I shall no leading need.

  Edg.

     Poor Tom shall lead thee.

                                                         Exeunt.





Scene II.

Before the Duke of Albany's Palace.
 Madam, within, but never man so chang'd.
 I told him you were coming:
     His answer was, 'The worse.

  Gon.

     It is the cowish terror of his spirit,  
     That dares not undertake.
 Our wishes on the way
     May prove effects.

     I must change arms at home and give the distaff
     Into my husband's hands.
 Wear this.
]
     Spare speech.

     Decline your head.
 Yours in the ranks of death!                        Exit.
 Madam, here comes my lord.

  
                            Enter Albany.


  Gon.
 I have been worth the whistle.
 O Goneril,
     You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
     Blows in your face! I fear your disposition.

     That nature which contemns it origin
     Cannot be bordered certain in itself.

     She that herself will sliver and disbranch
     From her material sap, perforce must wither
     And come to deadly use.

  Gon.
 No more! The text is foolish.

  Alb.
 Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile;
     Filths savour but themselves.
 What have you done?
     Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform'd?
     A father, and a gracious aged man,
     Whose reverence even the head-lugg'd bear would lick,
     Most barbarous, most degenerate, have you madded.

  Gon.
 Milk-liver'd man!
     That bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;
     Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
     Thine honour from thy suffering; that not know'st
     Fools do those villains pity who are punish'd
     Ere they have done their mischief.
 Where's thy drum?
     France spreads his banners in our noiseless land,
     With plumed helm thy state begins to threat,
     Whiles thou, a moral fool, sit'st still, and criest
     'Alack, why does he so?'
  Alb.
 See thyself, devil!
     Proper deformity seems not in the fiend
     So horrid as in woman.

  Gon.

  Gon.
 Marry, your manhood mew!

                          Enter a Gentleman.


  Alb.
 What news?
  Gent.

  Alb.
 Gloucester's eyes?
  Gent.
  
  Alb.

     This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer.

     'Tis from your sister.
 [aside] One way I like this well;
     But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
     May all the building in my fancy pluck
     Upon my hateful life.
 Another way
     The news is not so tart.
- I'll read, and answer.

  Alb.
 Come with my lady hither.

  Alb.
 He is not here.

  Gent.
 No, my good lord; I met him back again.
 Knows he the wickedness?
  Gent.
 Ay, my good lord.
 'Twas he inform'd against him,
     And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment  
     Might have the freer course.

  Alb.
 Gloucester, I live
     To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the King,
     And to revenge thine eyes.
 Come hither, friend.

     Tell me what more thou know'st.


  Kent.
 Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back know you the
     reason?
  Gent.
 Who hath he left behind him general?
  Gent.
 Ay, sir.
 She took them, read them in my presence,
     And now and then an ample tear trill'd down
     Her delicate cheek.
 It seem'd she was a queen
     Over her passion, who, most rebel-like,
     Sought to be king o'er her.

  Kent.
 O, then it mov'd her?
  Gent.
 Not to a rage.
 Patience and sorrow strove  
     Who should express her goodliest.
 You have seen
     Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears
     Were like, a better way.
 Those happy smilets
     That play'd on her ripe lip seem'd not to know
     What guests were in her eyes, which parted thence
     As pearls from diamonds dropp'd.

  Kent.
 Faith, once or twice she heav'd the name of father
     Pantingly forth, as if it press'd her heart;
     Cried 'Sisters, sisters! Shame of ladies! Sisters!
     Kent! father! sisters! What, i' th' storm? i' th' night?
     Let pity not be believ'd!' There she shook
     The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
     And clamour moisten'd.
 It is the stars,
     The stars above us, govern our conditions;
     Else one self mate and mate could not beget  
     Such different issues.
 You spoke not with her since?
  Gent.

  Kent.
 Was this before the King return'd?
  Gent.
 No, since.

  Kent.
 Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' th' town;
     Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
     What we are come about, and by no means
     Will yield to see his daughter.
 A sovereign shame so elbows him; his own unkindness,
     That stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her
     To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
     To his dog-hearted daughters- these things sting
     His mind so venomously that burning shame
     Detains him from Cordelia.
 Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not?
  Gent.
 'Tis so; they are afoot.

  Kent.
 Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear
     And leave you to attend him.
 Some dear cause  
     Will in concealment wrap me up awhile.
 I pray you go
     Along with me.
                                      Exeunt.


Enter, with Drum and Colours, Cordelia, Doctor, and Soldiers.
 Alack, 'tis he! Why, he was met even now
     As mad as the vex'd sea, singing aloud,
     Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow weeds,
     With hardocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo flow'rs,
     Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
     In our sustaining corn.
 A century send forth.

     Search every acre in the high-grown field
     And bring him to our eye.
 [Exit an Officer.
] What can man's
        wisdom
     In the restoring his bereaved sense?
     He that helps him take all my outward worth.

  Doct.
 There is means, madam.
 That to provoke in him
     Are many simples operative, whose power
     Will close the eye of anguish.
 All blest secrets,  
     All you unpublish'd virtues of the earth,
     Spring with my tears! be aidant and remediate
     In the good man's distress! Seek, seek for him!
     Lest his ungovern'd rage dissolve the life
     That wants the means to lead it.


                           Enter Messenger.


  Mess.
 News, madam.

     The British pow'rs are marching hitherward.

  Cor.

     Soon may I hear and see him!
                                                         Exeunt.





Scene V.


Enter Regan and [Oswald the] Steward.

  Reg.
 Himself in person there?
  Osw.
 Madam, with much ado.
 Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
  Osw.
 No, madam.

  Reg.

  Reg.
 Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
 Where he arrives he moves
     All hearts against us.

  Osw.
 I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
  
  Reg.
 Stay with us.

     The ways are dangerous.

  Osw.

  Reg.

  Osw.
 Madam, I had rather-
  Reg.
 I know your lady does not love her husband;
     I am sure of that; and at her late being here
     She gave strange eliads and most speaking looks
     To noble Edmund.
 I know you are of her bosom.
 I, madam?
  Reg.
 I speak in understanding.

     Therefore I do advise you take this note.

     My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talk'd,
     And more convenient is he for my hand
     Than for your lady's.

  Osw.

  Reg.
                                   Exeunt.


Enter Gloucester, and Edgar [like a Peasant].


  Glou.
 When shall I come to th' top of that same hill?
  Edg.

  Glou.
 Methinks the ground is even.

  Edg.

     Hark, do you hear the sea?
  Glou.
 No, truly.

  Edg.

  Glou.
 So may it be indeed.

     Methinks thy voice is alter'd, and thou speak'st
     In better phrase and matter than thou didst.

  Edg.
 Y'are much deceiv'd.
 In nothing am I chang'd
     But in my garments.

  Glou.
 Come on, sir; here's the place.
 Stand still.
 How fearful
     And dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low!
     The crows and choughs that wing the midway air  
     Show scarce so gross as beetles.
 Halfway down
     Hangs one that gathers sampire- dreadful trade!
     Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.

     The fishermen that walk upon the beach
     Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,
     Diminish'd to her cock; her cock, a buoy
     Almost too small for sight.
 I'll look no more,
     Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
     Topple down headlong.

  Glou.

  Edg.
 Give me your hand.
 Let go my hand.

     Here, friend, is another purse; in it a jewel
     Well worth a poor man's taking.
 Fairies and gods
     Prosper it with thee! Go thou further off;
     Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
 Now fare ye well, good sir.

  Edg.
 [aside].
 Why I do trifle thus with his despair
     Is done to cure it.

     This world I do renounce, and, in your sights,
     Shake patiently my great affliction off.

     If I could bear it longer and not fall
     To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
     My snuff and loathed part of nature should
     Burn itself out.
 If Edgar live, O, bless him!
     Now, fellow, fare thee well.

                                  He falls [forward and swoons].

  Edg.
 Gone, sir, farewell.
-
     And yet I know not how conceit may rob
     The treasury of life when life itself
     Yields to the theft.
 Had he been where he thought,
     By this had thought been past.
- Alive or dead?
     Ho you, sir! friend! Hear you, sir? Speak!-
     Thus might he pass indeed.
 Yet he revives.
  
     What are you, sir?
  Glou.

     Ten masts at each make not the altitude
     Which thou hast perpendicularly fell.

     Thy life is a miracle.
 Speak yet again.

  Glou.
 But have I fall'n, or no?
  Edg.

     Look up a-height.
 The shrill-gorg'd lark so far
     Cannot be seen or heard.
 Do but look up.
 Alack, I have no eyes!
     Is wretchedness depriv'd that benefit
     To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort
     When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage
     And frustrate his proud will.
 Give me your arm.

     Up- so.
 How is't? Feel you your legs? You stand.
 Too well, too well.

  Edg.
 This is above all strangeness.

     Upon the crown o' th' cliff what thing was that
     Which parted from you?
  Glou.
 A poor unfortunate beggar.

  Edg.
 As I stood here below, methought his eyes
     Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,
     Horns whelk'd and wav'd like the enridged sea.

  Glou.
 Bear free and patient thoughts.

  Lear.
 No, they cannot touch me for coming;
     I am the King himself.

  Edg.
 That fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper.
 Look, look, a mouse! Peace, peace; this piece
     of toasted cheese will do't.
 Sweet marjoram.
 Pass.
 Ha! Goneril with a white beard? They flatter'd me like a dog,
     and told me I had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones
     were there.
 'Tis a lie- I am not ague-proof.

  Glou.
 The trick of that voice I do well remember.

     Is't not the King?
  Lear.
 What was thy cause?
     Adultery?
     Thou shalt not die.

     Let copulation thrive; for Gloucester's bastard son
     Was kinder to his father than my daughters
     Got 'tween the lawful sheets.

     Down from the waist they are Centaurs,
     Though women all above.

     But to the girdle do the gods inherit,
     Beneath is all the fiend's.

     There's hell, there's darkness, there's the sulphurous pit;
     burning, scalding, stench, consumption.
 Fie, fie, fie! pah, pah!
     Give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, to sweeten my
     imagination.
 There's money for thee.
 Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.
 I remember thine eyes well enough.
 What, with the case of eyes?
  Lear.
 Yet you see how this world goes.
 I see it feelingly.
 What, art mad? A man may see how the world goes with no eyes.
 See how yond justice rails upon yond
     simple thief.
 Change places and, handy-dandy,
     which is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen a
     farmer's dog bark at a beggar?
  Glou.
 Ay, sir.

  Lear.

     Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
     Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back.
 The usurer hangs the cozener.

     Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
     To seal th' accuser's lips.
 Get thee glass eyes
     And, like a scurvy politician, seem
     To see the things thou dost not.
 Harder, harder! So.
 If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.

     I know thee well enough; thy name is Gloucester.

     Thou must be patient.
 I will preach to thee.
 Mark.

  Glou.
 I'll put't in proof,  
     And when I have stol'n upon these sons-in-law,
     Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!

                 Enter a Gentleman [with Attendants].
- Sir,
     Your most dear daughter-
  Lear.
 No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even
     The natural fool of fortune.
 Use me well;
     You shall have ransom.
 Let me have a surgeon;
     I am cut to th' brains.

  Gent.
 You shall have anything.
 Good sir-
  Lear.
 I will die bravely, like a smug bridegroom.
 Come, come, I am a king;
     My masters, know you that?  
  Gent.
 You are a royal one, and we obey you.

  Lear.
 Sa, sa, sa, sa!
                              Exit running.
 [Attendants follow.
]
  Gent.

  Edg.
 Hail, gentle sir.

  Gent.
 Sir, speed you.
 What's your will?
  Edg.
 Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?
  Gent.
 Most sure and vulgar.
 Every one hears that
     Which can distinguish sound.

  Edg.
 Near and on speedy foot.
 The main descry
     Stands on the hourly thought.

  Edg.
 Though that the Queen on special cause is here,
     Her army is mov'd on.
  
  Edg.
 I thank you, sir
                                               Exit [Gentleman].
 Now, good sir, what are you?
  Edg.
 Give me your hand;
     I'll lead you to some biding.

  Glou.
 Hearty thanks.

     The bounty and the benison of heaven
     To boot, and boot!

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.


  Osw.
 A proclaim'd prize! Most happy!
     That eyeless head of thine was first fram'd flesh
     To raise my fortunes.
 Thou old unhappy traitor,  
     Briefly thyself remember.

  Glou.

                                             [Edgar interposes.
]
  Osw.
 Let go his arm.

  Edg.
 Chill not let go, zir, without vurther 'cagion.
 Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor voke pass.
 Nay, come not near th' old man.
 Keep out,
     che vore ye, or Ise try whether your costard or my ballow be the
     harder.
 Chill be plain with you.

  Osw.

  Edg.
 Chill pick your teeth, zir.

                                                 [Oswald falls.

     If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,
     And give the letters which thou find'st about me
     To Edmund Earl of Gloucester.
 Seek him out
     Upon the British party.
 O, untimely death! Death!
                                                        He dies.
 I know thee well.

  Glou.
 What, is he dead?
  Edg.

     Let's see his pockets; these letters that he speaks of
     May be my friends.
 He's dead.

     To know our enemies' minds, we'ld rip their hearts;
     Their papers, is more lawful.
             Reads the letter.


       'Let our reciprocal vows be rememb'red.
'

     O indistinguish'd space of woman's will!
     A plot upon her virtuous husband's life,
     And the exchange my brother! Here in the sands
     Thee I'll rake up, the post unsanctified
     Of murtherous lechers; and in the mature time
     With this ungracious paper strike the sight
     Of the death-practis'd Duke, For him 'tis well
     That of thy death and business I can tell.

  Glou.

     So should my thoughts be sever'd from my griefs,
     And woes by wrong imaginations lose  
     The knowledge of themselves.
 Give me your hand.

     Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.

  Kent.
 To be acknowledg'd, madam, is o'erpaid.

     All my reports go with the modest truth;
     Nor more nor clipp'd, but so.
 Be better suited.

     These weeds are memories of those worser hours.

     I prithee put them off.

  Kent.
 Pardon, dear madam.

     Yet to be known shortens my made intent.

  Cor.
 [To the Doctor] How, does the King?
  Doct.

  Cor.
 O you kind gods,
     Cure this great breach in his abused nature!  
     Th' untun'd and jarring senses, O, wind up
     Of this child-changed father!
  Doct.

  Cor.


  Gent.
 Ay, madam.

  Doct.

     I doubt not of his temperance.
 Very well.
 Please you draw near.
 Louder the music there!
  Cor.
 O my dear father, restoration hang
     Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss
     Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
     Have in thy reverence made!  
  Kent.
 Had you not been their father, these white flakes
     Had challeng'd pity of them.
 Was this a face
     To be oppos'd against the warring winds?
     To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
     In the most terrible and nimble stroke
     Of quick cross lightning? to watch- poor perdu!-
     With this thin helm? Mine enemy's dog,
     Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
     Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,
     To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn,
     In short and musty straw? Alack, alack!
     'Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
     Had not concluded all.
- He wakes.
 Speak to him.
 You do me wrong to take me out o' th' grave.

     Thou art a soul in bliss; but I am bound
     Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
     Do scald like molten lead.
 Sir, do you know me?
  Lear.
 You are a spirit, I know.
 When did you die?
  Cor.
 He's scarce awake.
 Let him alone awhile.

  Lear.
 I should e'en die with pity,
     To see another thus.
 I know not what to say.

     I will not swear these are my hands.

     I feel this pin prick.
 O, look upon me, sir,
     And hold your hands in benediction o'er me.

  Lear.
 Pray, do not mock me.

     Methinks I should know you, and know this man;
     Yet I am doubtful; for I am mainly ignorant  
     What place this is; and all the skill I have
     Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
     Where I did lodge last night.
 Do not laugh at me;
     For (as I am a man) I think this lady
     To be my child Cordelia.

  Cor.
 Be your tears wet? Yes, faith.
 I pray weep not.

     I know you do not love me; for your sisters
     Have, as I do remember, done me wrong.

  Cor.
 No cause, no cause.

  Lear.
 Am I in France?
  Kent.
 The great rage
     You see is kill'd in him; and yet it is danger
     To make him even o'er the time he has lost.

     Desire him to go in.
 Trouble him no more
     Till further settling.
 Will't please your Highness walk?
  Lear.

     Pray you now, forget and forgive.
 I am old and foolish.

                              Exeunt.
 Manent Kent and Gentleman.

  Gent.
 Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?
  Kent.
 Most certain, sir.
 As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.

  Gent.

  Kent.
 Report is changeable.

  Gent.
 The arbitrement is like to be bloody.

     Fare you well, sir.
]
  Kent.
        Exit.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.
 Scene I.


Enter, with Drum and Colours, Edmund, Regan, Gentleman, and Soldiers.
 He's full of alteration
     And self-reproving.
 Bring his constant pleasure.

                                              [Exit an Officer.
]
  Reg.

  Edm.
 Tis to be doubted, madam.

  Reg.
 Now, sweet lord,
     You know the goodness I intend upon you.

     Tell me- but truly- but then speak the truth-
     Do you not love my sister?
  Edm.
 In honour'd love.
 But have you never found my brother's way
     To the forfended place?
  Edm.
 That thought abuses you.

  Reg.

  Edm.
 I never shall endure her.

  Edm.

     She and the Duke her husband!

       Enter, with Drum and Colours, Albany, Goneril, Soldiers.


  Gon.

  Alb.
 Our very loving sister, well bemet.
 Where I could not be honest,
     I never yet was valiant.

  Edm.
 Sir, you speak nobly.
 Why is this reason'd?
  Gon.
 Combine together 'gainst the enemy;
     For these domestic and particular broils
     Are not the question here.

  Alb.

  Edm.
 No.
 'Tis most convenient.
 [aside] O, ho, I know the riddle.
- I will go.

  Alb.

     If you have victory, let the trumpet sound  
     For him that brought it.
 Wretched though I seem,
     I can produce a champion that will prove
     What is avouched there.
 Fortune love you!
  Alb.
 Stay till I have read the letter.

  Edg.

  Alb.
 Why, fare thee well.

                                                   Exit [Edgar].


                            Enter Edmund.


  Edm.

     Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
     By diligent discovery; but your haste
     Is now urg'd on you.

  Alb.
 We will greet the time.

  Edm.
 Now then, we'll use
     His countenance for the battle, which being done,
     Let her who would be rid of him devise
     His speedy taking off.
 As for the mercy
     Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia-
     The battle done, and they within our power,
     Shall never see his pardon; for my state
     Stands on me to defend, not to debate.
                Exit.

A field between the two camps.
 Enter, with Drum and Colours, the Powers of France
over the stage, Cordelia with her Father in her hand, and exeunt.


  Edg.
 Here, father, take the shadow of this tree
     For your good host.

     If ever I return to you again,
     I'll bring you comfort.

  Glou.
 Grace go with you, sir!
                                                   Exit [Edgar].
 Enter Edgar,

  Edg.
 Away, old man! give me thy hand! away!
     King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en.

     Give me thy hand! come on!
  Glou.
 No further, sir.
  
  Edg.
 Come on.

  Glou.
                             Exeunt.





Scene III.


Enter, in conquest, with Drum and Colours, Edmund; Lear and Cordelia
as prisoners; Soldiers, Captain.
 Good guard
     Until their greater pleasures first be known
     That are to censure them.
 No, no, no, no! Come, let's away to prison.

     We two alone will sing like birds i' th' cage.
 So we'll live,
     And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
     At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
     Talk of court news; and we'll talk with them too-
     Who loses and who wins; who's in, who's out-  
     And take upon 's the mystery of things,
     As if we were God's spies; and we'll wear out,
     In a wall'd prison, packs and sects of great ones
     That ebb and flow by th' moon.
 Take them away.

  Lear.
 Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
     The gods themselves throw incense.
 Have I caught thee?
     He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven
     And fire us hence like foxes.
 Wipe thine eyes.

     Come.
                  Exeunt [Lear and Cordelia, guarded].

  Edm.

     Take thou this note [gives a paper].
 Go follow them to prison.
 Know thou this, that men
     Are as the time is.
 To be tender-minded
     Does not become a sword.
 Thy great employment
     Will not bear question.
 Either say thou'lt do't,  
     Or thrive by other means.

  Capt.
 I'll do't, my lord.

  Edm.
 About it! and write happy when th' hast done.

     Mark- I say, instantly; and carry it so
     As I have set it down.
                       Exit.
 Enter Albany, Goneril, Regan, Soldiers.

     We do require them of you, so to use them
     As we shall find their merits and our safety
     May equally determine.

  Edm.
 With him I sent the Queen,
     My reason all the same; and they are ready
     To-morrow, or at further space, t' appear
     Where you shall hold your session.
 At this time
     We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;
     And the best quarrels, in the heat, are curs'd
     By those that feel their sharpness.

  Reg.
 He led our powers,
     Bore the commission of my place and person,
     The which immediacy may well stand up
     And call itself your brother.

  Reg.
 That were the most if he should husband you.
 Jesters do oft prove prophets.

  Gon.
 Holla, holla!
     That eye that told you so look'd but asquint.
 General,
     Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
     Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine.

  Gon.
 The let-alone lies not in your good will.

  Edm.
 Nor in thine, lord.

  Alb.
  
  Alb.
 Stay yet; hear reason.
 Edmund, I arrest thee
     On capital treason; and, in thine attaint,
     This gilded serpent [points to Goneril].
 For your claim, fair
        sister,
     I bar it in the interest of my wife.

     'Tis she is subcontracted to this lord,
     And I, her husband, contradict your banes.
 Thou art arm'd, Gloucester.

     If none appear to prove upon thy person
     Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
     There is my pledge [throws down a glove]! I'll prove it on thy
        heart,
     Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
     Than I have here proclaim'd thee.
 Sick, O, sick!
  Gon.
 What in the world  
        he is
     That names me traitor, villain-like he lies.

     Call by thy trumpet.

  Alb.
 A herald, ho, a herald!
  Alb.
 Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,
     All levied in my name, have in my name
     Took their discharge.

  Alb.
 Convey her to my tent.

                                              [Exit Regan, led.


     Come hither, herald.

  Capt.
 Sound, trumpet!                        A trumpet sounds.

  
  Her.
 (reads) 'If any man of quality or degree within the lists of
     the army will maintain upon Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloucester,
     that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third sound
     of the trumpet.
 He is bold in his defence.
'

  Edm.
 Sound!                                     First trumpet.
 Again!                                    Second trumpet.

  Her.

                                         Trumpet answers within.


  Alb.
 Ask him his purposes, why he appears
     Upon this call o' th' trumpet.

  Her.
 What are you?
     Your name, your quality? and why you answer
     This present summons?
  Edg.
 Know my name is lost;
     By treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.

     Yet am I noble as the adversary  
     I come to cope.

  Alb.
 Himself.
 What say'st thou to him?
  Edg.
 Draw thy sword,
     That, if my speech offend a noble heart,
     Thy arm may do thee justice.
 Here is mine.
 I protest-
     Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence,
     Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,
     Thy valour and thy heart- thou art a traitor;
     False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
     Conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince;
     And from th' extremest upward of thy head
     To the descent and dust beneath thy foot,
     A most toad-spotted traitor.
 Say thou 'no,'
     This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent
     To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
     Thou liest.
  
  Edm.

     Back do I toss those treasons to thy head;
     With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart;
     Which- for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise-
     This sword of mine shall give them instant way
     Where they shall rest for ever.
 Trumpets, speak!
                                 Alarums.
 Fight.
 This is mere practice, Gloucester.
 Thou art not vanquish'd,
     But cozen'd and beguil'd.

  Alb.
 Shut your mouth, dame,
     Or with this paper shall I stop it.
 [Shows her her letter to
     Edmund.
]- [To Edmund].
 Hold, sir.
  
     No tearing, lady! I perceive you know it.

  Gon.
                             Exit.
 Go after her.
 She's desperate; govern her.

                                              [Exit an Officer.
 What, you have charg'd me with, that have I done,
     And more, much more.
 The time will bring it out.

     'Tis past, and so am I.

  Edg.
 Let's exchange charity.

     My name is Edgar and thy father's son.

     The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
     Make instruments to scourge us.

     The dark and vicious place where thee he got  
     Cost him his eyes.
 Th' hast spoken right; 'tis true.

  Alb.
 Methought thy very gait did prophesy
     A royal nobleness.
 I must embrace thee.

     Let sorrow split my heart if ever I
     Did hate thee, or thy father!
  Edg.

  Alb.
 Where have you hid yourself?
     How have you known the miseries of your father?
  Edg.
 By nursing them, my lord.
 List a brief tale;
     And when 'tis told, O that my heart would burst!
     The bloody proclamation to escape
     That follow'd me so near (O, our lives' sweetness!
     That with the pain of death would hourly die
     Rather than die at once!) taught me to shift
     Into a madman's rags, t' assume a semblance
     That very dogs disdain'd; and in this habit
     Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
     Their precious stones new lost; became his guide,  
     Led him, begg'd for him, sav'd him from despair;
     Never (O fault!) reveal'd myself unto him
     Until some half hour past, when I was arm'd,
     Not sure, though hoping of this good success,
     I ask'd his blessing, and from first to last
     Told him my pilgrimage.
 But his flaw'd heart
     (Alack, too weak the conflict to support!)
     'Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
     Burst smilingly.

  Alb.
 If there be more, more woful, hold it in;
     For I am almost ready to dissolve,
     Hearing of this.
 This would have seem'd a period
     To such as love not sorrow; but another,
     To amplify too much, would make much more,
     And top extremity.

     Whilst I was big in clamour, came there a man,  
     Who, having seen me in my worst estate,
     Shunn'd my abhorr'd society; but then, finding
     Who 'twas that so endur'd, with his strong arms
     He fastened on my neck, and bellowed out
     As he'd burst heaven; threw him on my father;
     Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
     That ever ear receiv'd; which in recounting
     His grief grew puissant, and the strings of life
     Began to crack.
 Twice then the trumpets sounded,
     And there I left him tranc'd.
 But who was this?
  Edg.
 Kent, sir, the banish'd Kent; who in disguise
     Followed his enemy king and did him service
     Improper for a slave.


                Enter a Gentleman with a bloody knife.
 Help, help! O, help!
  Edg.
 What kind of help?
  Alb.
 Speak, man.
  
  Edg.
 'Tis hot, it smokes.

  Gent.
 I was contracted to them both.


                             Enter Kent.
 Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead.

                                               [Exit Gentleman.
 O, is this he?
     The time will not allow the compliment
     That very manners urges.

  Kent.

     Seest thou this object, Kent?
  Kent.
 Alack, why thus?
  Edm.
 Yet Edmund was belov'd.

     The one the other poisoned for my sake,
     And after slew herself.

  Alb.
 Even so.
 Cover their faces.
 I pant for life.
 Some good I mean to do,
     Despite of mine own nature.
 Quickly send
     (Be brief in't) to the castle; for my writ
     Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia.

     Nay, send in time.
 Well thought on.
 Take my sword;
     Give it the Captain.
 Haste thee for thy life.
                    [Exit Edgar.
]
  Edm.
 He hath commission from thy wife and me
     To hang Cordelia in the prison and
     To lay the blame upon her own despair
     That she fordid herself.

  Alb.
]

    Enter Lear, with Cordelia [dead] in his arms, [Edgar, Captain,
                        and others following].
 Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stone.

     Had I your tongues and eyes, I'ld use them so
     That heaven's vault should crack.
 Lend me a looking glass.

  Kent.
 Or image of that horror?  
  Alb.
 Fall and cease!
  Lear.
 This feather stirs; she lives! If it be so,
     It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
     That ever I have felt.

  Kent.
 O my good master!
  Lear.
 Prithee away!
  Edg.
 'Tis noble Kent, your friend.
 A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!
     I might have sav'd her; now she's gone for ever!
     Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little.

     I kill'd the slave that was a-hanging thee.
 'Tis true, my lords, he did.

  Lear.
 I am old now,
     And these same crosses spoil me.
 Who are you?
     Mine eyes are not o' th' best.
 This' a dull sight.
 Are you not Kent?
  Kent.

     He'll strike, and quickly too.
 He's dead and rotten.

  Kent.
 No, my good lord; I am the very man-
  Lear.
 I'll see that straight.
 That from your first of difference and decay
     Have followed your sad steps.
 You're welcome hither.

  Kent.

     Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
     And desperately are dead.

  Lear.
 Ay, so I think.

  Alb.
  

  Capt.
 Edmund is dead, my lord.

  Alb.
 That's but a trifle here.
- All friends shall taste
     The wages of their virtue, and all foes
     The cup of their deservings.
- O, see, see!
  Lear.
 And my poor fool is hang'd! No, no, no life!
     Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
     And thou no breath at all? Thou'lt come no more,
     Never, never, never, never, never!
     Pray you undo this button.
 Thank you, sir.

     Do you see this? Look on her! look! her lips!
     Look there, look there!                            He dies.
 He faints! My lord, my lord!
  Kent.
 Break, heart; I prithee break!
  Edg.
 Look up, my lord.

  Kent.
 O, let him pass! He hates him
     That would upon the rack of this tough world
     Stretch him out longer.
 He is gone indeed.

  Kent.
 The wonder is, he hath endur'd so long.

  Alb.
 Bear them from hence.
 [To Kent and Edgar] Friends of my soul, you
        twain
     Rule in this realm, and the gor'd state sustain.

  Kent.
 I have a journey, sir, shortly to go.
 The weight of this sad time we must obey,
     Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.

     The oldest have borne most; we that are young
     Shall never see so much, nor live so long.

                                       Exeunt with a dead march.



THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



SCENE:
Navarre


ACT I.
 SCENE I.

Navarre.
 The King's park

Enter the King, BEROWNE, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN

  KING.
 Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
    Live regist'red upon our brazen tombs,
    And then grace us in the disgrace of death;
    When, spite of cormorant devouring Time,
    Th' endeavour of this present breath may buy
    That honour which shall bate his scythe's keen edge,
    And make us heirs of all eternity.

    Therefore, brave conquerors- for so you are
    That war against your own affections
    And the huge army of the world's desires-
    Our late edict shall strongly stand in force:
    Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
    Our court shall be a little Academe,
    Still and contemplative in living art.

    Your oaths are pass'd; and now subscribe your names,
    That his own hand may strike his honour down
    That violates the smallest branch herein.

  LONGAVILLE.
 I am resolv'd; 'tis but a three years' fast.

    The mind shall banquet, though the body pine.

  DUMAIN.

    The grosser manner of these world's delights
    He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves;
    To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die,
    With all these living in philosophy.

  BEROWNE.

    O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
    Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep!
  KING.

  BEROWNE.
 Let me say no, my liege, an if you please:
    I only swore to study with your Grace,
    And stay here in your court for three years' space.

  LONGAVILLE.

  BEROWNE.
 By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.
 Why, that to know which else we should not know.

  BEROWNE.
 Ay, that is study's god-like recompense.
 Come on, then; I will swear to study so,
    To know the thing I am forbid to know,
    As thus: to study where I well may dine,
    When I to feast expressly am forbid;
    Or study where to meet some mistress fine,
    When mistresses from common sense are hid;
    Or, having sworn too hard-a-keeping oath,
    Study to break it, and not break my troth.

    Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.

    Light, seeking light, doth light of light beguile;  
    So, ere you find where light in darkness lies,
    Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes.

    Study is like the heaven's glorious sun,
    That will not be deep-search'd with saucy looks;
    Small have continual plodders ever won,
    Save base authority from others' books.

    Too much to know is to know nought but fame;
    And every godfather can give a name.
 How well he's read, to reason against reading!
  DUMAIN.
 Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding!
  LONGAVILLE.
 He weeds the corn, and still lets grow the weeding.
 The spring is near, when green geese are a-breeding.
  
  DUMAIN.
 How follows that?
  BEROWNE.
 Fit in his place and time.

  DUMAIN.
 Something then in rhyme.

  LONGAVILLE.
 Berowne is like an envious sneaping frost
    That bites the first-born infants of the spring.
 Well, say I am; why should proud summer boast
    Before the birds have any cause to sing?
    Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
    At Christmas I no more desire a rose
    Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled shows;
    But like of each thing that in season grows;
    So you, to study now it is too late,
    Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.

  BEROWNE.
 No, my good lord; I have sworn to stay with you;
    And though I have for barbarism spoke more
    Than for that angel knowledge you can say,
    Yet confident I'll keep what I have swore,
    And bide the penance of each three years' day.
  
    Give me the paper; let me read the same;
    And to the strictest decrees I'll write my name.
 How well this yielding rescues thee from shame!
  BEROWNE.

  BEROWNE.

  BEROWNE.
 Sweet lord, and why?
  LONGAVILLE.
 To fright them hence with that dread penalty.

  BEROWNE.

    [Reads] 'Item.
'
    This article, my liege, yourself must break;
    For well you know here comes in embassy
    The French king's daughter, with yourself to speak-
    A mild of grace and complete majesty-
    About surrender up of Aquitaine  
    To her decrepit, sick, and bedrid father;
    Therefore this article is made in vain,
    Or vainly comes th' admired princess hither.

  KING.
 What say you, lords? Why, this was quite forgot.

  BEROWNE.

    While it doth study to have what it would,
    It doth forget to do the thing it should;
    And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
    'Tis won as towns with fire- so won, so lost.
 We must of force dispense with this decree;
    She must lie here on mere necessity.

  BEROWNE.
 Necessity will make us all forsworn
    Three thousand times within this three years' space;
    For every man with his affects is born,
    Not by might mast'red, but by special grace.

    If I break faith, this word shall speak for me:
    I am forsworn on mere necessity.
 Our court, you know, is haunted
    With a refined traveller of Spain,
    A man in all the world's new fashion planted,
    That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;
    One who the music of his own vain tongue
    Doth ravish like enchanting harmony;
    A man of complements, whom right and wrong
    Have chose as umpire of their mutiny.

    How you delight, my lords, I know not, I;
    But I protest I love to hear him lie,
    And I will use him for my minstrelsy.

  BEROWNE.
 Armado is a most illustrious wight,  
    A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.


      Enter DULL, a constable, with a letter, and COSTARD

  DULL.
 Which is the Duke's own person?
  BEROWNE.
 This, fellow.
 I myself reprehend his own person, for I am his Grace's
    farborough; but I would see his own person in flesh and blood.

  BEROWNE.
 This is he.
 There's villainy abroad;
    this letter will tell you more.

  COSTARD.

  BEROWNE.
 How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.

  LONGAVILLE.
 A high hope for a low heaven.
 God grant us patience!
  BEROWNE.
 To hear, or forbear hearing?
  LONGAVILLE.
 To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or, to
    forbear both.
  
  BEROWNE.
 The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta.
 In manner and form following, sir; all those three: I was
    seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with her upon the form,
    and taken following her into the park; which, put together, is in
    manner and form following.
 Now, sir, for the manner- it is the
    manner of a man to speak to a woman.
 For the form- in some form.
 For the following, sir?
  COSTARD.
 As it shall follow in my correction; and God defend the
    right!
  KING.
 Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
 It may be so; but if he say it is so, he is, in telling
    true, but so.

  KING.
 Peace!
  COSTARD.
 No words!
  COSTARD.
 Of other men's secrets, I beseech you.
 The time When? About the sixth hour; when beasts
    most graze, birds best peck, and men sit down to that nourishment
    which is called supper.
 Now for the
    ground Which? which, I mean, I upon; it is ycleped thy park.
 But to the place Where? It standeth
    north-north-east and by east from the west corner of thy
    curious-knotted garden.
 Me?
  KING.
 'that unlettered small-knowing soul,'
  COSTARD.
 Me?
  KING.
 Still me?
  KING.
 'which, as I remember, hight Costard,'
  COSTARD.
 O, me!
  KING.
 'sorted and consorted, contrary to thy established proclaimed
    edict and continent canon; which, with, O, with- but with this I
    passion to say wherewith-'
  COSTARD.

    King.
 Him I, as my ever-esteemed
    duty pricks me on, have sent to thee, to receive the meed of
    punishment, by thy sweet Grace's officer, Antony Dull, a man of
    good repute, carriage, bearing, and estimation.

  KING.
 'For Jaquenetta- so is the weaker vessel called, which I
    apprehended with the aforesaid swain- I keep her as a vessel of  
    thy law's fury; and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice,
    bring her to trial.
 Thine, in all compliments of devoted and
    heart-burning heat of duty,
                                         DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.
'

  BEROWNE.
 This is not so well as I look'd for, but the best that
    ever I heard.
 Sir, I confess the wench.

  KING.
 Did you hear the proclamation?
  COSTARD.
 It was proclaimed a year's imprisonment to be taken with a
    wench.
 I was taken with none, sir; I was taken with a damsel.

  COSTARD.
 This was no damsel neither, sir; she was a virgin.

  COSTARD.
 If it were, I deny her virginity; I was taken with a maid.
  
  KING.
 I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.

  KING.
 And Don Armado shall be your keeper.

    My Lord Berowne, see him delivered o'er;
    And go we, lords, to put in practice that
    Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.

                             Exeunt KING, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN
  BEROWNE.

    Sirrah, come on.

  COSTARD.
 I suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is I was taken
    with Jaquenetta, and Jaquenetta is a true girl; and therefore
    welcome the sour cup of prosperity! Affliction may one day smile
    again; and till then, sit thee down, sorrow.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE II.

The park

Enter ARMADO and MOTH, his page

  ARMADO.
 Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.

  MOTH.
 No, no; O Lord, sir, no!
  ARMADO.
 How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, my tender
    juvenal?
  MOTH.
 By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough signior.
 Why tender juvenal? Why tender juvenal?
  ARMADO.

  MOTH.
 And I, tough signior, as an appertinent title to your old
    time, which we may name tough.

  MOTH.
 Thou pretty, because little.

  MOTH.
 Little pretty, because little.
 I will praise an eel with the same praise.

  ARMADO.
 that an eel is ingenious?
  MOTH.

  MOTH.
 I am answer'd, sir.
 I love not to be cross'd.

  MOTH.
 [Aside] He speaks the mere contrary: crosses love not him.

  ARMADO.
 I have promised to study three years with the Duke.

  MOTH.
 You may do it in an hour, sir.
 Impossible.

  ARMADO.
 I confess both; they are both the varnish of a complete
    man.
 Then I am sure you know how much the gross sum of deuce-ace
    amounts to.

  ARMADO.
 It doth amount to one more than two.

  ARMADO.

  MOTH.
 Why, sir, is this such a piece of study? Now here is three
    studied ere ye'll thrice wink; and how easy it is to put 'years'
    to the word 'three,' and study three years in two words, the
    dancing horse will tell you.
 [Aside] To prove you a cipher.

  ARMADO.
 I will hereupon confess I am in love.
 Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, name more;  
    and, sweet my child, let them be men of good repute and carriage.

  MOTH.
 O well-knit Samson! strong-jointed Samson! I do excel thee
    in my rapier as much as thou didst me in carrying gates.
 I am in
    love too.
 Who was Samson's love, my dear Moth?
  MOTH.
 Of what complexion?
  MOTH.
 Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the
    four.

  ARMADO.

  MOTH.

  ARMADO.
 Is that one of the four complexions?
  MOTH.
 As I have read, sir; and the best of them too.

  ARMADO.
 Green, indeed, is the colour of lovers; but to have a love
    of that colour, methinks Samson had small reason for it.
 He
    surely affected her for her wit.

  MOTH.
 It was so, sir; for she had a green wit.
 My love is most immaculate white and red.

  MOTH.
      If she be made of white and red,
               Her faults will ne'er be known;
             For blushing cheeks by faults are bred,
               And fears by pale white shown.

    A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of white and red.
 Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?
  MOTH.
 The world was very guilty of such a ballad some three ages
    since; but I think now 'tis not to be found; or if it were, it
    would neither serve for the writing nor the tune.

  ARMADO.
 I will have that subject newly writ o'er, that I may
    example my digression by some mighty precedent.

  MOTH.
 [Aside] To be whipt; and yet a better love than my master.
 Sing, boy; my spirit grows heavy in love.

  MOTH.
 And that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
 I say, sing.

  MOTH.


                Enter DULL, COSTARD, and JAQUENETTA

  DULL.
 For this damsel, I must keep her at
    the park; she is allow'd for the day-woman.
 Fare you well.
 I do betray myself with blushing.
 Maid!
  JAQUENETTA.
 Man!
  ARMADO.
 I will visit thee at the lodge.

  JAQUENETTA.
 That's hereby.
 I know where it is situate.
 I will tell thee wonders.
 With that face?
  ARMADO.
 I love thee.

  JAQUENETTA.
 So I heard you say.

  JAQUENETTA.
 Fair weather after you!
  DULL.
             Exit with JAQUENETTA
  ARMADO.

  ARMADO.
 I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they are but
    lightly rewarded.

  ARMADO.
 Come, you transgressing slave, away.

  COSTARD.

  MOTH.
 No, sir; that were fast, and loose.
 Thou shalt to prison.
 Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation that I
    have seen, some shall see.
  
  MOTH.
 What shall some see?
  COSTARD.
 Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon.
 It is
    not for prisoners to be too silent in their words, and therefore
    I will say nothing.

                                         Exeunt MOTH and COSTARD
  ARMADO.
 I do affect the very ground, which is base, where her shoe,
    which is baser, guided by her foot, which is basest, doth tread.
 And how can that be true love which is falsely attempted?
    Love is a familiar; Love is a devil.
 Yet was Samson so tempted, and he had an excellent
    strength; yet was Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit.

    Cupid's butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules' club, and therefore
    too much odds for a Spaniard's rapier.
 Assist me, some
    extemporal god of rhyme, for I am sure I shall turn sonnet.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.
 SCENE II.
 Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits.

    Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
    As Nature was in making graces dear,
    When she did starve the general world beside
    And prodigally gave them all to you.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
    Needs not the painted flourish of your praise.

    Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye,
    Not utt'red by base sale of chapmen's tongues;  
    I am less proud to hear you tell my worth
    Than you much willing to be counted wise
    In spending your wit in the praise of mine.

    Tell him the daughter of the King of France,
    On serious business, craving quick dispatch,
    Importunes personal conference with his Grace.

    Haste, signify so much; while we attend,
    Like humble-visag'd suitors, his high will.

  BOYET.
 Proud of employment, willingly I go.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.
 Lord Longaville is one.
 I know him, madam; at a marriage feast,
    Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir
    Of Jaques Falconbridge, solemnized
    In Normandy, saw I this Longaville.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Some merry mocking lord, belike; is't so?
  MARIA.
 They say so most that most his humours know.
 Such short-liv'd wits do wither as they grow.
 The young Dumain, a well-accomplish'd youth,
    Of all that virtue love for virtue loved;
    Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill,
    For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,
    And shape to win grace though he had no wit.

    I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once;
    And much too little of that good I saw
    Is my report to his great worthiness.
 Another of these students at that time
    Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.

    His eye begets occasion for his wit,
    For every object that the one doth catch
    The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
    Which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
    Delivers in such apt and gracious words
    That aged ears play truant at his tales,  
    And younger hearings are quite ravished;
    So sweet and voluble is his discourse.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.


                       Re-enter BOYET

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Now, what admittance, lord?
  BOYET.
 Navarre had notice of your fair approach,
    And he and his competitors in oath
    Were all address'd to meet you, gentle lady,
    Before I came.

  KING.
 Fair Princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 'Fair' I give you back again; and 'welcome' I
    have not yet.

  KING.
 You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.

  KING.
 Hear me, dear lady: I have sworn an oath-
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Why, will shall break it; will, and nothing
    else.

  KING.
 Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
 Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
    Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.

    'Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,  
    And sin to break it.

    But pardon me, I am too sudden bold;
    To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.

    Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
    And suddenly resolve me in my suit.
         [Giving a paper]
  KING.
 Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
  KATHARINE.
 Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
  BEROWNE.
 How needless was it then to ask the question!
  BEROWNE.
 You must not be so quick.
 'Tis long of you, that spur me with such questions.
 What time o' day?
  KATHARINE.
 The hour that fools should ask.
 And send you many lovers!
  KATHARINE.
 Amen, so you be none.

  BEROWNE.

  KING.

    If then the King your father will restore
    But that one half which is unsatisfied,
    We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
    And hold fair friendship with his Majesty.

    But that, it seems, he little purposeth,
    For here he doth demand to have repaid
    A hundred thousand crowns; and not demands,
    On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,  
    To have his title live in Aquitaine;
    Which we much rather had depart withal,
    And have the money by our father lent,
    Than Aquitaine so gelded as it is.

    Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
    From reason's yielding, your fair self should make
    A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast,
    And go well satisfied to France again.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.

  KING.
 I do protest I never heard of it;
    And, if you prove it, I'll repay it back
    Or yield up Aquitaine.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 We arrest your word.

    Boyet, you can produce acquittances
    For such a sum from special officers
    Of Charles his father.

  KING.
  
  BOYET.

  KING.
 It shall suffice me; at which interview
    All liberal reason I will yield unto.

    Meantime receive such welcome at my hand
    As honour, without breach of honour, may
    Make tender of to thy true worthiness.

    To-morrow shall we visit you again.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Lady, I will commend you to mine own heart.

  ROSALINE.

  ROSALINE.
 Sick at the heart.
 My physic says 'ay.
 No point, with my knife.

  BEROWNE.
 Now, God save thy life!
  ROSALINE.
 I cannot stay thanksgiving.
                [Retiring]
  DUMAIN.

  DUMAIN.
          Exit
  LONGAVILLE.
 I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
  BOYET.
 A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.
 Perchance light in the light.

  BOYET.

  LONGAVILLE.
 Her mother's, I have heard.

  LONGAVILLE.
 Good sir, be not offended;
    She is an heir of Falconbridge.
 Nay, my choler is ended.

    She is a most sweet lady.

  BOYET.
 Not unlike, sir; that may be.

  BEROWNE.
 Is she wedded or no?
  BOYET.

  BEROWNE.
 You are welcome, sir; adieu!
  BOYET.
 Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.

                                     Exit BEROWNE.
 LADIES Unmask
  MARIA.
 And every jest but a word.

  BOYET.
 I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.

  KATHARINE.

  BOYET.
 To my fortunes and me.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 If my observation, which very seldom lies,
    By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
    Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 With what?
  BOYET.
'
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Why, all his behaviours did make their retire  
    To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.

    Methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye,
    As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;
    Who, tend'ring their own worth from where they were glass'd,
    Did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Boyet is dispos'd.

  BOYET.
 But to speak that in words which his eye hath disclos'd;
    I only have made a mouth of his eye,
    By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.
 Thou art an old love-monger, and speakest skilfully.
  
  KATHARINE.

  ROSALINE.
 Do you hear, my mad wenches?
  MARIA.
 No.

  BOYET.
 What, then; do you see?
  MARIA.
 You are too hard for me.
                         Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>



ACT III.
 SCENE I.

The park

Enter ARMADO and MOTH

  ARMADO.
 Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years, take this key, give
    enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately hither; I must
    employ him in a letter to my love.
 How meanest thou? Brawling in French?
  MOTH.

    These are complements, these are humours; these betray nice  
    wenches, that would be betrayed without these; and make them men
    of note- do you note me?- that most are affected to these.
 How hast thou purchased this experience?
  MOTH.

  ARMADO.
 But O- but O-
  MOTH.

  ARMADO.
 No, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your love
    perhaps a hackney.
 But have you forgot your love?
  ARMADO.
 Almost I had.

  MOTH.
 Negligent student! learn her by heart.

  ARMADO.
 By heart and in heart, boy.

  MOTH.

  ARMADO.
 What wilt thou prove?
  MOTH.

  ARMADO.
 I am all these three.
 And three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.

  ARMADO.
 A message well sympathiz'd- a horse to be ambassador for an
    ass.
 Ha, ha, what sayest thou?
  MOTH.
 Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse, for he is
    very slow-gaited.
 The way is but short; away.

  MOTH.
 As swift as lead, sir.

  ARMADO.
 The meaning, pretty ingenious?
    Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
  MOTH.

  MOTH.
 You are too swift, sir, to say so:
    Is that lead slow which is fir'd from a gun?
  ARMADO.
 Sweet smoke of rhetoric!
    He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that's he;
    I shoot thee at the swain.
 Thump, then, and I flee.
                            Exit
  ARMADO.
 A most acute juvenal; volable and free of grace!  
    By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face;
    Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.

    My herald is return'd.


                       Re-enter MOTH with COSTARD

  MOTH.
 A wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.
 Some enigma, some riddle; come, thy l'envoy; begin.
 No egma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the mail, sir.

    O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain; no l'envoy, no l'envoy; no
    salve, sir, but a plantain!
  ARMADO.
 By virtue thou enforcest laughter; thy silly thought, my
    spleen; the heaving of my lungs provokes me to ridiculous
    smiling.
 O, pardon me, my stars! Doth the inconsiderate take
    salve for l'envoy, and the word 'l'envoy' for a salve?
  MOTH.
 Do the wise think them other? Is not l'envoy a salve?
  ARMADO.
 No, page; it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain
    Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.

    I will example it:
           The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,  
           Were still at odds, being but three.
 Now the l'envoy.

  MOTH.
 I will add the l'envoy.
 Say the moral again.

  ARMADO.
  The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
           Were still at odds, being but three.

  MOTH.

    Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with my l'envoy.

           The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
           Were still at odds, being but three.
 A good l'envoy, ending in the goose; would you desire more?
  COSTARD.
 The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.

    Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.

    To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose;
    Let me see: a fat l'envoy; ay, that's a fat goose.

  ARMADO.
 Come hither, come hither.
 How did this argument begin?
  MOTH.
 By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.

    Then call'd you for the l'envoy.
  
  COSTARD.
 Thus came your argument in;
    Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought;
    And he ended the market.
 But tell me: how was there a costard broken in a shin?
  MOTH.

  COSTARD.
 Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth; I will speak that
      l'envoy.

  ARMADO.
 We will talk no more of this matter.

  COSTARD.
 Till there be more matter in the shin.

  ARMADO.
 Sirrah Costard.
 I will enfranchise thee.

  ARMADO.
 By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,
    enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured, restrained,
    captivated, bound.

  ARMADO.
 Moth, follow.
                  Exit
  MOTH.
 My sweet ounce of man's flesh, my incony Jew!
                                                       Exit MOTH
    Now will I look to his remuneration.
 Remuneration! O, that's the
    Latin word for three farthings.
 Three farthings- remuneration.
' Why, it carries it.
 Remuneration! Why, it is
    a fairer name than French crown.


                          Enter BEROWNE

  BEROWNE.
 My good knave Costard, exceedingly well met!
  COSTARD.
 Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.

  COSTARD.
 I thank your worship.

    As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,
    Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.

  COSTARD.
 When would you have it done, sir?
  BEROWNE.
 This afternoon.

  COSTARD.

  COSTARD.
 I shall know, sir, when I have done it.

  BEROWNE.
 Why, villain, thou must know first.

  COSTARD.
 Ask for her,
    And to her white hand see thou do commend  
    This seal'd-up counsel.
 There's thy guerdon; go.

                                         [Giving him a shilling]
  COSTARD.

    And I to sigh for her! to watch for her!
    To pray for her! Go to; it is a plague
    That Cupid will impose for my neglect
    Of his almighty dreadful little might.

    Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue, and groan:
    Some men must love my lady, and some Joan.
              Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE I.

The park

Enter the PRINCESS, ROSALINE, MARIA, KATHARINE, BOYET, LORDS, ATTENDANTS,
and a FORESTER

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Was that the King that spurr'd his horse so
      hard
    Against the steep uprising of the hill?
  BOYET.
 Whoe'er 'a was, 'a show'd a mounting mind.

    Well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch;
    On Saturday we will return to France.

    Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
    That we must stand and play the murderer in?
  FORESTER.

  FORESTER.
 Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.

  FORESTER.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 See, see, my beauty will be sav'd by merit.

    But come, the bow.

    And, out of question, so it is sometimes:
    Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
    When, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
    We bend to that the working of the heart;  
    As I for praise alone now seek to spill
    The poor deer's blood that my heart means no ill.
 Only for praise; and praise we may afford
    To any lady that subdues a lord.
 Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
 God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that
    have no heads.

  COSTARD.
 Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 The thickest and the tallest.

  COSTARD.
 The thickest and the tallest! It is so; truth is truth.

    An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
    One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.

    Are not you the chief woman? You are the thickest here.
  
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 What's your will, sir? What's your will?
  COSTARD.
 I have a letter from Monsieur Berowne to one
    Lady Rosaline.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 O, thy letter, thy letter! He's a good friend
      of mine.
 I am bound to serve.

    It is writ to Jaquenetta.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 We will read it, I swear.

    Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.

  BOYET.
 Who came?-
    the king.
 Why did he see?-to overcome.
 The catastrophe is a nuptial; on whose side?- the
    king's.
 I am the king, for so
    stands the comparison; thou the beggar, for so witnesseth thy
    lowliness.
 Shall I enforce thy
    love? I could.
 Shall I entreat thy love? I will.
 What shalt thou
    exchange for rags?- robes, for tittles?- titles, for thyself?
    -me.
 Thus expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy foot, my
    eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy every part.
  
    But if thou strive, poor soul, what are thou then?
    Food for his rage, repasture for his den.
'
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 What plume of feathers is he that indited this
      letter?
    What vane? What weathercock? Did you ever hear better?
  BOYET.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Else your memory is bad, going o'er it
    erewhile.

  BOYET.
 This Armado is a Spaniard, that keeps here in court;
    A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
    To the Prince and his book-mates.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Thou fellow, a word.
 I told you: my lord.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 To whom shouldst thou give it?
  COSTARD.
 From my lord to my lady.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 From my Lord Berowne, a good master of mine,
    To a lady of France that he call'd Rosaline.

    [To ROSALINE] Here, sweet, put up this; 'twill be thine another
      day.
                             Exeunt PRINCESS and TRAIN
  BOYET.

  ROSALINE.
 Why, she that bears the bow.
 My lady goes to kill horns; but, if thou marry,
    Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.

  BOYET.
 If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
 You Still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes at the
    brow.

  BOYET.

  ROSALINE.
    An I cannot, cannot, cannot,
            An I cannot, another can.

                                   Exeunt ROSALINE and KATHARINE
  COSTARD.
 By my troth, most pleasant! How both did fit it!
  MARIA.
 A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady!
    Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.

  MARIA.
 Wide o' the bow-hand! I' faith, your hand is out.
 Indeed, 'a must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the
    clout.

  BOYET.
 An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.

  COSTARD.
 Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.

  MARIA.
 Come, come, you talk greasily; your lips grow foul.

  BOYET.
 I fear too much rubbing; good-night, my good owl.
 By my soul, a swain, a most simple clown!
    Lord, Lord! how the ladies and I have put him down!
    O' my troth, most sweet jests, most incony vulgar wit!
    When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so fit.

    Armado a th' t'one side- O, a most dainty man!
    To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
    To see him kiss his hand, and how most sweetly 'a will swear!
    And his page a t' other side, that handful of wit!
    Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit!
    Sola, sola!                                     Exit COSTARD




SCENE II.

The park

From the shooting within, enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL

  NATHANIEL.

  HOLOFERNES.
 The deer was, as you know, sanguis, in blood; ripe as
    the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of caelo,
    the sky, the welkin, the heaven; and anon falleth like a crab on
    the face of terra, the soil, the land, the earth.

  NATHANIEL.
 Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly
    varied, like a scholar at the least; but, sir, I assure ye it was
    a buck of the first head.

  HOLOFERNES.

  DULL.
 Most barbarous intimation! yet a kind of insinuation,
    as it were, in via, in way, of explication; facere, as it were,
    replication, or rather, ostentare, to show, as it were, his
    inclination, after his undressed, unpolished, uneducated,
    unpruned, untrained, or rather unlettered, or ratherest  
    unconfirmed fashion, to insert again my haud credo for a deer.

  DULL.
 I Said the deer was not a haud credo; 'twas a pricket.

  HOLOFERNES.
 Twice-sod simplicity, bis coctus!
    O thou monster Ignorance, how deformed dost thou look!
  NATHANIEL.
 Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred in
      a book;
    He hath not eat paper, as it were; he hath not drunk ink; his
    intellect is not replenished; he is only an animal, only sensible
    in the duller parts;
    And such barren plants are set before us that we thankful should
      be-
    Which we of taste and feeling are- for those parts that do
      fructify in us more than he.

    For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool,
    So, were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school.

    But, omne bene, say I, being of an old father's mind:
    Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.

  DULL.
 You two are book-men: can you tell me by your wit
    What was a month old at Cain's birth that's not five weeks old as
      yet?  
  HOLOFERNES.
 Dictynna, goodman Dull; Dictynna, goodman Dull.
 What is Dictynna?
  NATHANIEL.
 A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.

  HOLOFERNES.

    Th' allusion holds in the exchange.

  DULL.
 'Tis true, indeed; the collusion holds in the exchange.

  HOLOFERNES.
 God comfort thy capacity! I say th' allusion holds in
    the exchange.

  HOLOFERNES.
 Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph on
    the death of the deer? And, to humour the ignorant, call the deer
    the Princess kill'd a pricket.
 Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge, so it shall please
    you to abrogate scurrility.

    Some say a sore; but not a sore till now made sore with shooting.

    The dogs did yell; put el to sore, then sorel jumps from thicket-
    Or pricket sore, or else sorel; the people fall a-hooting.

    If sore be sore, then L to sore makes fifty sores o' sorel.


  NATHANIEL.
 [Aside] If a talent be a claw, look how he claws him with a
    talent.

  HOLOFERNES.
 This is a gift that I have, simple, simple; a foolish
    extravagant spirit, full of forms, figures, shapes, objects,
    ideas, apprehensions, motions, revolutions.
 These are begot in
    the ventricle of memory, nourish'd in the womb of pia mater, and
    delivered upon the mellowing of occasion.
 Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my
    parishioners; for their sons are well tutor'd by you, and their
    daughters profit very greatly under you.
 You are a good member of  
    the commonwealth.
 A soul feminine saluteth
    us.


                    Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD

  JAQUENETTA.

  HOLOFERNES.
 Master Person, quasi pers-one.
 And if one should be
    pierc'd which is the one?
  COSTARD.
 Marry, Master Schoolmaster, he that is likest to a
    hogshead.
 Piercing a hogshead! A good lustre of conceit in a turf
    of earth; fire enough for a flint, pearl enough for a swine; 'tis
    pretty; it is well.

  JAQUENETTA.

  HOLOFERNES.
 Fauste, precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra  
    Ruminat-
    and so forth.

    Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? or rather as
    Horace says in his- What, my soul, verses?
  NATHANIEL.
 Ay, sir, and very learned.

  HOLOFERNES.
 [Reads] 'If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to
      love?
    Ah, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vowed!
    Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll faithful prove;
    Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like osiers bowed.

    Study his bias leaves, and makes his book thine eyes,
    Where all those pleasures live that art would comprehend.

    Celestial as thou art, O, pardon love this wrong,
    That singes heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue.
'
  HOLOFERNES.
 You find not the apostrophas, and so miss the accent:
    let me supervise the canzonet.
 Here are only numbers ratified;
    but, for the elegancy, facility, and golden cadence of poesy,
    caret.
 And why, indeed, 'Naso' but for
    smelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy, the jerks of
    invention? Imitari is nothing: so doth the hound his master, the
    ape his keeper, the tired horse his rider.
 But, damosella virgin,
    was this directed to you?
  JAQUENETTA.
 Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Berowne, one of the strange
    queen's lords.

  HOLOFERNES.
 Trip and go, my sweet;
    deliver this paper into the royal hand of the King; it may
    concern much.
 Stay not thy compliment; I forgive thy duty.
 Adieu.

                                   Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA
  NATHANIEL.
 Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very
    religiously; and, as a certain father saith-
  HOLOFERNES.
 Sir, tell not me of the father; I do fear colourable
    colours.
 But to return to the verses: did they please you, Sir
    Nathaniel?
  NATHANIEL.

  HOLOFERNES.
 I do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil of
    mine; where, if, before repast, it shall please you to gratify
    the table with a grace, I will, on my privilege I have with the
    parents of the foresaid child or pupil, undertake your ben  
    venuto; where I will prove those verses to be very unlearned,
    neither savouring of poetry, wit, nor invention.
 I beseech your
    society.
 And thank you too; for society, saith the text, is the
    happiness of life.
 Away; the gentles are at their game, and we will to
    our recreation.

    They have pitch'd a toil: I am tolling in a pitch- pitch that
    defiles.
 Defile! a foul word.
 Well, 'set thee down, sorrow!' for
    so they say the fool said, and so say I, and I am the fool.
 Well
    proved, wit.
 I
    will not love; if I do, hang me.
 O, but her
    eye! By this light, but for her eye, I would not love her- yes,
    for her two eyes.
 Well, I do nothing in the world but lie, and
    lie in my throat.
 By heaven, I do love; and it hath taught me to
    rhyme, and to be melancholy; and here is part of my rhyme, and
    here my melancholy.
 Shot, by heaven! Proceed, sweet Cupid; thou hast thump'd
    him with thy bird-bolt under the left pap.
 In faith, secrets!
  KING.
 [Reads]
      'So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
      To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
      As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
      The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows;
      Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
      Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
      As doth thy face through tears of mine give light.

      Thou shin'st in every tear that I do weep;
      No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
      So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.

      Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
      And they thy glory through my grief will show.

      But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep  
      My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
'
    How shall she know my griefs? I'll drop the paper-
    Sweet leaves, shade folly.
 Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.

  KING.
 One drunkard loves another of the name.
 I could put thee in comfort: not by two that I know;
    Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,
    The shape of Love's Tyburn that hangs up simplicity.

  LONGAVILLE.

  BEROWNE.
 O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose:
    Disfigure not his slop.

  LONGAVILLE.

      Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is;
      Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine,
      Exhal'st this vapour-vow; in thee it is.

      If broken, then it is no fault of mine;
      If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
      To lose an oath to win a paradise?'
  BEROWNE.
 This is the liver-vein, which makes flesh a deity,  
    A green goose a goddess- pure, pure idolatry.

    God amend us, God amend! We are much out o' th' way.


                      Enter DUMAIN, with a paper

  LONGAVILLE.
 By whom shall I send this?- Company! Stay.

                                                   [Steps aside]
  BEROWNE.

    More sacks to the mill! O heavens, I have my wish!
    Dumain transformed! Four woodcocks in a dish!
  DUMAIN.
 O most profane coxcomb!
  DUMAIN.
 By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
  BEROWNE.

  DUMAIN.
 Her amber hairs for foul hath amber quoted.

  BEROWNE.
 An amber-colour'd raven was well noted.

  DUMAIN.
 As upright as the cedar.

  BEROWNE.
 Stoop, I say;  
    Her shoulder is with child.

  DUMAIN.
 As fair as day.

  DUMAIN.
 O that I had my wish!
  LONGAVILLE.
 And I had mine!
  KING.
 And I mine too,.
 Sweet misprision!
  DUMAIN.
 Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.

  BEROWNE.

  DUMAIN.
 [Reads]
        'On a day-alack the day!-
        Love, whose month is ever May,
        Spied a blossom passing fair
        Playing in the wanton air.

        Through the velvet leaves the wind,
        All unseen, can passage find;  
        That the lover, sick to death,
        Wish'd himself the heaven's breath.
  
  LONGAVILLE.
 [Advancing] Dumain, thy love is far from charity,
    That in love's grief desir'st society;
    You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
    To be o'erheard and taken napping so.

  KING.

    You chide at him, offending twice as much:
    You do not love Maria! Longaville
    Did never sonnet for her sake compile;
    Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
    His loving bosom, to keep down his heart.

    I heard your guilty rhymes, observ'd your fashion,
    Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion.

    'Ay me!' says one.

    One, her hairs were gold; crystal the other's eyes.

    [To LONGAVILLE] You would for paradise break faith and troth;
    [To Dumain] And Jove for your love would infringe an oath.

  BEROWNE.
 [Descending] Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy,
    Ah, good my liege, I pray thee pardon me.

    Good heart, what grace hast thou thus to reprove
    These worms for loving, that art most in love?
    Your eyes do make no coaches; in your tears
    There is no certain princess that appears;
    You'll not be perjur'd; 'tis a hateful thing;
    Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting.

    But are you not ashamed? Nay, are you not,
    All three of you, to be thus much o'ershot?
    You found his mote; the King your mote did see;
    But I a beam do find in each of three.

    O, what a scene of fool'ry have I seen,
    Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow, and of teen!
    O, me, with what strict patience have I sat,
    To see a king transformed to a gnat!  
    To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
    And profound Solomon to tune a jig,
    And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
    And critic Timon laugh at idle toys!
    Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumain?
    And, gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
    And where my liege's? All about the breast.

    A caudle, ho!
  KING.
 Too bitter is thy jest.

    Are we betrayed thus to thy over-view?
  BEROWNE.
 Not you by me, but I betrayed to you.

    I that am honest, I that hold it sin
    To break the vow I am engaged in;
    I am betrayed by keeping company
    With men like you, men of inconstancy.
 Soft! whither away so fast?
    A true man or a thief that gallops so?
  BEROWNE.
 What present hast thou there?
  COSTARD.
 What makes treason here?
  COSTARD.
 Nay, it makes nothing, sir.

  KING.
 If it mar nothing neither,
    The treason and you go in peace away together.

  JAQUENETTA.
 I beseech your Grace, let this letter be read;
    Our person misdoubts it: 'twas treason, he said.

  KING.
        [BEROWNE reads the letter]
    Where hadst thou it?
  JAQUENETTA.
 Of Costard.
 Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.
 How now! What is in you? Why dost thou tear it?
  BEROWNE.
 A toy, my liege, a toy! Your Grace needs not fear it.
 It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear
     it.

  DUMAIN.
 [ To COSTARD] Ah, you whoreson loggerhead, you were born
      to do me shame.

    Guilty, my lord, guilty! I confess, I confess.

  KING.
 What?
  BEROWNE.
 That you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess;
    He, he, and you- and you, my liege!- and I
    Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.

    DUMAIN.
 Hence, sirs, away.
  
  COSTARD.

                                   Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA
  BEROWNE.

    The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
    Young blood doth not obey an old decree.

    We cannot cross the cause why we were born,
    Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
 'Did they?' quoth you.
 Who sees the heavenly Rosaline
    That, like a rude and savage man of Inde
    At the first op'ning of the gorgeous east,
    Bows not his vassal head and, strucken blind,
    Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
    What peremptory eagle-sighted eye
    Dares look upon the heaven of her brow
    That is not blinded by her majesty?
  KING.

    O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
    Of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty
    Do meet, as at a fair, in her fair cheek,
    Where several worthies make one dignity,
    Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.

    Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues-
    Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not!
    To things of sale a seller's praise belongs:
    She passes praise; then praise too short doth blot.

    A wither'd hermit, five-score winters worn,
    Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye.

    O, 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine!
  KING.
 By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.

  BEROWNE.

    O, who can give an oath? Where is a book?
    That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack,  
    If that she learn not of her eye to look.

    No face is fair that is not full so black.
 O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,
    The hue of dungeons, and the school of night;
    And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.
 Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light.

    O, if in black my lady's brows be deckt,
    It mourns that painting and usurping hair
    Should ravish doters with a false aspect;
    And therefore is she born to make black fair.

    Her favour turns the fashion of the days;
    For native blood is counted painting now;
    And therefore red that would avoid dispraise
    Paints itself black, to imitate her brow.

  DUMAIN.

  KING.
 And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.

  DUMAIN.
  
  KING.
 'Twere good yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain,
    I'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day.

  BEROWNE.
 I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.

  LONGAVILLE.
 O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
    Her feet were much too dainty for such tread!
  DUMAIN.
 O vile! Then, as she goes, what upward lies
    The street should see as she walk'd overhead.

  KING.
 But what of this? Are we not all in love?
  BEROWNE.
 Nothing so sure; and thereby all forsworn.
 Then leave this chat; and, good Berowne, now prove
    Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.

  DUMAIN.
 O, some authority how to proceed;
    Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil!
  DUMAIN.
 Some salve for perjury.
  
    Have at you, then, affection's men-at-arms.

    Consider what you first did swear unto:
    To fast, to study, and to see no woman-
    Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth.

    Say, can you fast? Your stomachs are too young,
    And abstinence engenders maladies.

    Why, universal plodding poisons up
    The nimble spirits in the arteries,
    As motion and long-during action tires
    The sinewy vigour of the traveller.

    For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,
    In leaden contemplation have found out
    Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
    Of beauty's tutors have enrich'd you with?
    Other slow arts entirely keep the brain;
    And therefore, finding barren practisers,
    Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil;
    But love, first learned in a lady's eyes,
    Lives not alone immured in the brain,  
    But with the motion of all elements
    Courses as swift as thought in every power,
    And gives to every power a double power,
    Above their functions and their offices.

    It adds a precious seeing to the eye:
    A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind.

    A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound,
    When the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd.

    Love's feeling is more soft and sensible
    Than are the tender horns of cockled snails:
    Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste.

    And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
    Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.

    From women's eyes this doctrine I derive.

  LONGAVILLE.
 Now to plain-dealing; lay these glozes by.
 And win them too; therefore let us devise
    Some entertainment for them in their tents.

  BEROWNE.
 First, from the park let us conduct them thither;
    Then homeward every man attach the hand
    Of his fair mistress.
 In the afternoon
    We will with some strange pastime solace them,
    Such as the shortness of the time can shape;
    For revels, dances, masks, and merry hours,
    Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers.

  KING.
 Away, away! No time shall be omitted
    That will betime, and may by us be fitted.
 Allons! allons! Sow'd cockle reap'd no corn,
    And justice always whirls in equal measure.

    Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;
    If so, our copper buys no better treasure.
            Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

The park

Enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL

  HOLOFERNES.
 Satis quod sufficit.
 I praise God for you, sir.
 Your reasons at dinner have
    been sharp and sententious; pleasant without scurrility, witty
    without affection, audacious without impudency, learned without
    opinion, and strange without heresy.
 I did converse this quondam
    day with a companion of the King's who is intituled, nominated,
    or called, Don Adriano de Armado.

  HOLOFERNES.
 Novi hominem tanquam te.
 His humour is lofty, his
    discourse peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his
    gait majestical and his general behaviour vain, ridiculous, and
    thrasonical.
 He is too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd,
    as it were, too peregrinate, as I may call it.
 A most singular and choice epithet.
 He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than
    the staple of his argument.
 I abhor such fanatical phantasimes,
    such insociable and point-devise companions; such rackers of  
    orthography, as to speak 'dout' fine, when he should say 'doubt';
    'det' when he should pronounce 'debt'- d, e, b, t, not d, e, t.
' It insinuateth me of insanie: ne
    intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic.
 Laus Deo, bone intelligo.


                 Enter ARMADO, MOTH, and COSTARD

  NATHANIEL.
 Videsne quis venit?
  HOLOFERNES.
 Video, et gaudeo.
 [To MOTH] Chirrah!
  HOLOFERNES.
 I
    marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou are
    not so long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus; thou art
    easier swallowed than a flap-dragon.

  MOTH.
 [To HOLOFERNES] Monsieur, are you not lett'red?
  MOTH.
 Yes, yes; he teaches boys the hornbook.
 Ba, most silly sheep with a horn.
 You hear his learning.

  HOLOFERNES.
 The third of the five vowels, if You repeat them; or the
    fifth, if I.

  HOLOFERNES.
 I will repeat them: a, e, I-
  MOTH.
 Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet touch,
    a quick venue of wit- snip, snap, quick and home.
 It rejoiceth my
    intellect.
 True wit!
  MOTH.
 Offer'd by a child to an old man; which is wit-old.
 What is the figure? What is the figure?  
  MOTH.
 Horns.

  HOLOFERNES.
 Thou disputes like an infant; go whip thy gig.

  COSTARD.
 An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst have it
    to buy ginger-bread.
 O, an the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but
    my bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me! Go to;
    thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers' ends, as they say.

  HOLOFERNES.
 Arts-man, preambulate; we will be singuled from the
    barbarous.
 Do you not educate youth at the charge-house on the
    top of the mountain?
  HOLOFERNES.

  HOLOFERNES.
 I do, sans question.
  
  HOLOFERNES.
 The word is well
    cull'd, chose, sweet, and apt, I do assure you, sir, I do assure.
 Sir, the King is a noble gentleman, and my familiar, I do
    assure ye, very good friend.
 For what is inward between us, let
    it pass.
 I beseech
    thee, apparel thy head.
 And among other importunate and most
    serious designs, and of great import indeed, too- but let that
    pass; for I must tell thee it will please his Grace, by the
    world, sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder, and with his royal
    finger thus dally with my excrement, with my mustachio; but,
    sweet heart, let that pass.
 By the world, I recount no fable:
    some certain special honours it pleaseth his greatness to impart
    to Armado, a soldier, a man of travel, that hath seen the world;
    but let that pass.
 The very all of all is- but, sweet heart, I do
    implore secrecy- that the King would have me present the
    Princess, sweet chuck, with some delightful ostentation, or show,
    or pageant, or antic, or firework.
 Now, understanding that the
    curate and your sweet self are good at such eruptions and sudden
    breaking-out of mirth, as it were, I have acquainted you withal,  
    to the end to crave your assistance.

  NATHANIEL.
 Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?
  HOLOFERNES.

  ARMADO.
 Pardon, sir; error: he is not quantity enough for that
    Worthy's thumb; he is not so big as the end of his club.

  HOLOFERNES.
 Shall I have audience? He shall present Hercules in
    minority: his enter and exit shall be strangling a snake; and I
    will have an apology for that purpose.

  MOTH.
  
  ARMADO.
 For the rest of the Worthies?
  HOLOFERNES.
 I will play three myself.

  MOTH.
 Thrice-worthy gentleman!
  ARMADO.
 Shall I tell you a thing?
  HOLOFERNES.
 We attend.

  ARMADO.
 We will have, if this fadge not, an antic.
 I beseech you,
    follow.

  HOLOFERNES.
 Via, goodman Dull! Thou has spoken no word all this
    while.
 Allons! we will employ thee.

  DULL.
 Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away.

The park

Enter the PRINCESS, MARIA, KATHARINE, and ROSALINE

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
    If fairings come thus plentifully in.

    A lady wall'd about with diamonds!
    Look you what I have from the loving King.

  ROSALINE.
 Nothing but this! Yes, as much love in rhyme
    As would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper
    Writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
    That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.

  KATHARINE.
 Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.

  ROSALINE.
 You'll ne'er be friends with him: 'a kill'd your sister.

  KATHARINE.
 He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy;
    And so she died.
 Had she been light, like you,
    Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit,
    She might 'a been a grandam ere she died.
  
    And so may you; for a light heart lives long.
 What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
  KATHARINE.

  ROSALINE.
 You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
    Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
 Look what you do, you do it still i' th' dark.
 So do not you; for you are a light wench.

  ROSALINE.

  KATHARINE.
 You weigh me not? O, that's you care not for me.

  ROSALINE.
 Great reason; for 'past cure is still past care.
'
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.

    But, Rosaline, you have a favour too?
    Who sent it? and what is it?
  ROSALINE.

    Nay, I have verses too, I thank Berowne;
    The numbers true, and, were the numb'ring too,
    I were the fairest goddess on the ground.
  
    I am compar'd to twenty thousand fairs.

    O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Anything like?
  ROSALINE.
 Much in the letters; nothing in the praise.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.

  ROSALINE.
 Ware pencils, ho! Let me not die your debtor,
    My red dominical, my golden letter:
    O that your face were not so full of O's!
  KATHARINE.
 A pox of that jest! and I beshrew all shrows!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair
    Dumain?
  KATHARINE.
 Madam, this glove.
 Yes, madam; and, moreover,
    Some thousand verses of a faithful lover;
    A huge translation of hypocrisy,
    Vilely compil'd, profound simplicity.

  MARIA.
 This, and these pearl, to me sent Longaville;
    The letter is too long by half a mile.
  
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Dost thou not wish in heart
    The chain were longer and the letter short?
  MARIA.
 Ay, or I would these hands might never part.

  ROSALINE.
 They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.

    O that I knew he were but in by th' week!
    How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
    And wait the season, and observe the times,
    And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes,
    And shape his service wholly to my hests,
    And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
    So pertaunt-like would I o'ersway his state
    That he should be my fool, and I his fate.
 None are so surely caught, when they are
      catch'd,
    As wit turn'd fool; folly, in wisdom hatch'd,
    Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school,
    And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.

  MARIA.

  BOYET.
 O, I am stabb'd with laughter! Where's her Grace?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Thy news, Boyet?
  BOYET.
 Prepare, madam, prepare!
    Arm, wenches, arm! Encounters mounted are
    Against your peace.
 Love doth approach disguis'd,
    Armed in arguments; you'll be surpris'd.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Saint Dennis to Saint Cupid! What are they
    That charge their breath against us? Say, scout, say.

  BOYET.

    Action and accent did they teach him there:
    'Thus must thou speak' and 'thus thy body bear,'
    And ever and anon they made a doubt
    Presence majestical would put him out;
    'For' quoth the King 'an angel shalt thou see;
    Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.
'
    The boy replied 'An angel is not evil;
    I should have fear'd her had she been a devil.
'
    With that all laugh'd, and clapp'd him on the shoulder,
    Making the bold wag by their praises bolder.
'
    The third he caper'd, and cried 'All goes well.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 But what, but what, come they to visit us?
  BOYET.
 They do, they do, and are apparell'd thus,
    Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess.

    Their purpose is to parley, court, and dance;
    And every one his love-feat will advance
    Unto his several mistress; which they'll know
    By favours several which they did bestow.
  
    Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear,
    And then the King will court thee for his dear;
    Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
    So shall Berowne take me for Rosaline.

    And change you favours too; so shall your loves
    Woo contrary, deceiv'd by these removes.

  ROSALINE.

    They do it but in mocking merriment,
    And mock for mock is only my intent.

    Their several counsels they unbosom shall
    To loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal
    Upon the next occasion that we meet
    With visages display'd to talk and greet.

  ROSALINE.
 No, to the death, we will not move a foot,
    Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace;
    But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face.

  BOYET.
 Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,  
    And quite divorce his memory from his part.
 Therefore I do it; and I make no doubt
    The rest will ne'er come in, if he be out.

    There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
    To make theirs ours, and ours none but our own;
    So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
    And they well mock'd depart away with shame.

                                         [Trumpet sounds within]
  BOYET.
 The trumpet sounds; be mask'd; the maskers come.

                                               [The LADIES mask]

          Enter BLACKAMOORS music, MOTH as Prologue, the
     KING and his LORDS as maskers, in the guise of Russians

  MOTH.
 Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
  
  MOTH.
 That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!
    Out-
  BOYET.

  MOTH.
 Out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
    Not to behold-
  BEROWNE.
 Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes- with your
    sun-beamed eyes-
  BOYET.
'
  MOTH.
 They do not mark me, and that brings me out.

  BEROWNE.
 What would these strangers? Know their minds, Boyet.

    If they do speak our language, 'tis our will
    That some plain man recount their purposes.

    Know what they would.

  BOYET.
 Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.

  ROSALINE.
 Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.

  ROSALINE.
 Why, that they have; and bid them so be gone.

  BOYET.
 She says you have it, and you may be gone.

  KING.
 Say to her we have measur'd many miles
    To tread a measure with her on this grass.

  BOYET.
 They say that they have measur'd many a mile
    To tread a measure with you on this grass.
 It is not so.
 Ask them how many inches
    Is in one mile? If they have measured many,
    The measure, then, of one is eas'ly told.

  BOYET.
 If to come hither you have measur'd miles,
    And many miles, the Princess bids you tell
    How many inches doth fill up one mile.
 Tell her we measure them by weary steps.

  BOYET.

  ROSALINE.
 How many weary steps
    Of many weary miles you have o'ergone
    Are numb'red in the travel of one mile?
  BEROWNE.
 My face is but a moon, and clouded too.

  KING.

  KING.

  ROSALINE.
 Nay, you must do it soon.

    Not yet? No dance! Thus change I like the moon.

  KING.

    The music plays; vouchsafe some motion to it.
 Our ears vouchsafe it.

  KING.

  ROSALINE.
 Since you are strangers, and come here by chance,  
    We'll not be nice; take hands.

  KING.
 Why take we hands then?
  ROSALINE.
 Only to part friends.

    Curtsy, sweet hearts; and so the measure ends.

  KING.
 More measure of this measure; be not nice.
 What buys your company?
  ROSALINE.

  KING.

  ROSALINE.

  KING.
 In private then.
       [They converse apart]
  BEROWNE.
 Honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.
 Nay, then, two treys, an if you grow so nice,
    Metheglin, wort, and malmsey; well run dice!
    There's half a dozen sweets.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.

  BEROWNE.
 One word in secret.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.

  BEROWNE.
 Thou grievest my gall.
 Therefore meet.
 Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
  MARIA.
 Name it.
 Fair lady-
  MARIA.
 Say you so? Fair lord-
    Take that for your fair lady.

  DUMAIN.
 Please it you,
    As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.

                                           [They converse apart]
  KATHARINE.
 What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
  LONGAVILLE.
 I know the reason, lady, why you ask.

  LONGAVILLE.

  KATHARINE.
 A calf, fair lady!
  KATHARINE.
 No, a fair lord calf.
 Let's part the word.

  KATHARINE.
 No, I'll not be your half.

  LONGAVILLE.
 Look how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
    Will you give horns, chaste lady? Do not so.
 Then die a calf, before your horns do grow.

  LONGAVILLE.
 One word in private with you ere I die.
 Bleat softly, then; the butcher hears you cry.
 The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
    As is the razor's edge invisible,
    Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen,
    Above the sense of sense; so sensible
    Seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings,
    Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.

  ROSALINE.
 Not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.
 By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
  KING.
 Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovits.
 Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.

  ROSALINE.
 Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 They were all in lamentable cases!
    The King was weeping-ripe for a good word.

  MARIA.
 Dumain was at my service, and his sword.

    'No point' quoth I; my servant straight was mute.

  KATHARINE.

  KATHARINE.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
  
    But will you hear? The King is my love sworn.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.

  KATHARINE.

  BOYET.
 Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
    Immediately they will again be here
    In their own shapes; for it can never be
    They will digest this harsh indignity.
 Will they return?
  BOYET.
 They will, they will, God knows,
    And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows;
    Therefore, change favours; and, when they repair,
    Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 How blow? how blow? Speak to be understood.

  BOYET.
 Fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud:
    Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown,
    Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Avaunt, perplexity! What shall we do
    If they return in their own shapes to woo?
  ROSALINE.
 Good madam, if by me you'll be advis'd,  
    Let's mock them still, as well known as disguis'd.

    Let us complain to them what fools were here,
    Disguis'd like Muscovites, in shapeless gear;
    And wonder what they were, and to what end
    Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd,
    And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
    Should be presented at our tent to us.

  BOYET.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Whip to our tents, as roes run o'er land.

                 Exeunt PRINCESS, ROSALINE, KATHARINE, and MARIA

         Re-enter the KING, BEROWNE, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN,
                        in their proper habits

  KING.

  BOYET.
          Exit
  BEROWNE.
 This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease,  
    And utters it again when God doth please.

    He is wit's pedlar, and retails his wares
    At wakes, and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs;
    And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
    Have not the grace to grace it with such show.

    This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve;
    Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve.
 The ladies call him sweet;
    The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet.

    This is the flow'r that smiles on every one,
    To show his teeth as white as whales-bone;
    And consciences that will not die in debt
    Pay him the due of 'honey-tongued Boyet.
'
  KING.
 'Fair' in 'all hail' is foul, as I conceive.

  KING.
 Construe my speeches better, if you may.

  KING.
 We came to visit you, and purpose now
    To lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow:
    Nor God, nor I, delights in perjur'd men.

  KING.
 Rebuke me not for that which you provoke.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 You nickname virtue: vice you should have
      spoke;
    For virtue's office never breaks men's troth.

  KING.
 O, you have liv'd in desolation here,
    Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Not so, my lord; it is not so, I swear;
    We have had pastimes here, and pleasant game;
    A mess of Russians left us but of late.
 Ay, in truth, my lord;
    Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
 Madam, speak true.
 It is not so, my lord.

    My lady, to the manner of the days,
    In courtesy gives undeserving praise.

    We four indeed confronted were with four
    In Russian habit; here they stayed an hour
    And talk'd apace; and in that hour, my lord,  
    They did not bless us with one happy word.

  BEROWNE.
 Fair gentle sweet,
    Your wit makes wise things foolish; when we greet,
    With eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye,
    By light we lose light; your capacity
    Is of that nature that to your huge store
    Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.

  ROSALINE.
 This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye-
  BEROWNE.

  ROSALINE.

  BEROWNE.
 O, I am yours, and all that I possess.

  ROSALINE.
 All the fool mine?
  BEROWNE.
 I cannot give you less.
 Where? when? what vizard? Why demand you this?
  ROSALINE.
 There, then, that vizard; that superfluous case
    That hid the worse and show'd the better face.

  DUMAIN.
 Let us confess, and turn it to a jest.
 Amaz'd, my lord? Why looks your Highness sad?
  ROSALINE.
 Help, hold his brows! he'll swoon! Why look you pale?
    Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.

  BEROWNE.

    I do forswear them; and I here protest,
    By this white glove- how white the hand, God knows!-
    Henceforth my wooing mind shall be express'd
    In russet yeas, and honest kersey noes.

  ROSALINE.
 Sans 'sans,' I pray you.
 Yet I have a trick
    Of the old rage; bear with me, I am sick;
    I'll leave it by degrees.
 Soft, let us see-
    Write 'Lord have mercy on us' on those three;
    They are infected; in their hearts it lies;
    They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.

  ROSALINE.
 It is not so; for how can this be true,
    That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?  
  BEROWNE.
 Peace; for I will not have to do with you.

  ROSALINE.
 Speak for yourselves; my wit is at an end.

  KING.
 Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
    Some fair excuse.
 The fairest is confession.
 Madam, I was.
 And were you well advis'd?
  KING.
 I was, fair madam.
 When you then were here,
    What did you whisper in your lady's ear?
  KING.
 That more than all the world I did respect her.
 When she shall challenge this, you will reject
    her.

  KING.
 Upon mine honour, no.
 Peace, peace, forbear;
    Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.

  KING.
 Despise me when I break this oath of mine.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 I will; and therefore keep it.
 Rosaline,  
    What did the Russian whisper in your ear?
  ROSALINE.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 God give thee joy of him! The noble lord
     Most honourably doth uphold his word.
 What mean you, madam? By my life, my troth,
    I never swore this lady such an oath.

  ROSALINE.

  KING.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear;
    And Lord Berowne, I thank him, is my dear.

    I see the trick on't: here was a consent,
    Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
    To dash it like a Christmas comedy.

    Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,  
    Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick,
    That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
    To make my lady laugh when she's dispos'd,
    Told our intents before; which once disclos'd,
    The ladies did change favours; and then we,
    Following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she.

    Much upon this it is; [To BOYET] and might not you
    Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
    Do not you know my lady's foot by th' squier,
    And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
    And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
    Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
    You put our page out.
 Go, you are allow'd;
    Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.

  BOYET.
 Full merrily
    Hath this brave manage, this career, been run.
  
  BEROWNE.
 Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace; I have done.


                          Enter COSTARD

    Welcome, pure wit! Thou part'st a fair fray.

  COSTARD.
 No, sir; but it is vara fine,
    For every one pursents three.

  BEROWNE.
 And three times thrice is nine.

    You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir; we know what we
      know;
    I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir-
  BEROWNE.

  COSTARD.
 Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.

  BEROWNE.
 By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.

  COSTARD.
 O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living by  
    reck'ning, sir.
 How much is it?
  COSTARD.
 For mine own part, I am, as they
    say, but to parfect one man in one poor man, Pompion the Great,
    sir.
 It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompey the Great;
    for mine own part, I know not the degree of the Worthy; but I am
    to stand for him.

  BEROWNE.

                                                    Exit COSTARD
  KING.

  BEROWNE.

  KING.
 Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now.

    That sport best pleases that doth least know how;
    Where zeal strives to content, and the contents  
    Dies in the zeal of that which it presents.

    Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
    When great things labouring perish in their birth.
 A right description of our sport, my lord.
 Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal sweet
    breath as will utter a brace of words.

           [Converses apart with the KING, and delivers a paper]
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Doth this man serve God?
  BEROWNE.
 Why ask you?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.

  ARMADO.
 I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!
                                                     Exit ARMADO
  KING.
 Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies.
 He presents
    Hector of Troy; the swain, Pompey the Great; the parish curate,  
    Alexander; Arinado's page, Hercules; the pedant, Judas
    Maccabaeus.

    And if these four Worthies in their first show thrive,
    These four will change habits and present the other five.

  KING.
 You are deceived, 'tis not so.
 The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool, and
    the boy:
    Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
    Cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.

  KING.


                   Enter COSTARD, armed for POMPEY

  COSTARD.

  COSTARD.
 With libbard's head on knee.
 Well said, old mocker; I must needs be friends with thee.

  COSTARD.
 I Pompey am, Pompey surnam'd the Big-  
   DUMAIN.
 The Great.

  COSTARD.

    Pompey surnam'd the Great,
    That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my foe to
      sweat;
    And travelling along this coast, I bere am come by chance,
    And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France.
 Great thanks, great Pompey.

  COSTARD.
 'Tis not so much worth; but I hope I was perfect.

    I made a little fault in Great.


                 Enter SIR NATHANIEL, for ALEXANDER

  NATHANIEL.

    My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander-
  BOYET.
  
  BEROWNE.
 Your nose smells 'no' in this, most tender-smelling
    knight.
 The conqueror is dismay'd.

  NATHANIEL.
 Pompey the Great!
  COSTARD.

  BEROWNE.
 Take away the conqueror, take away Alisander.
 [To Sir Nathaniel] O, Sir, you have overthrown Alisander
    the conqueror! You will be scrap'd out of the painted cloth for
    this.
 Your lion, that holds his poleaxe sitting on a close-stool,
    will be given to Ajax.
 He will be the ninth Worthy.

    [Sir Nathaniel retires] There, an't shall please you, a foolish
    mild man; an honest man, look you, and soon dash'd.
 But there
    are Worthies a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort.
  

         Enter HOLOFERNES, for JUDAS; and MOTH, for HERCULES

  HOLOFERNES.
 Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
    Whose club kill'd Cerberus, that three-headed canus;
    And when be was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
    Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.

    Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.
 A Judas!
  HOLOFERNES.
 Not Iscariot, sir.

    Judas I am, ycliped Maccabaeus.

  DUMAIN.

  BEROWNE.
 A kissing traitor.
 Judas I am-
  DUMAIN.
 What mean you, sir?
  BOYET.
  
  HOLOFERNES.
 Begin, sir; you are my elder.

  BEROWNE.
 Because thou hast no face.
 What is this?
  BOYET.
 The head of a bodkin.
 A death's face in a ring.
 The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.

  BOYET.
 The pommel of Coesar's falchion.

  DUMAIN.
 The carv'd-bone face on a flask.

  BEROWNE.
 Saint George's half-cheek in a brooch.

  DUMAIN.
 Ay, and in a brooch of lead.

  BEROWNE.
 And now,
    forward; for we have put thee in countenance.

  HOLOFERNES.
 You have put me out of countenance.

  BEROWNE.
 False: we have given thee faces.

  HOLOFERNES.

  BEROWNE.
 An thou wert a lion we would do so.
 Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.
 For the latter end of his name.

  BEROWNE.
 For the ass to the Jude; give it him- Jud-as, away.

  HOLOFERNES.
 This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.

  BOYET.
 A light for Monsieur Judas! It grows dark, he may stumble.

                                            [HOLOFERNES retires]
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!

                   Enter ARMADO, for HECTOR

  BEROWNE.
 Hide thy head, Achilles; here comes Hector in arms.
 Though my mocks come home by me, I will now be merry.
 Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.

  BOYET.

  BOYET.
 No; he is best indued in the small.

  BEROWNE.
 This cannot be Hector.

  DUMAIN.
 He's a god or a painter, for he makes faces.
 A gilt nutmeg.

  BEROWNE.
 A lemon.
 Stuck with cloves.
 Peace!
    The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
    Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
    A man so breathed that certain he would fight ye,
    From morn till night out of his pavilion.

    I am that flower-
  DUMAIN.
 That mint.

  LONGAVILLE.

  ARMADO.
 Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.

  LONGAVILLE.

  DUMAIN.

  ARMADO.
 The sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks, beat
    not the bones of the buried; when he breathed, he was a man.


          [BEROWNE steps forth, and speaks to COSTARD]

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Speak, brave Hector; we are much delighted.

  ARMADO.

  BOYET.
 [Aside to DUMAIN] Loves her by the foot.
 [Aside to BOYET] He may not by the yard.

  ARMADO.
 This Hector far surmounted Hannibal-
  COSTARD.
 The party is gone, fellow Hector, she is gone; she is two
    months on her way.

  ARMADO.
 Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor wench
    is cast away.

  ARMADO.
 Then shall Hector be whipt for Jaquenetta that is quick by
    him, and hang'd for Pompey that is dead by him.

  DUMAIN.
 Most rare Pompey!  
  BOYET.
 Renowned Pompey!
  BEROWNE.
 Greater than Great! Great, great, great Pompey! Pompey the
    Huge!
  DUMAIN.

  BEROWNE.
 Pompey is moved.
 Hector will challenge him.
 By the North Pole, I do challenge thee.

  DUMAIN.
 I'll do it in my shirt.

  DUMAIN.
 Most resolute Pompey!
  MOTH.
 Master, let me take you a buttonhole lower.

  DUMAIN.
 You may not deny it: Pompey hath made the challenge.

  ARMADO.
 Sweet bloods, I both may and will.

  BEROWNE.
 What reason have you for 't?
  ARMADO.

  BOYET.
 Welcome, Marcade;
    But that thou interruptest our merriment.

  MARCADE.
 I am sorry, madam; for the news I bring
    Is heavy in my tongue.
 The King your father-
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Dead, for my life!
  MARCADE.
 Even so; my tale is told.

  BEROWNE.
  
  ARMADO.
 I have seen the
    day of wrong through the little hole of discretion, and I will
    right myself like a soldier.
                 Exeunt WORTHIES
  KING.
 How fares your Majesty?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.

  KING.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 Prepare, I say.

    A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue.

    Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
    For my great suit so easily obtain'd.

  KING.
 The extreme parts of time extremely forms
    All causes to the purpose of his speed;
    And often at his very loose decides  
    That which long process could not arbitrate.
 I understand you not; my griefs are double.

  BEROWNE.
 Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief;
    And by these badges understand the King.

    For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
    Play'd foul play with our oaths; your beauty, ladies,
    Hath much deformed us, fashioning our humours
    Even to the opposed end of our intents;
    And what in us hath seem'd ridiculous,
    As love is full of unbefitting strains,
    All wanton as a child, skipping and vain;
    Form'd by the eye and therefore, like the eye,  
    Full of strange shapes, of habits, and of forms,
    Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
    To every varied object in his glance;
    Which parti-coated presence of loose love
    Put on by us, if in your heavenly eyes
    Have misbecom'd our oaths and gravities,
    Those heavenly eyes that look into these faults
    Suggested us to make.
 Therefore, ladies,
    Our love being yours, the error that love makes
    Is likewise yours.
 We to ourselves prove false,
    By being once false for ever to be true
    To those that make us both- fair ladies, you;
    And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
    Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.

  DUMAIN.

  LONGAVILLE.
 So did our looks.

  ROSALINE.
 We did not quote them so.

  KING.
 A time, methinks, too short
    To make a world-without-end bargain in.

    No, no, my lord, your Grace is perjur'd much,
    Full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this,
    If for my love, as there is no such cause,
    You will do aught- this shall you do for me:
    Your oath I will not trust; but go with speed
    To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
    Remote from all the pleasures of the world;
    There stay until the twelve celestial signs
    Have brought about the annual reckoning.

    If this austere insociable life
    Change not your offer made in heat of blood,  
    If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds,
    Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
    But that it bear this trial, and last love,
    Then, at the expiration of the year,
    Come, challenge me, challenge me by these deserts;
    And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine,
    I will be thine; and, till that instant, shut
    My woeful self up in a mournful house,
    Raining the tears of lamentation
    For the remembrance of my father's death.
 If this, or more than this, I would deny,
    To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
    The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
    Hence hermit then, my heart is in thy breast.
 You must he purged too, your sins are rack'd;
    You are attaint with faults and perjury;
    Therefore, if you my favour mean to get,  
    A twelvemonth shall you spend, and never rest,
    But seek the weary beds of people sick.

  DUMAIN.
 A beard, fair health, and honesty;
    With threefold love I wish you all these three.

  DUMAIN.
 O, shall I say I thank you, gentle wife?
  KATHARINE.

  DUMAIN.

  KATHARINE.

  LONGAVILLE.
 What says Maria?
  MARIA.
 At the twelvemonth's end
    I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.

  LONGAVILLE.
 Studies my lady? Mistress, look on me;
    Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,  
    What humble suit attends thy answer there.

    Impose some service on me for thy love.

    To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain,
    And therewithal to win me, if you please,
    Without the which I am not to be won,
    You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
    Visit the speechless sick, and still converse
    With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,
    With all the fierce endeavour of your wit,
    To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
 To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
    It cannot be; it is impossible;
    Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.

  ROSALINE.

    A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
    Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
    Of him that makes it; then, if sickly ears,
    Deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans,
    Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
    And I will have you and that fault withal.
 A twelvemonth? Well, befall what will befall,
    I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 [ To the King] Ay, sweet my lord, and so I take
    my leave.

  KING.
 These ladies' courtesy
    Might well have made our sport a comedy.

  KING.

  BEROWNE.
 That's too long for a play.
 Sweet Majesty, vouchsafe me-
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE.
 The worthy knight of Troy.

  ARMADO.

  KING.
 Call them forth quickly; we will do so.
 Holla! approach.


                            Enter All

    This side is Hiems, Winter; this Ver, the Spring- the one  
    maintained by the Owl, th' other by the Cuckoo.
 Ver, begin.


                      SPRING
         When daisies pied and violets blue
         And lady-smocks all silver-white
         And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue
         Do paint the meadows with delight,
         The cuckoo then on every tree
         Mocks married men, for thus sings he:
              'Cuckoo;
         Cuckoo, cuckoo'- O word of fear,
         Unpleasing to a married ear!

         When shepherds pipe on oaten straws,
         And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks;
         When turtles tread, and rooks and daws,
         And maidens bleach their summer smocks;
         The cuckoo then on every tree
         Mocks married men, for thus sings he:
              'Cuckoo;  
         Cuckoo, cuckoo'- O word of fear,
         Unpleasing to a married ear!


                    WINTER

         When icicles hang by the wall,
         And Dick the shepherd blows his nail,
         And Tom bears logs into the hall,
         And milk comes frozen home in pail,
         When blood is nipp'd, and ways be foul,
         Then nightly sings the staring owl:
              'Tu-who;
         Tu-whit, Tu-who'- A merry note,
         While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.


  ARMADO.

    You that way: we this way.
                            Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
 SCENE I.


Enter three Witches.

  FIRST WITCH.

  THIRD WITCH.
 There to meet with Macbeth.
 I come, Graymalkin.

  ALL.
 Anon!
    Fair is foul, and foul is fair.

    Hover through the fog and filthy air.
                Exeunt.





SCENE II.


Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Lennox, with Attendants,
meeting a bleeding Sergeant.
 This is the sergeant
    Who like a good and hardy soldier fought
    'Gainst my captivity.
 Hail, brave friend!
    Say to the King the knowledge of the broil
    As thou didst leave it.

  SERGEANT.
 Doubtful it stood,
    As two spent swimmers that do cling together
    And choke their art.
 The merciless Macdonwald-
    Worthy to be a rebel, for to that
    The multiplying villainies of nature
    Do swarm upon him -from the Western Isles
    Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
    And Fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,  
    Show'd like a rebel's whore.
 But all's too weak;
    For brave Macbeth -well he deserves that name-
    Disdaining Fortune, with his brandish'd steel,
    Which smoked with bloody execution,
    Like Valor's minion carved out his passage
    Till he faced the slave,
    Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
    Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps,
    And fix'd his head upon our battlements.
 O valiant cousin! Worthy gentleman!
  SERGEANT.
 As whence the sun 'gins his reflection
    Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break,
    So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come
    Discomfort swells.

    No sooner justice had, with valor arm'd,
    Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
    But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
    With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men,
    Began a fresh assault.

  DUNCAN.
 Dismay'd not this  
    Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo.
?
  SERGEANT.

    Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
    Or memorize another Golgotha,
    I cannot tell-
    But I am faint; my gashes cry for help.
 So well thy words become thee as thy wounds;
    They smack of honor both.
 Go get him surgeons.

    Who comes here?

                       Enter Ross.


  MALCOLM The worthy Thane of Ross.

  LENNOX.
 What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look  
    That seems to speak things strange.

  ROSS.
 God save the King!
  DUNCAN.
 Whence camest thou, worthy Thane?
  ROSS.
 From Fife, great King,
    Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
    And fan our people cold.

    Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
    Assisted by that most disloyal traitor
    The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict,
    Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof,
    Confronted him with self-comparisons,
    Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm,
    Curbing his lavish spirit; and, to conclude,
    The victory fell on us.
  
  DUNCAN.
 No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
    Our bosom interest.
 What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.

                                                         Exeunt.





SCENE III.
 Killing swine.

  THIRD WITCH.
 Sister, where thou?
  FIRST WITCH.
 A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap,
    And mounch'd, and mounch'd, and mounch'd.

    "Aroint thee, witch!" the rump-fed ronyon cries.

  SECOND WITCH.
 I'll give thee a wind.

  FIRST WITCH.

  THIRD WITCH.

  FIRST WITCH.
 I myself have all the other,
    And the very ports they blow,
    All the quarters that they know
    I' the shipman's card.
  
    I will drain him dry as hay:
    Sleep shall neither night nor day
    Hang upon his penthouse lid;
    He shall live a man forbid.

    Weary se'nnights nine times nine
    Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine;
    Though his bark cannot be lost,
    Yet it shall be tempest-toss'd.

    Look what I have.

  SECOND WITCH.
 Here I have a pilot's thumb,
    Wreck'd as homeward he did come.
                Drum within.

  THIRD WITCH.

  ALL.
 The weird sisters, hand in hand,
    Posters of the sea and land,
    Thus do go about, about,
    Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
    And thrice again, to make up nine.

    Peace! The charm's wound up.


  MACBETH.
 So foul and fair a day I have not seen.

  MACBETH.
 Speak, if you can.
 What are you?
  FIRST WITCH.
 All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!
  SECOND WITCH.
 All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be King hereafter!
  BANQUO.
 To me you speak not.
 Hail!
  SECOND WITCH.
 Hail!
  THIRD WITCH.
 Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.

  SECOND WITCH.
 Not so happy, yet much happier.
 Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none.

    So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
  FIRST WITCH.
 Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more.
 Say from whence
    You owe this strange intelligence, or why
    Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
    With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.

                                                 Witches vanish.

  BANQUO.
 The earth hath bubbles as the water has,
    And these are of them.
 Into the air, and what seem'd corporal melted
    As breath into the wind.
 Your children shall be kings.

  BANQUO.
 Went it not so?
  BANQUO.
 Who's here?

                Enter Ross and Angus.

  
  ROSS.
 The King hath happily received, Macbeth,
    The news of thy success; and when he reads
    Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,
    His wonders and his praises do contend
    Which should be thine or his.
 Silenced with that,
    In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day,
    He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
    Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
    Strange images of death.
 And for an earnest of a greater honor,
    He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor.

    In which addition, hail, most worthy Thane,
    For it is thine.
  
  BANQUO.
 The Thane of Cawdor lives.
 Why do you dress me
    In borrow'd robes?
  ANGUS.
 Who was the Thane lives yet,
    But under heavy judgement bears that life
    Which he deserves to lose.
 Whether he was combined
    With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
    With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
    He labor'd in his country's wreck, I know not;
    But treasons capital, confess'd and proved,
    Have overthrown him.
 [Aside.
] Glamis, and Thane of Cawdor!
    The greatest is behind.
 [To Ross and Angus] Thanks for your
      pains.
] That, trusted home,
    Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
    Besides the Thane of Cawdor.
 But 'tis strange;  
    And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
    The instruments of darkness tell us truths,
    Win us with honest trifles, to betray's
    In deepest consequence-
    Cousins, a word, I pray you.

  MACBETH.
] This supernatural soliciting
    Cannot be ill, cannot be good.

    If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
    Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair
    And make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
    Against the use of nature? Present fears
    Are less than horrible imaginings:
    My thought, whose murther yet is but fantastical,
    Shakes so my single state of man that function
    Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is  
    But what is not.
 Look, how our partner's rapt.

  MACBETH.

  BANQUO.
 New honors come upon him,
    Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould
    But with the aid of use.

  MACBETH.
 [Aside.
] Come what come may,
    Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.

  BANQUO.

  MACBETH.
 Kind gentlemen, your pains
    Are register'd where every day I turn
    The leaf to read them.
 Let us toward the King.

    Think upon what hath chanced, and at more time,
    The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak
    Our free hearts each to other.
 Very gladly.

  MACBETH.
             Exeunt.

Forres.
 Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
    Those in commission yet return'd?
  MALCOLM.
 My liege,
    They are not yet come back.

  DUNCAN.
  

             Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Ross, and Angus.
 Would thou hadst less deserved,
    That the proportion both of thanks and payment
    Might have been mine! Only I have left to say,
    More is thy due than more than all can pay.
 Your Highness' part
    Is to receive our duties, and our duties
    Are to your throne and state, children and servants,
    Which do but what they should, by doing everything
    Safe toward your love and honor.
 Welcome hither.
 Noble Banquo,  
    That hast no less deserved, nor must be known
    No less to have done so; let me infold thee
    And hold thee to my heart.

  BANQUO.
 My plenteous joys,
    Wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves
    In drops of sorrow.
 From hence to Inverness,
    And bind us further to you.

  MACBETH.
 My worthy Cawdor!
  MACBETH.
 [Aside.
] The Prince of Cumberland! That is a step
    On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap,
    For in my way it lies.
 Stars, hide your fires;
    Let not light see my black and deep desires.

    The eye wink at the hand; yet let that be
    Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.
 True, worthy Banquo! He is full so valiant,
    And in his commendations I am fed;
    It is a banquet to me.

    It is a peerless kinsman.
                  Flourish.
 Exeunt.





SCENE V.
 Macbeth's castle.


Enter Lady Macbeth, reading a letter.
 "They met me in the day of success, and I have
    learned by the perfectest report they have more in them than
    mortal knowledge.

    Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came missives from the
    King, who all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor'; by which title,
    before, these weird sisters saluted me and referred me to the
    coming on of time with 'Hail, King that shalt be!' This have I
    thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness,
    that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being
    ignorant of what greatness is promised thee.
 Lay it to thy heart,
    and farewell.
"

    Glamis thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be
    What thou art promised.
 Yet do I fear thy nature.

    It is too full o' the milk of human kindness
    To catch the nearest way.
 Thou wouldst be great;  
    Art not without ambition, but without
    The illness should attend it.
 What thou wouldst highly,
    That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false,
    And yet wouldst wrongly win.
" Hie thee hither,
    That I may pour my spirits in thine ear,
    And chastise with the valor of my tongue
    All that impedes thee from the golden round,
    Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
    To have thee crown'd withal.

  LADY MACBETH.
 Thou'rt mad to say it!
    Is not thy master with him? who, were't so,
    Would have inform'd for preparation.
  
  MESSENGER.
 So please you, it is true; our Thane is coming.

  LADY MACBETH.
 Give him tending;
    He brings great news.

    The raven himself is hoarse
    That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
    Under my battlements.


    Great Glamis! Worthy Cawdor!
    Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!
    Thy letters have transported me beyond
    This ignorant present, and I feel now
    The future in the instant.

  MACBETH.

  LADY MACBETH.
 And when goes hence?
  MACBETH.
 O, never
    Shall sun that morrow see!
    Your face, my Thane, is as a book where men
    May read strange matters.
 He that's coming
    Must be provided for; and you shall put
    This night's great business into my dispatch,
    Which shall to all our nights and days to come
    Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
 We will speak further.

  LADY MACBETH.
 Only look up clear;
    To alter favor ever is to fear.

    Leave all the rest to me.
  Hautboys and torches.

  BANQUO.
 This guest of summer,
    The temple-haunting martlet, does approve
    By his loved mansionry that the heaven's breath
    Smells wooingly here.


                     Enter Lady Macbeth.
 See, see, our honor'd hostess!
    The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,  
    Which still we thank as love.
 All our service
    In every point twice done, and then done double,
    Were poor and single business to contend
    Against those honors deep and broad wherewith
    Your Majesty loads our house.
 For those of old,
    And the late dignities heap'd up to them,
    We rest your hermits.

  DUNCAN.
 Where's the Thane of Cawdor?
    We coursed him at the heels and had a purpose
    To be his purveyor; but he rides well,
    And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him
    To his home before us.

  LADY MACBETH.
 Your servants ever
    Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs, in compt,
    To make their audit at your Highness' pleasure,
    Still to return your own.
 Give me your hand;
    Conduct me to mine host.

    By your leave, hostess.
 If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well
    It were done quickly.
 If the assassination
    Could trammel up the consequence, and catch,
    With his surcease, success; that but this blow
    Might be the be-all and the end-all -here,
    But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
    We'ld jump the life to come.
 This even-handed justice
    Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice
    To our own lips.
 Besides, this Duncan
    Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
    So clear in his great office, that his virtues
    Will plead like angels trumpet-tongued against
    The deep damnation of his taking-off,
    And pity, like a naked new-born babe
    Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubin horsed
    Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
    Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
    That tears shall drown the wind.
 I have no spur
    To prick the sides of my intent, but only
    Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself
    And falls on the other.


    How now, what news?
  LADY MACBETH.
 He has almost supp'd.
 Hath he ask'd for me?
  LADY MACBETH.
 Know you not he has?  
  MACBETH.

  LADY MACBETH.
 Was the hope drunk
    Wherein you dress'd yourself? Hath it slept since?
    And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
    At what it did so freely? From this time
    Such I account thy love.
 Nor time nor place
    Did then adhere, and yet you would make both.

    They have made themselves, and that their fitness now
    Does unmake you.
 I have given suck and know
    How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me-
    I would, while it was smiling in my face,
    Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums
    And dash'd the brains out had I so sworn as you
    Have done to this.

  MACBETH.
 We fail?
    But screw your courage to the sticking-place
    And we'll not fail.
 When in swinish sleep
    Their drenched natures lie as in a death,
    What cannot you and I perform upon
    The unguarded Duncan? What not put upon
    His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
    Of our great quell?
  MACBETH.
 Bring forth men-children only,
    For thy undaunted mettle should compose
    Nothing but males.
 Will it not be received,
    When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two
    Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,
    That they have done't?
  LADY MACBETH.

    Away, and mock the time with fairest show:
    False face must hide what the false heart doth know.
  
                                                         Exeunt.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.
 Court of Macbeth's castle.


  BANQUO.
 How goes the night, boy?
  FLEANCE.
 And she goes down at twelve.
 I take't 'tis later, sir.
 Hold, take my sword.


    Give me my sword.

    Who's there?
  MACBETH.

  BANQUO.
 Being unprepared,
    Our will became the servant to defect,
    Which else should free have wrought.

    I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters:
    To you they have show'd some truth.

  MACBETH.

  BANQUO.
 At your kind'st leisure.
 So I lose none
    In seeking to augment it, but still keep  
    My bosom franchised and allegiance clear,
    I shall be counsel'd.

  MACBETH.

  BANQUO.
 Thanks, sir, the like to you.
 Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
    She strike upon the bell.
 Get thee to bed.
     Exit Servant.

    Is this a dagger which I see before me,
    The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.
 I see thee still,  
    And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood,
    Which was not so before.
 Now o'er the one half-world
    Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
    The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates
    Pale Hecate's offerings; and wither'd Murther,
    Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf,
    Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
    With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design
    Moves like a ghost.
 Thou sure and firm-set earth,
    Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
    Thy very stones prate of my whereabout,
    And take the present horror from the time,
    Which now suits with it.
 Whiles I threat, he lives;
    Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.

    Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell
    That summons thee to heaven, or to hell.
               Exit.





SCENE II.

The same.
 That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold;
    What hath quench'd them hath given me fire.
 He is about it:
    The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms
    Do mock their charge with snores.
 [Within.
 The attempt and not the deed
    Confounds us.
 Had he not resembled
    My father as he slept, I had done't.


                      Enter Macbeth,
  
    My husband!
  MACBETH.
 Didst thou not hear a noise?
  LADY MACBETH.
 When?
  LADY MACBETH.
 Now.

  MACBETH.
 As I descended?
  LADY MACBETH.
 Ay.
 Donalbain.

  MACBETH.
           [Looks on his hands.
 A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.

  MACBETH.
 There's one did laugh in 's sleep, and one cried,
      "Murther!"
    That they did wake each other.
 One cried, "God bless us!" and "Amen" the other,  
    As they had seen me with these hangman's hands.
 Consider it not so deeply.

  MACBETH.
 These deeds must not be thought
    After these ways; so, it will make us mad.
 What do you mean?
  MACBETH.
 Macbeth shall sleep no more.
 Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy Thane,  
    You do unbend your noble strength, to think
    So brainsickly of things.
 Go, get some water
    And wash this filthy witness from your hand.
 Go carry them, and smear
    The sleepy grooms with blood.

  MACBETH.
 I'll go no more.
 Infirm of purpose!
    Give me the daggers.
 If he do bleed,
    I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal,
    For it must seem their guilt.
         Exit.
 Knocking within.

  MACBETH.
 Whence is that knocking?
    How is't with me, when every noise appals me?
    What hands are here? Ha, they pluck out mine eyes!
    Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood
    Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather  
    The multitudinous seas incarnadine,
    Making the green one red.


                   Re-enter Lady Macbeth.
 My hands are of your color, but I shame
    To wear a heart so white.
 Retire we to our chamber.

    A little water clears us of this deed.

    How easy is it then! Your constancy
    Hath left you unattended.
 [Knocking within.
 Be not lost
    So poorly in your thoughts.
 To know my deed, 'twere best not know myself.

    Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst!
                                                         Exeunt.





SCENE III.
 Knocking within.


  PORTER.
 Here's a knocking indeed! If a man were porter of Hell
    Gate, he should have old turning the key.
 [Knocking within.
]
    Knock, knock, knock! Who's there, i' the name of Belzebub? Here's
    a farmer that hanged himself on th' expectation of plenty.

    [Knocking within.
 [Knocking within.
] Knock, knock, knock!
    Who's there? Faith, here's an English tailor come hither, for
    stealing out of a French hose.
 Come in, tailor; here you may
    roast your goose.
] Knock, knock! Never at
    quiet! What are you? But this place is too cold for hell.
 I'll
    devil-porter it no further.
] Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the  
    porter.


                       Enter Macduff and Lennox.


  MACDUFF.
 Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,
    That you do lie so late?
  PORTER.
 Faith, sir, we were carousing till the second cock; and
    drink, sir, is a great provoker of three things.

  MACDUFF.
 What three things does drink especially provoke?
  PORTER.
 Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine.
 Lechery, sir,
    it provokes and unprovokes: it provokes the desire, but it takes
    away the performance.
 I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.

  PORTER.

  MACDUFF.
 Is thy master stirring?

                             Enter Macbeth.


    Our knocking has awaked him; here he comes.
 Good morrow, noble sir.
 morrow, both.

  MACDUFF.
 Not yet.

  MACDUFF.
 He did command me to call timely on him;
    I have almost slipp'd the hour.

  MACBETH.
 I'll bring you to him.

  MACDUFF.
 I know this is a joyful trouble to you,
    But yet 'tis one.
 The labor we delight in physics pain.

  MACDUFF I'll make so bold to call,
    For 'tis my limited service.
 Goes the King hence today?  
  MACBETH.
 He does; he did appoint so.

  LENNOX.
 The night has been unruly.
 The obscure bird
    Clamor'd the livelong night.
 Some say the earth
    Was feverous and did shake.

  MACBETH.
 'Twas a rough fight.

  LENNOX.


  MACDUFF.
 O horror, horror, horror! Tongue nor heart
    Cannot conceive nor name thee.

  MACBETH.
 LENNOX.
 What's the matter?
  MACDUFF.
 Confusion now hath made his masterpiece.

    Most sacrilegious murther hath broke ope  
    The Lord's anointed temple and stole thence
    The life o' the building.

  MACBETH.
 What is't you say? the life?
  LENNOX.
 Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight
    With a new Gorgon.
 Do not bid me speak;
    See, and then speak yourselves.

                                      Exeunt Macbeth and Lennox.
 Murther and treason!
    Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm, awake!
    Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit,
    And look on death itself! Up, up, and see
    The great doom's image! Malcolm! Banquo!
    As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites
    To countenance this horror! Ring the bell.
 What's the business,  
    That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
    The sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!
  MACDUFF.
 O gentle lady,
    'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:
    The repetition in a woman's ear
    Would murther as it fell.


                     Enter Banquo.
 Woe, alas!
    What, in our house?
  BANQUO.
 Too cruel anywhere.


  MACBETH.
 Had I but died an hour before this chance,  
    I had lived a blessed time, for from this instant
    There's nothing serious in mortality.

    All is but toys; renown and grace is dead,
    The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
    Is left this vault to brag of.


  DONALBAIN.

    The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
    Is stopped, the very source of it is stopp'd.

  MACDUFF.
 O, by whom?
  LENNOX.
 Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done't.

    Their hands and faces were all badged with blood;
    So were their daggers, which unwiped we found
    Upon their pillows.

  MACDUFF.
 Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious,
    Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man.

    The expedition of my violent love
    Outrun the pauser reason.
 Here lay Duncan,
    His silver skin laced with his golden blood,
    And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature
    For ruin's wasteful entrance; there, the murtherers,
    Steep'd in the colors of their trade, their daggers
    Unmannerly breech'd with gore.
 Look to the lady.

  MALCOLM.
] Why do we hold our tongues,
    That most may claim this argument for ours?
  DONALBAIN.
] What should be spoken here, where
      our fate,  
    Hid in an auger hole, may rush and seize us?
    Let's away,
    Our tears are not yet brew'd.

  MALCOLM.
 [Aside to Donalbain.
] Nor our strong sorrow
    Upon the foot of motion.

                                    Lady Macbeth is carried out.
 Fears and scruples shake us.

    In the great hand of God I stand, and thence
    Against the undivulged pretense I fight
    Of treasonous malice.

  ALL.
 So all.

  MACBETH.
 Well contented.

    To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
    Which the false man does easy.
 I'll to England.

  MALCOLM.
 Therefore to horse;
    And let us not be dainty of leave-taking,
    But shift away.


Enter Ross with an Old Man.
 Threescore and ten I can remember well,
    Within the volume of which time I have seen
    Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night
    Hath trifled former knowings.
 By the clock 'tis day,
    And yet dark night strangles the traveling lamp.

    Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame,
    That darkness does the face of earth entomb,
    When living light should kiss it?
  OLD MAN.
 'Tis unnatural,
    Even like the deed that's done.
 On Tuesday last
    A falcon towering in her pride of place
    Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.
 And Duncan's horses-a thing most strange and certain-
    Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,  
    Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
    Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make
    War with mankind.

  ROSS.


                     Enter Macduff.

    How goes the world, sir, now?
  MACDUFF.
 Why, see you not?
  ROSS.
 Those that Macbeth hath slain.

  ROSS.
 They were suborn'd:
    Malcolm and Donalbain, the King's two sons,
    Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them
    Suspicion of the deed.
  
  ROSS.
 'Gainst nature still!
    Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up
    Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like
    The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.

  MACDUFF.
 Where is Duncan's body?
  MACDUFF.
 Will you to Scone?
  MACDUFF.

  ROSS.
 Well, I will thither.

  MACDUFF.
 Farewell, father.
 God's benison go with you and with those
    That would make good of bad and friends of foes!
                                                         Exeunt.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

Forres.
 The palace.


Enter Banquo.


  BANQUO.
 Thou hast it now: King, Cawdor, Glamis, all,
    As the weird women promised, and I fear
    Thou play'dst most foully for't; yet it was said
    It should not stand in thy posterity,
    But that myself should be the root and father
    Of many kings.
 If there come truth from them
    (As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine)
    Why, by the verities on thee made good,
    May they not be my oracles as well
    And set me up in hope? But hush, no more.


      Sennet sounds.
 Enter Macbeth as King, Lady Macbeth
    as Queen, Lennox, Ross, Lords, Ladies, and Attendants.


  MACBETH.

  LADY MACBETH.
 If he had been forgotten,
    It had been as a gap in our great feast  
    And all thing unbecoming.
 Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir,
    And I'll request your presence.

  BANQUO.

  MACBETH.
 Ride you this afternoon?
  BANQUO.
 Ay, my good lord.

  MACBETH.

    Is't far you ride'!
  BANQUO.
 Go not my horse the better,
    I must become a borrower of the night
    For a dark hour or twain.
 Fail not our feast.
 My lord, I will not.
 We hear our bloody cousins are bestow'd  
    In England and in Ireland, not confessing
    Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
    With strange invention.
 But of that tomorrow,
    When therewithal we shall have cause of state
    Craving us jointly.
 Hie you to horse; adieu,
    Till you return at night.
 Goes Fleance with you?
  BANQUO.
 Ay, my good lord.
 I wish your horses swift and sure of foot,
    And so I do commend you to their backs.

    Sirrah, a word with you.
 They are, my lord, without the palace gate.

  MACBETH.
 Bring them before us.

    To be thus is nothing,  
    But to be safely thus.

    Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature
    Reigns that which would be fear'd.
 'Tis much he dares,
    And, to that dauntless temper of his mind,
    He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor
    To act in safety.
 He chid the sisters
    When first they put the name of King upon me
    And bade them speak to him; then prophet-like
    They hail'd him father to a line of kings.

    Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown
    And put a barren sceptre in my gripe,
    Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand,
    No son of mine succeeding.
 If't be so,
    For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind,
    For them the gracious Duncan have I murther'd,
    Put rancors in the vessel of my peace
    Only for them, and mine eternal jewel  
    Given to the common enemy of man,
    To make them kings -the seed of Banquo kings!
    Rather than so, come, Fate, into the list,
    And champion me to the utterance! Who's there?

        Re-enter Attendant, with two Murtherers.

                                                 Exit Attendant.

    Was it not yesterday we spoke together?
  FIRST MURTHERER.
 Well then, now
    Have you consider'd of my speeches? Know
    That it was he in the times past which held you
    So under fortune, which you thought had been
    Our innocent self? This I made good to you
    In our last conference, pass'd in probation with you:
    How you were borne in hand, how cross'd, the instruments,
    Who wrought with them, and all things else that might
    To half a soul and to a notion crazed  
    Say, "Thus did Banquo.

  MACBETH.
 I did so, and went further, which is now
    Our point of second meeting.

  MACBETH.
 Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men,
    As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs,
    Shoughs, waterrugs, and demi-wolves are clept
    All by the name of dogs.

  FIRST MURTHERER.
 And I another
    So weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune,
    That I would set my life on any chance,
    To mend it or be rid on't.
 Both of you
    Know Banquo was your enemy.

  BOTH MURTHERERS.
 True, my lord.

  MACBETH.
 And thence it is
    That I to your assistance do make love,
    Masking the business from the common eye
    For sundry weighty reasons.

  SECOND MURTHERER.

  FIRST MURTHERER.
 Though our lives-
  MACBETH.
 Your spirits shine through you.
 Resolve yourselves apart;
    I'll come to you anon.

  BOTH MURTHERERS.
 We are resolved, my lord.

                                              Exeunt Murtherers.

    It is concluded: Banquo, thy soul's flight,
    If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.





SCENE II.

The palace.
 Is Banquo gone from court?
  SERVANT.

  LADY MACBETH.
 Say to the King I would attend his leisure
    For a few words.
                                  Exit.

  LADY MACBETH.

    'Tis safer to be that which we destroy
    Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.


    How now, my lord? Why do you keep alone,
    Of sorriest fancies your companions making,
    Using those thoughts which should indeed have died
    With them they think on? Things without all remedy
    Should be without regard.
 What's done is done.
 We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it.

    She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice
    Remains in danger of her former tooth.

    But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer,
    Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep
    In the affliction of these terrible dreams
    That shake us nightly.

  LADY MACBETH.
 Come on,
    Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks;
    Be bright and jovial among your guests tonight.

  LADY MACBETH.

  MACBETH.

  LADY MACBETH.
 There's comfort yet; they are assailable.

    Then be thou jocund.
 Ere the bat hath flown
    His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons
    The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums
    Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done
    A deed of dreadful note.
 What's to be done?
  MACBETH.
 Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
    Till thou applaud the deed.
 Come, seeling night,
    Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day,
    And with thy bloody and invisible hand
    Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond  
    Which keeps me pale! Light thickens, and the crow
    Makes wing to the rooky wood;
    Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
    Whiles night's black agents to their preys do rouse.

    Thou marvel'st at my words, but hold thee still:
    Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.

    So, prithee, go with me.
                             Exeunt.


  FIRST MURTHERER.
 But who did bid thee join with us?
  THIRD MURTHERER.

  SECOND MURTHERER.
 He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers
    Our offices and what we have to do
    To the direction just.

    The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day;
    Now spurs the lated traveler apace
    To gain the timely inn, and near approaches
    The subject of our watch.
 Hark! I hear horses.

  BANQUO.
 [Within.
] Give us a light there, ho!
  SECOND MURTHERER.
 Then 'tis he; the rest
    That are within the note of expectation
    Already are i' the court.

  SECOND MURTHERER.
 A light, a light!

              Enter Banquo, and Fleance with a torch.


  THIRD MURTHERER.
 'Tis he.

  FIRST MURTHERER.
 Stand to't.

  BANQUO.
 It will be rain tonight.
 Let it come down.

                                           They set upon Banquo.

  THIRD MURTHERER.
 Who did strike out the light?
  FIRST MURTHERER.
 There's but one down; the son is fled.

  SECOND MURTHERER.

  FIRST MURTHERER.
 Well, let's away and say how much is done.

                                                         Exeunt.





SCENE IV.

A Hall in the palace.


Enter Macbeth, Lady Macbeth, Ross, Lennox, Lords, and Attendants.
 You know your own degrees; sit down.
 At first
    And last the hearty welcome.

  MACBETH.
 Ourself will mingle with society
    And play the humble host.

  LADY MACBETH.


                Enter first Murtherer to the door.


  MACBETH.
 See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks.

    Be large in mirth; anon we'll drink a measure
    The table round.
 [Approaches the door.
] There's blood upon thy  
      face.
 'Tis Banquo's then.

  MACBETH.
 Thou art the best o' the cut-throats! Yet he's good
    That did the like for Fleance.
 Most royal sir,
    Fleance is 'scaped.
 [Aside.
 Ay, my good lord.
 Safe in a ditch he bides,
    With twenty trenched gashes on his head,
    The least a death to nature.
 Thanks for that.

    There the grown serpent lies; the worm that's fled  
    Hath nature that in time will venom breed,
    No teeth for the present.
 Get thee gone.
 Tomorrow
    We'll hear ourselves again.

                                                 Exit Murtherer.
 The feast is sold
    That is not often vouch'd, while 'tis amaking,
    'Tis given with welcome.

  MACBETH.
 Sweet remembrancer!
    Now good digestion wait on appetite,
    And health on both!
  LENNOX.
 May't please your Highness sit.


  MACBETH.
 Here had we now our country's honor roof'd,
    Were the graced person of our Banquo present,
    Who may I rather challenge for unkindness  
    Than pity for mischance!
  ROSS.
 Please't your Highness
    To grace us with your royal company?
  MACBETH.
 The table's full.

  LENNOX.
 Here is a place reserved, sir.
 Where?
  LENNOX.
 Here, my good lord.
 Which of you have done this?
  LORDS.
 What, my good lord?
  MACBETH.
 Thou canst not say I did it; never shake
    Thy gory locks at me.

  ROSS.
 Pray you, keep seat.
 If much you note him,
    You shall offend him and extend his passion.
 Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that  
    Which might appal the devil.
 O proper stuff!
    This is the very painting of your fear;
    This is the air-drawn dagger which you said
    Led you to Duncan.
 Shame itself!
    Why do you make such faces? When all's done,
    You look but on a stool.
 Prithee, see there! Behold! Look! Lo! How say you?
    Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.
                      Exit Ghost.

  LADY MACBETH.
 What, quite unmann'd in folly?
  MACBETH.
 If I stand here, I saw him.

  LADY MACBETH.
 Fie, for shame!
  MACBETH.
 Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time,
    Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal;  
    Ay, and since too, murthers have been perform'd
    Too terrible for the ear.
 The time has been,
    That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
    And there an end; but now they rise again,
    With twenty mortal murthers on their crowns,
    And push us from our stools.

  LADY MACBETH.
 My worthy lord,
    Your noble friends do lack you.

  MACBETH.
 I do forget.

    Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends.
 Come, love and health to all;
    Then I'll sit down.
 Give me some wine, fill full.

    Would he were here! To all and him we thirst,
    And all to all.

  
                     Re-enter Ghost.
 Avaunt, and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee!
    Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold;
    Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
    Which thou dost glare with.
 Think of this, good peers,
    But as a thing of custom.
 'Tis no other,
    Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.

  MACBETH.

    Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
    The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger;
    Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
    Shall never tremble.

    If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
    The baby of a girl.
 Hence, horrible shadow!
    Unreal mockery, hence!                           Exit Ghost.
  
  LADY MACBETH.
 You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting,
    With most admired disorder.

  MACBETH.
 At once, good night.

  LENNOX.
 Good night, and better health
    Attend his Majesty!
  LADY MACBETH.
 A kind good night to all!
                        Exeunt all but Macbeth and Lady Macbeth.
 will have blood; they say blood will have blood.
 What is the night?
  LADY MACBETH.
 Almost at odds with morning, which is which.

  MACBETH.
 How say'st thou, that Macduff denies his person
    At our great bidding?
  LADY MACBETH.

    There's not a one of them but in his house
    I keep a servant feed.

    More shall they speak; for now I am bent to know,
    By the worst means, the worst.

    Strange things I have in head that will to hand,
    Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.

  LADY MACBETH.

  MACBETH.
 Come, we'll to sleep.
                       Exeunt.





SCENE V.

A heath.
 Thunder.
 Have I not reason, beldams as you are,
    Saucy and overbold? How did you dare
    To trade and traffic with Macbeth
    In riddles and affairs of death,
    And I, the mistress of your charms,
    The close contriver of all harms,
    Was never call'd to bear my part,
    Or show the glory of our art?
    And, which is worse, all you have done
    Hath been but for a wayward son,
    Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do,
    Loves for his own ends, not for you.
 Thither he
    Will come to know his destiny.

    I am for the air; this night I'll spend
    Unto a dismal and a fatal end.

    Great business must be wrought ere noon:
    Upon the corner of the moon
    There hangs a vaporous drop profound;
    I'll catch it ere it come to ground.

    And that distill'd by magic sleights
    Shall raise such artificial sprites
    As by the strength of their illusion
    Shall draw him on to his confusion.

    And you all know security
    Is mortals' chiefest enemy.
"
    Hark! I am call'd; my little spirit, see,
    Sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me.
                Exit.
 Come, let's make haste; she'll soon be back again.

                                                         Exeunt.





SCENE VI.

Forres.


Enter Lennox and another Lord.


  LENNOX.
 My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
    Which can interpret farther; only I say
    Thing's have been strangely borne.
 Sir, can you tell
    Where he bestows himself?
  LORD.
 And this report
    Hath so exasperate the King that he
    Prepares for some attempt of war.
 Sent he to Macduff?
  LORD.
 He did, and with an absolute "Sir, not I,"
    The cloudy messenger turns me his back,
    And hums, as who should say, "You'll rue the time
    That clogs me with this answer.
 And that well might
    Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance
    His wisdom can provide.

                                                         Exeunt.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.

A cavern.
 In the middle, a boiling cauldron.
 Thunder.

  FIRST WITCH.
 Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd.
 Harpier cries, "'Tis time, 'tis time.
"
  FIRST WITCH.

    Toad, that under cold stone
    Days and nights has thirty-one
    Swelter'd venom sleeping got,
    Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.

  ALL.
 Double, double, toil and trouble;
    Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
 Fillet of a fenny snake,
    In the cauldron boil and bake;
    Eye of newt and toe of frog,
    Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
    Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting,
    Lizard's leg and howlet's wing,
    For a charm of powerful trouble,  
    Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.

  ALL.
 Double, double, toil and trouble;
    Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

  THIRD WITCH.
 Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
    Witch's mummy, maw and gulf
    Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark,
    Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark,
    Liver of blaspheming Jew,
    Gall of goat and slips of yew
    Sliver'd in the moon's eclipse,
    Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips,
    Finger of birth-strangled babe
    Ditch-deliver'd by a drab,
    Make the gruel thick and slab.

    Add thereto a tiger's chawdron,
    For the ingredients of our cawdron.

  SECOND WITCH.
 Cool it with a baboon's blood,
    Then the charm is firm and good.


  HECATE.
 O, well done! I commend your pains,
    And everyone shall share i' the gains.

                              Music and a song, "Black spirits.
"
                                                 Hecate retires.

  SECOND WITCH.
 By the pricking of my thumbs,
    Something wicked this way comes.

    Open, locks,
    Whoever knocks!

                      Enter Macbeth.


  MACBETH.
  
  MACBETH.

  SECOND WITCH.
 Demand.
 We'll answer.

  FIRST WITCH.
 Say, if thou'dst rather hear it from our mouths,
    Or from our masters'?
  MACBETH.
 Call 'em, let me see 'em.

  FIRST WITCH.
 Pour in sow's blood that hath eaten
    Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten  
    From the murtherer's gibbet throw
    Into the flame.

  ALL.
 Come, high or low;
    Thyself and office deftly show!

            Thunder.
 First Apparition: an armed Head.


  MACBETH.
 He knows thy thought:
    Hear his speech, but say thou nought.
 Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks;
    Thou hast harp'd my fear aright.
 He will not be commanded.
 Second Apparition: a bloody Child.

  
  SECOND APPARITION.
 Had I three ears, I'd hear thee.

  SECOND APPARITION.
 Then live, Macduff.
 What need I fear of thee?
    But yet I'll make assurance double sure,
    And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live,
    That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,
    And sleep in spite of thunder.


       Thunder.
 Third Apparition: a Child crowned,
               with a tree in his hand.
 Listen, but speak not to't.

  THIRD APPARITION.
 Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care  
    Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are.

    Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until
    Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill
    Shall come against him.
                            Descends.

  MACBETH.

    Who can impress the forest, bid the tree
    Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements, good!
    Rebellion's head, rise never till the Wood
    Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth
    Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
    To time and mortal custom.
 Seek to know no more.

  MACBETH.
 I will be satisfied! Deny me this,
    And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know.

  FIRST WITCH.
 Show!  
  SECOND WITCH.
 WITCH.
 Show!
  ALL.
 Show his eyes, and grieve his heart;
    Come like shadows, so depart!

    A show of eight Kings, the last with a glass in his hand;
                   Banquo's Ghost following.
 Thou are too like the spirit of Banquo Down!
    Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs.
 And thy hair,
    Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
 Ay, sir, all this is so.

                                    Music.

  MACBETH.
 are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour
    Stand ay accursed in the calendar!
    Come in, without there!

                    Enter Lennox.


  LENNOX.
 What's your Grace's will?
  MACBETH.
 Saw you the weird sisters?
  LENNOX.
  
  MACBETH.
 Came they not by you?
  LENNOX.
 Who wast came by?
  LENNOX.
 Ay, my good lord.

  MACBETH.
 [Aside.
] Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits.

    The flighty purpose never is o'ertook
    Unless the deed go with it.
 And even now,
    To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done:
    The castle of Macduff I will surprise,
    Seize upon Fife, give to the edge o' the sword
    His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls
    That trace him in his line.
                       Exeunt.

Fife.


  LADY MACDUFF.
 What had he done, to make him fly the land?
  ROSS.
 You must have patience, madam.

  LADY MACDUFF.
 He had none;
    His flight was madness.
 You know not
    Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.

  LADY MACDUFF.
 Wisdom? To leave his wife, to leave his babes,
    His mansion, and his titles, in a place
    From whence himself does fly? He loves us not;
    He wants the natural touch; for the poor wren,
    The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
    Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
 But for your husband,
    He is noble, wise, Judicious, and best knows
    The fits o' the season.
 I take my leave of you;
    Shall not be long but I'll be here again.

    Things at the worst will cease or else climb upward
    To what they were before.
 Father'd he is, and yet he's fatherless.

    I take my leave at once.
                               Exit.

  LADY MACDUFF.
 With what I get, I mean; and so do they.
 Poor bird! Thou'ldst never fear the net nor lime,
    The pitfall nor the gin.

  SON.

  LADY MACDUFF.
 How wilt thou do for father?
  SON.
 Nay, how will you do for a husband?
  LADY MACDUFF.
 Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.

  SON.
 Then you'll buy 'em to sell again.

  LADY MACDUFF.
 Was my father a traitor, Mother?
  LADY MACDUFF.
 Ay, that he was.

  SON.
 What is a traitor?
  LADY MACDUFF.
 Everyone that does so is a traitor and must be
     hanged.

  SON.
 And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?
  LADY MACDUFF.
 Everyone.
  
  SON.
 Why, the honest men.

  SON.
 Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are liars and
    swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang up them.

  LADY MACDUFF.
 Now, God help thee, poor monkey! But how wilt thou do
    for a father?
  SON.
 If he were dead, you'ld weep for him; if you would not, it
    were a good sign that I should quickly have a new father.

  LADY MACDUFF.


  MESSENGER.
 Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known,
    Though in your state of honor I am perfect.

    I doubt some danger does approach you nearly.

    If you will take a homely man's advice,
    Be not found here; hence, with your little ones.

    To fright you thus, methinks I am too savage;
    To do worse to you were fell cruelty,
    Which is too nigh your person.
                                Exit.
 Whither should I fly?
    I have done no harm.
 Where is your husband?
  LADY MACDUFF.
 I hope, in no place so unsanctified
    Where such as thou mayst find him.

  FIRST MURTHERER.
 Thou liest, thou shag-ear'd villain!
  FIRST MURTHERER.
 He has kill'd me, Mother.
  
    Run away, I pray you!                                  Dies.





SCENE III.

England.
 Before the King's palace.


Enter Malcolm and Macduff.


  MALCOLM.

  MACDUFF.
 Each new morn
    New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows
    Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
    As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out
    Like syllable of dolor.

  MALCOLM.
 What I believe, I'll wall;
    What know, believe; and what I can redress,
    As I shall find the time to friend, I will.

    What you have spoke, it may be so perchance.

    This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
    Was once thought honest.
 I am young, but something
    You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom  
    To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb
    To appease an angry god.

  MACDUFF.
 I am not treacherous.
 But Macbeth is.

    A good and virtuous nature may recoil
    In an imperial charge.
 But I shall crave your pardon;
    That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose.

    Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.

    Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,
    Yet grace must still look so.

  MACDUFF.
 I have lost my hopes.
 Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.

    Why in that rawness left you wife and child,
    Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
    Without leave-taking? I pray you,
    Let not my jealousies be your dishonors,
    But mine own safeties.

  MACDUFF.
 Wear thou thy wrongs;
    The title is affeer'd.
 Fare thee well, lord.

    I would not be the villain that thou think'st
    For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp
    And the rich East to boot.

    I think our country sinks beneath the yoke;
    It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
    Is added to her wounds.
 I think withal
    There would be hands uplifted in my right;
    And here from gracious England have I offer
    Of goodly thousands.
 But for all this,
    When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head,
    Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
    Shall have more vices than it had before,
    More suffer and more sundry ways than ever,
    By him that shall succeed.
 What should he be?
  MALCOLM.

  MACDUFF.
 Not in the legions
    Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd
    In evils to top Macbeth.

  MALCOLM.
 Better Macbeth
    Than such an one to reign.

  MACDUFF.
 But fear not yet
    To take upon you what is yours.
 You may
    Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty
    And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink.

    We have willing dames enough; there cannot be
    That vulture in you to devour so many
    As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
    Finding it so inclined.

  MALCOLM.
 With this there grows
    In my most ill-composed affection such
    A stanchless avarice that, were I King,
    I should cut off the nobles for their lands,
    Desire his jewels and this other's house,
    And my more-having would be as a sauce
    To make me hunger more, that I should forge
    Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
    Destroying them for wealth.

  MACDUFF.

  MALCOLM.
 The king-becoming graces,
    As justice, verity, temperance, stableness,
    Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
    Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
    I have no relish of them, but abound
    In the division of each several crime,
    Acting it many ways.
 Nay, had I power, I should
    Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
    Uproar the universal peace, confound
    All unity on earth.

  MACDUFF.
 If such a one be fit to govern, speak.

    I am as I have spoken.

  MACDUFF.
 Fit to govern?
    No, not to live.
 O my breast,
    Thy hope ends here!
  MALCOLM.
 Macduff, this noble passion,
    Child of integrity, hath from my soul
    Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts
    To thy good truth and honor.
 What I am truly
    Is thine and my poor country's to command.

    Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,
    Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men
    Already at a point, was setting forth.

    Now we'll together, and the chance of goodness
    Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent?
  MACDUFF.

  
  MALCOLM.
 Well, more anon.
 Comes the King forth, I pray you?
  DOCTOR.
 Ay, sir, there are a crew of wretched souls
    That stay his cure.
 Their malady convinces
    The great assay of art, but at his touch,
    Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand,
    They presently amend.

  MALCOLM.
 I thank you, Doctor.
                     Exit Doctor.

  MACDUFF.
 With this strange virtue
    He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy,  
    And sundry blessings hang about his throne
    That speak him full of grace.


                    Enter Ross.


  MACDUFF.
 See, who comes here?
  MALCOLM.
 My countryman, but yet I know him not.
 My ever gentle cousin, welcome hither.

  MALCOLM.
 I know him now.
 Good God, betimes remove
    The means that makes us strangers!
  ROSS.
 Sir, amen.

  MACDUFF.
 Stands Scotland where it did?
  ROSS.
 Alas, poor country,
    Almost afraid to know itself! It cannot
    Be call'd our mother, but our grave.
 Where nothing,
    But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile;
    Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air,
    Are made, not mark'd; where violent sorrow seems
    A modern ecstasy.
 The dead man's knell
    Is there scarce ask'd for who, and good men's lives  
    Expire before the flowers in their caps,
    Dying or ere they sicken.
 O, relation
    Too nice, and yet too true!
  MALCOLM.
 What's the newest grief?
  ROSS.
 That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker;
    Each minute teems a new one.
 How does my wife?
  ROSS.

  MACDUFF.
 And all my children?
  ROSS.
 Well too.

  MACDUFF.

  MALCOLM.
 Be't their comfort
    We are coming thither.
 Gracious England hath
    Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men;
    An older and a better soldier none
    That Christendom gives out.
 Would I could answer
    This comfort with the like! But I have words
    That would be howl'd out in the desert air,
    Where hearing should not latch them.
 What concern they?
    The general cause? Or is it a fee-grief
    Due to some single breast?
  ROSS.
 No mind that's honest
    But in it shares some woe, though the main part
    Pertains to you alone.

  MACDUFF.

  ROSS.
 Humh! I guess at it.

  ROSS.

  MALCOLM.
 Merciful heaven!
    What, man! Neer pull your hat upon your brows;
    Give sorrow words.

  MACDUFF.
 My children too?
  ROSS.

  MACDUFF.
 And I must be from thence!
    My wife kill'd too?
  ROSS.

  MALCOLM.

    I cannot but remember such things were
    That were most precious to me.
 Heaven rest them now!
  MALCOLM.
 Let grief
    Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.

  MACDUFF.
 O, I could play the woman with mine eyes
    And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,
    Cut short all intermission; front to front
    Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself;
    Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape,  
    Heaven forgive him too!
  MALCOLM.
 Macbeth
    Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
    Put on their instruments.
 Receive what cheer you may,
    The night is long that never finds the day.
          Exeunt.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.
 Anteroom in the castle.


Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting Gentlewoman.


  DOCTOR.
 I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive no
    truth in your report.
 When was it she last walked?
  GENTLEWOMAN.

  DOCTOR.
 A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the
    benefit of sleep and do the effects of watching! In this slumbery
    agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances,
    what, at any time, have you heard her say?
  GENTLEWOMAN.
 That, sir, which I will not report after her.

  DOCTOR.
 You may to me, and 'tis most meet you should.

  GENTLEWOMAN.
 Neither to you nor anyone, having no witness to
    confirm my speech.
  

    Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise, and, upon my
    life, fast asleep.
 Observe her; stand close.

  DOCTOR.
 How came she by that light?
  GENTLEWOMAN.

  DOCTOR.
 Ay, but their sense is shut.

  DOCTOR.
 What is it she does now? Look how she rubs her hands.
 Yet here's a spot.

  DOCTOR.
 Hark, she speaks! I will set down what comes from her, to
    satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.
 Out, damned spot! Out, I say! One- two -why then 'tis
    time to do't.
 Hell is murky.
 Fie, my lord, fie! A soldier, and
    afeard? What need we fear who knows it, when none can call our
    power to account? Yet who would have thought the old man to have
    had so much blood in him?  
  DOCTOR.
 Do you mark that?
  LADY MACBETH.
 You mar all with this starting.

  DOCTOR.
 Go to, go to; you have known what you should not.

  GENTLEWOMAN.
 She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of that.

    Heaven knows what she has known.

  LADY MACBETH.
 Here's the smell of the blood still.
 I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the
    dignity of the whole body.
 This disease is beyond my practice.
 Yet I have known those
    which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their
    beds.

  LADY MACBETH.
 Wash your hands, put on your nightgown, look not so
    pale.
  
  DOCTOR.
 Even so?
  LADY MACBETH.
 To bed, to bed; there's knocking at the gate.

Exit.
 Directly.

  DOCTOR.
 Foul whisperings are abroad.

    More needs she the divine than the physician.

    God, God, forgive us all! Look after her;
    Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
    And still keep eyes upon her.

    My mind she has mated and amazed my sight.

    I think, but dare not speak.

  GENTLEWOMAN.


Enter Menteith, Caithness, Angus, Lennox, and Soldiers.


  MENTEITH.
 The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
    His uncle Siward, and the good Macduff.

    Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes
    Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
    Excite the mortified man.

  ANGUS.
 Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?
  LENNOX.
 For certain, sir, he is not; I have a file
    Of all the gentry.
 Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies.

  ANGUS.
 Now does he feel his title
    Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe
    Upon a dwarfish thief.

  MENTEITH.

  LENNOX.
 Or so much as it needs
    To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.

Dunsinane.


  MACBETH.


                       Enter a Servant.
 Geese, villain?  
  SERVANT.
 Soldiers, sir.
 What soldiers, patch?
    Death of thy soul! Those linen cheeks of thine
    Are counselors to fear.
 What soldiers, whey-face?
  SERVANT.
 The English force, so please you.

  MACBETH.
 Take thy face hence.
                    Exit Servant.

    Seyton-I am sick at heart,
    When I behold- Seyton, I say!- This push
    Will cheer me ever or disseat me now.

    I have lived long enough.
 My way of life
    Is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf,
    And that which should accompany old age,
    As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,
    I must not look to have; but in their stead,
    Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath,
    Which the poor heart would fain deny and dare not.

    Seyton!

                       Enter Seyton.
  

  SEYTON.
 What's your gracious pleasure?
  MACBETH.
 What news more?
  SEYTON.
 All is confirm'd, my lord, which was reported.
 I'll fight, 'til from my bones my flesh be hack'd.

    Give me my armor.

  SEYTON.

  MACBETH.

    How does your patient, doctor?
  DOCTOR.

  MACBETH.
 Cure her of that.

    Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,
    Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
    Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
    And with some sweet oblivious antidote
    Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff  
    Which weighs upon the heart?
  DOCTOR.

    Seyton, send out.
 Doctor, the Thanes fly from me.
 If thou couldst, doctor, cast
    The water of my land, find her disease
    And purge it to a sound and pristine health,
    I would applaud thee to the very echo,
    That should applaud again.
 Pull't off, I say.

    What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug
    Would scour these English hence? Hearst thou of them?
  DOCTOR.

  MACBETH.

    I will not be afraid of death and bane
    Till Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane.

  DOCTOR.
 [Aside.
 Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
    That chambers will be safe.

  SIWARD.
 Let every soldier hew him down a bough,
    And bear't before him; thereby shall we shadow
    The numbers of our host, and make discovery
    Err in report of us.

  SOLDIERS.
 We learn no other but the confident tyrant
    Keeps still in Dunsinane and will endure
    Our setting down before't.
 Let our just censures
    Attend the true event, and put we on
    Industrious soldiership.

  SIWARD.
 The time approaches
    That will with due decision make us know
    What we shall say we have and what we owe.

    Towards which advance the war.

                                                Exeunt Marching.

Dunsinane.
 Within the castle.


Enter Macbeth, Seyton, and Soldiers, with drum and colors.

    Were they not forced with those that should be ours,
    We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
    And beat them backward home.

                                          A cry of women within.

    What is that noise?
  SEYTON.
 I have almost forgot the taste of fears:
    The time has been, my senses would have cool'd
    To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair
    Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
    As life were in't.
 I have supp'd full with horrors;
    Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts,
    Cannot once start me.
  

                  Re-enter Seyton.
 She should have died hereafter;
    There would have been a time for such a word.

    Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow
    Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
    To the last syllable of recorded time;
    And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
    The way to dusty death.
 Out, out, brief candle!
    Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player
    That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
    And then is heard no more.


                 Enter a Messenger.
  
  MESSENGER.
 Gracious my lord,
    I should report that which I say I saw,
    But know not how to do it.
 Well, say, sir.

  MESSENGER.
 As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
    I look'd toward Birnam, and anon, methought,
    The Wood began to move.
 Liar and slave!
  MESSENGER.
 Let me endure your wrath, if't be not so.

    Within this three mile may you see it coming;
    I say, a moving grove.

  MACBETH.

    I pull in resolution and begin
    To doubt the equivocation of the fiend
    That lies like truth.
 "Fear not, till Birnam Wood
    Do come to Dunsinane," and now a wood
    Comes toward Dunsinane.
 Arm, arm, and out!  
    If this which he avouches does appear,
    There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.

    I 'gin to be aweary of the sun
    And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.

    Ring the alarum bell! Blow, wind! Come, wrack!
    At least we'll die with harness on our back.
         Exeunt.





SCENE VI.

Dunsinane.
  Before the castle.


Enter Malcolm, old Siward, Macduff, and their Army, with boughs.

Drum and colors.
 Now near enough; your leavy screens throw down,
    And show like those you are.
 You, worthy uncle,
    Shall with my cousin, your right noble son,
    Lead our first battle.

  SIWARD.
 Fare you well.

    Do we but find the tyrant's power tonight,
    Let us be beaten if we cannot fight.

  MACDUFF.
 Make all our trumpets speak, give them all breath,
    Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.

Dunsinane.


  MACBETH.
 They have tied me to a stake; I cannot fly,
    But bear-like I must fight the course.


                     Enter young Siward.


  YOUNG SIWARD.
 What is thy name?
  MACBETH.
 Thou'lt be afraid to hear it.

  MACBETH.
 My name's Macbeth.

  YOUNG SIWARD.
 The devil himself could not pronounce a title
    More hateful to mine ear.

  MACBETH.
  
                          They fight, and young Seward is slain.

  MACBETH.

    But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
    Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born.
 Enter Macduff.


  MACDUFF.
 Tyrant, show thy face!
    If thou best slain and with no stroke of mine,
    My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.
 Let me find him, Fortune!
    And more I beg not.
                           Exit.
 Alarums.

  
  SIWARD.

    The tyrant's people on both sides do fight,
    The noble Thanes do bravely in the war,
    The day almost itself professes yours,
    And little is to do.
 Alarum.


  MACBETH.
 Why should I play the Roman fool and die
    On mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes
    Do better upon them.


  MACDUFF.
 Turn, hell hound, turn!
  MACBETH.
 Of all men else I have avoided thee.

    But get thee back, my soul is too much charged
    With blood of thine already.

  MACBETH.

  MACDUFF.
 Despair thy charm,
    And let the angel whom thou still hast served
    Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb
    Untimely ripp'd.

  MACBETH.
 Accursed be that tongue that tells me so,
    For it hath cow'd my better part of man!
    And be these juggling fiends no more believed
    That patter with us in a double sense,
    That keep the word of promise to our ear
    And break it to our hope.
 I'll not fight with thee.
 Then yield thee, coward,
    And live to be the show and gaze o' the time.

    We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
    Painted upon a pole, and underwrit,
    "Here may you see the tyrant.
  
    Though Birnam Wood be come to Dunsinane,
    And thou opposed, being of no woman born,
    Yet I will try the last.
 Before my body
    I throw my warlike shield! Lay on, Macduff,
    And damn'd be him that first cries, "Hold, enough!"
                                       Exeunt fighting.
 Alarums.





SCENE IX.


Retreat.
 Flourish.
 Enter, with drum and colors, Malcolm, old Siward, Ross,
the other Thanes, and Soldiers.


  MALCOLM.
 I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.

  SIWARD.
 Some must go off, and yet, by these I see,
    So great a day as this is cheaply bought.

  MALCOLM.
 Macduff is missing, and your noble son.

  ROSS.

    He only lived but till he was a man,
    The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd
    In the unshrinking station where he fought,
    But like a man he died.

  SIWARD.
 Then he is dead?
  ROSS.
 Your cause of sorrow
    Must not be measured by his worth, for then
    It hath no end.
 Had he his hurts before?
  ROSS.
 Ay, on the front.

  SIWARD.

  MALCOLM.

  SIWARD.
 He's worth no more:
    They say he parted well and paid his score,
    And so God be with him! Here comes newer comfort.


  MACDUFF.
 Hail, King, for so thou art.
 Behold where stands
    The usurper's cursed head.
 The time is free.

    I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl
    That speak my salutation in their minds,
    Whose voices I desire aloud with mine-
    Hail, King of Scotland!
  ALL.
 Hail, King of Scotland!                         Flourish.
 We shall not spend a large expense of time
    Before we reckon with your several loves
    And make us even with you.

    So thanks to all at once and to each one,
    Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.

                                               Flourish.

                 -THE END-



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.

The DUKE'S palace

Enter DUKE, ESCALUS, LORDS, and ATTENDANTS

  DUKE.
 My lord.
 Of government the properties to unfold
    Would seem in me t' affect speech and discourse,
    Since I am put to know that your own science
    Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
    My strength can give you; then no more remains
    But that to your sufficiency- as your worth is able-
    And let them work.
 The nature of our people,
    Our city's institutions, and the terms
    For common justice, y'are as pregnant in
    As art and practice hath enriched any
    That we remember.
 There is our commission,
    From which we would not have you warp.
 Call hither,
    I say, bid come before us, Angelo.
         Exit an ATTENDANT
    What figure of us think you he will bear?
    For you must know we have with special soul  
    Elected him our absence to supply;
    Lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love,
    And given his deputation all the organs
    Of our own power.
 What think you of it?
  ESCALUS.
 If any in Vienna be of worth
    To undergo such ample grace and honour,
    It is Lord Angelo.


                          Enter ANGELO

  DUKE.

  ANGELO.
 Always obedient to your Grace's will,
    I come to know your pleasure.

  DUKE.
 Angelo,
    There is a kind of character in thy life
    That to th' observer doth thy history
    Fully unfold.

    Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,  
    Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
    Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
    As if we had them not.
 Spirits are not finely touch'd
    But to fine issues; nor Nature never lends
    The smallest scruple of her excellence
    But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
    Herself the glory of a creditor,
    Both thanks and use.

    Hold, therefore, Angelo-
    In our remove be thou at full ourself;
    Mortality and mercy in Vienna
    Live in thy tongue and heart.
 Old Escalus,
    Though first in question, is thy secondary.

  DUKE.
 We shall write to you,
    As time and our concernings shall importune,
    How it goes with us, and do look to know
    What doth befall you here.
 So, fare you well.

    To th' hopeful execution do I leave you
    Of your commissions.

  ANGELO.
 Yet give leave, my lord,
    That we may bring you something on the way.
 My haste may not admit it;
    Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do
    With any scruple: your scope is as mine own,
    So to enforce or qualify the laws
    As to your soul seems good.
 Give me your hand;
    I'll privily away.
 I love the people,
    But do not like to stage me to their eyes;
    Though it do well, I do not relish well  
    Their loud applause and Aves vehement;
    Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
    That does affect it.
 Once more, fare you well.
 The heavens give safety to your purposes!
  ESCALUS.
 Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!
  DUKE.
 I thank you.
                         Exit
  ESCALUS.
 I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
    To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
    To look into the bottom of my place:
    A pow'r I have, but of what strength and nature
    I am not yet instructed.

  ANGELO.
 'Tis so with me.

  ESCALUS.
                    Exeunt




SCENE II.
 If the Duke, with the other dukes, come not to composition
    with the King of Hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the
    King.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of
    Hungary's!
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Amen.
 Thou conclud'st like the sanctimonious pirate that went to
    sea with the Ten Commandments, but scrap'd one out of the table.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Ay, that he raz'd.
 Why, 'twas a commandment to command the captain
    and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to steal.

    There's not a soldier of us all that, in the thanksgiving before
    meat, do relish the petition well that prays for peace.

  LUCIO.
 I believe thee; for I think thou never wast where grace was
    said.
  
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 No? A dozen times at least.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 What, in metre?
  LUCIO.
 In any proportion or in any language.
 I think, or in any religion.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 And thou the velvet; thou art good velvet; thou'rt
    a three-pil'd piece, I warrant thee.
 Do I speak feelingly now?
  LUCIO.
 I will, out of thine own confession, learn to begin
    thy health; but, whilst I live, forget to drink after thee.
 I think I have done myself wrong, have I not?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 To what, I pray?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 Ay, and more.
 A French crown more.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 Nay, not, as one would say, healthy; but so sound as things
    that are hollow: thy bones are hollow; impiety has made a feast
    of thee.
 How now! which of your hips has the most profound
    sciatica?
  MRS.
 OVERDONE.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 Who's that, I pray thee?  
  MRS.
 Marry, sir, that's Claudio, Signior Claudio.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 Claudio to prison? 'Tis not so.

  MRS.

  LUCIO.
 Art
    thou sure of this?
  MRS.
 I am too sure of it; and it is for getting Madam
    Julietta with child.

  LUCIO.
 Believe me, this may be; he promis'd to meet me two hours
    since, and he was ever precise in promise-keeping.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 But most of all agreeing with the proclamation.

                                      Exeunt Lucio and GENTLEMEN
  MRS.
 OVERDONE.
 Yonder man is carried to prison.

  MRS.
 Well, what has he done?
  POMPEY.
 A woman.

  MRS.
 OVERDONE.
 But what's his offence?
  POMPEY.
 Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.

  MRS.
 What! is there a maid with child by him?
  POMPEY.
 No; but there's a woman with maid by him.
 You have not
   heard of the proclamation, have you?
  MRS.
 OVERDONE.
 And what shall become of those in the city?
  POMPEY.
 OVERDONE.
 But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be
    pull'd down?
  POMPEY.
 OVERDONE.

    Though you change your place you need not change your trade; I'll
    be your tapster still.
 Courage, there will be pity taken on you;
    you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you will
    be considered.

  MRS.
 What's to do here, Thomas Tapster? Let's withdraw.

  POMPEY.
                             Exeunt

            Enter PROVOST, CLAUDIO, JULIET, and OFFICERS;
                            LUCIO following

  CLAUDIO.
 Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to th' world?
    Bear me to prison, where I am committed.

  PROVOST.

  CLAUDIO.
 Why, how now, Claudio, whence comes this restraint?
  CLAUDIO.
 Our natures do pursue,
    Like rats that ravin down their proper bane,
    A thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.
 If I could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would send for
    certain of my creditors; and yet, to say the truth, I had as lief
    have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment.

    What's thy offence, Claudio?
  CLAUDIO.
 What but to speak of would offend again.
 What, is't murder?
  CLAUDIO.
 No.

  LUCIO.
 Call it so.
 Away, sir; you must go.

  CLAUDIO.
 Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
    I got possession of Julietta's bed.

    From whom we thought it meet to hide our love
    Till time had made them for us.
 But it chances
    The stealth of our most mutual entertainment,
    With character too gross, is writ on Juliet.

  LUCIO.
 I warrant it is; and thy head stands so tickle on thy
    shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off.

  CLAUDIO.
 I have done so, but he's not to be found.

    I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service:
    This day my sister should the cloister enter,
    And there receive her approbation;
    Acquaint her with the danger of my state;
    Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
    To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him.

    I have great hope in that; for in her youth
    There is a prone and speechless dialect  
    Such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art
    When she will play with reason and discourse,
    And well she can persuade.

  LUCIO.

  CLAUDIO.
 I thank you, good friend Lucio.
 Within two hours.

  CLAUDIO.
                           Exeunt




SCENE III.
 No, holy father; throw away that thought;
    Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
    Can pierce a complete bosom.
 May your Grace speak of it?
  DUKE.
 My holy sir, none better knows than you
    How I have ever lov'd the life removed,
    And held in idle price to haunt assemblies
    Where youth, and cost, a witless bravery keeps.

  FRIAR.

  DUKE.

  FRIAR.
 I do fear, too dreadful.
  
    Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
    'Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
    For what I bid them do; for we bid this be done,
    When evil deeds have their permissive pass
    And not the punishment.
 Moe reasons for this action
    At our more leisure shall I render you.

    Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise;
    Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses
    That his blood flows, or that his appetite
    Is more to bread than stone.
         Exeunt




SCENE IV.

A nunnery

Enter ISABELLA and FRANCISCA

  ISABELLA.
 And have you nuns no farther privileges?
  FRANCISCA.
 Yes, truly; I speak not as desiring more,
    But rather wishing a more strict restraint
    Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.
 [ Within] Ho! Peace be in this place!
  ISABELLA.
 Who's that which calls?
  FRANCISCA.
 It is a man's voice.
 Gentle Isabella,
    Turn you the key, and know his business of him:
    You may, I may not; you are yet unsworn;
    When you have vow'd, you must not speak with men
    But in the presence of the prioress;
    Then, if you speak, you must not show your face,
    Or, if you show your face, you must not speak.
 Peace and prosperity! Who is't that calls?
  
                           Enter LUCIO

  LUCIO.
 Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
    Proclaim you are no less.

  LUCIO.

    Not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
 For that which, if myself might be his judge,
    He should receive his punishment in thanks:
    He hath got his friend with child.

  ISABELLA.
 Sir, make me not your story.
 It is true.

    I would not- though 'tis my familiar sin
    With maids to seem the lapwing, and to jest,  
    Tongue far from heart- play with all virgins so:
    I hold you as a thing enskied and sainted,
    By your renouncement an immortal spirit,
    And to be talk'd with in sincerity,
    As with a saint.

  LUCIO.
 Do not believe it.
 Fewness and truth, 'tis thus:
    Your brother and his lover have embrac'd.

    As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
    That from the seedness the bare fallow brings
    To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
    Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.

  ISABELLA.
 Some one with child by him? My cousin Juliet?
  LUCIO.
 Adoptedly, as school-maids change their names
    By vain though apt affection.

  LUCIO.
 She it is.
 This is the point.

    The Duke is very strangely gone from hence;  
    Bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
    In hand, and hope of action; but we do learn,
    By those that know the very nerves of state,
    His givings-out were of an infinite distance
    From his true-meant design.
 Upon his place,
    And with full line of his authority,
    Governs Lord Angelo, a man whose blood
    Is very snow-broth, one who never feels
    The wanton stings and motions of the sense,
    But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
    With profits of the mind, study and fast.

    He- to give fear to use and liberty,
    Which have for long run by the hideous law,
    As mice by lions- hath pick'd out an act
    Under whose heavy sense your brother's life
    Falls into forfeit; he arrests him on it,
    And follows close the rigour of the statute
    To make him an example.
 And that's my pith of business  
    'Twixt you and your poor brother.

  ISABELLA.
 My power, alas, I doubt!
  LUCIO.
 Our doubts are traitors,
    And make us lose the good we oft might win
    By fearing to attempt.
 I'll see what I can do.
 But speedily.

  ISABELLA.
 I humbly thank you.

    Commend me to my brother; soon at night
    I'll send him certain word of my success.
 I take my leave of you.
 Good sir, adieu.
                              Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.
 Scene I.

A hall in ANGELO'S house

Enter ANGELO, ESCALUS, a JUSTICE, PROVOST, OFFICERS, and other ATTENDANTS

  ANGELO.
 We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
    Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
    And let it keep one shape till custom make it
    Their perch, and not their terror.

  ESCALUS.
 Ay, but yet
    Let us be keen, and rather cut a little
    Than fall and bruise to death.
 Alas! this gentleman,
    Whom I would save, had a most noble father.

  ANGELO.
 I not deny
    The jury, passing on the prisoner's life,
    May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
    Guiltier than him they try.
 What's open made to justice,
    That justice seizes.
 What knows the laws
    That thieves do pass on thieves? 'Tis very pregnant,
    The jewel that we find, we stoop and take't,
    Because we see it; but what we do not see
    We tread upon, and never think of it.

    You may not so extenuate his offence
    For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,
    When I, that censure him, do so offend,
    Let mine own judgment pattern out my death,
    And nothing come in partial.

  ESCALUS.

  ANGELO.
 Here, if it like your honour.

  ANGELO.
 See that Claudio  
    Be executed by nine to-morrow morning;
    Bring him his confessor; let him be prepar'd;
    For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.
        Exit PROVOST
  ESCALUS.
 [Aside] Well, heaven forgive him! and forgive us all!
    Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall;
    Some run from breaks of ice, and answer none,
    And some condemned for a fault alone.
 Come, bring them away; if these be good people in a
    commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in common houses,
    I know no law; bring them away.

  ANGELO.
 How now, sir! What's your name, and what's the matter?
  ELBOW.
 If it please your honour, I am the poor Duke's constable,
    and my name is Elbow; I do lean upon justice, sir, and do bring
    in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors.

  ANGELO.
 If it please your honour, I know not well what they are; but  
    precise villains they are, that I am sure of, and void of all
    profanation in the world that good Christians ought to have.

  ESCALUS.
 This comes off well; here's a wise officer.

  ANGELO.
 Go to; what quality are they of? Elbow is your name? Why
    dost thou not speak, Elbow?
  POMPEY.

  ANGELO.
 He, sir? A tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that serves a bad
    woman; whose house, sir, was, as they say, pluck'd down in the
    suburbs; and now she professes a hot-house, which, I think, is a
    very ill house too.

  ESCALUS.
 How know you that?
  ELBOW.
 Dost thou detest her therefore?
  ELBOW.
 I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as she, that
    this house, if it be not a bawd's house, it is pity of her life,
    for it is a naughty house.
 How dost thou know that, constable?  
  ELBOW.
 Marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman
    cardinally given, might have been accus'd in fornication,
    adultery, and all uncleanliness there.
 By the woman's means?
  ELBOW.
 Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone's means; but as she spit in
    his face, so she defied him.

  POMPEY.
 Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.

  ELBOW.

  ESCALUS.
 Do you hear how he misplaces?
  POMPEY.
 Sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving your
    honour's reverence, for stew'd prunes.
 Sir, we had but two in the
    house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were, in a
    fruit dish, a dish of some three pence; your honours have seen
    such dishes; they are not China dishes, but very good dishes.
 Go to, go to; no matter for the dish, sir.
 No, indeed.

  POMPEY.
 Very well; you being then, if you be rememb'red, cracking
    the stones of the foresaid prunes-
  FROTH.

  POMPEY.

  POMPEY.
 Why, very well then-
  ESCALUS.
 Come, you are a tedious fool.
 To the purpose: what was
    done to Elbow's wife that he hath cause to complain of? Come me
    to what was done to her.

  POMPEY.
 Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.

  ESCALUS.
 No, sir, nor I mean it not.
 Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's leave.
 All-hallond eve.

  POMPEY.
 Why, very well; I hope here be truths.
 He, sir, sitting, as
    I say, in a lower chair, sir; 'twas in the Bunch of Grapes,
    where, indeed, you have a delight to sit, have you not?
  FROTH.
 I have so; because it is an open room, and good for winter.

  POMPEY.
 Why, very well then; I hope here be truths.

  ESCALUS.
 Good morrow to your lordship.

    [Exit ANGELO] Now, sir, come on; what was done to Elbow's wife,
    once more?
  POMPEY.
 Once?- sir.
 There was nothing done to her once.

  ELBOW.

  ESCALUS.
 Doth  
    your honour mark his face?
  ESCALUS.
 Ay, sir, very well.

  POMPEY.
 Nay, I beseech you, mark it well.

  POMPEY.
 Doth your honour see any harm in his face?
  ESCALUS.
 Why, no.

  POMPEY.
 I'll be suppos'd upon a book his face is the worst thing
    about him.
 Good then; if his face be the worst thing about him,
    how could Master Froth do the constable's wife any harm? I would
    know that of your honour.

  ESCALUS.

  POMPEY.

  ELBOW.

  POMPEY.
  
  ESCALUS.
 O thou caitiff! O thou varlet! O thou wicked Hannibal! I
    respected with her before I was married to her! If ever I was
    respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship think me
    the poor Duke's officer.
 If he took you a box o' th' ear, you might have your
    action of slander too.

  ELBOW.
 What is't your
    worship's pleasure I shall do with this wicked caitiff?
  ESCALUS.
 Truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him that
    thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in his
    courses till thou know'st what they are.

  ELBOW.
 Marry, I thank your worship for it.
 Thou seest, thou wicked
    varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art to continue now,
    thou varlet; thou art to continue.
 Where were you born, friend?
  FROTH.
 Here in Vienna, sir.

  ESCALUS.
 Are you of fourscore pounds a year?  
  FROTH.
 Yes, an't please you, sir.

  ESCALUS.
 So.
 What trade are you of, sir?
  POMPEY.
 A tapster, a poor widow's tapster.

  ESCALUS.
 Your mistress' name?
  POMPEY.
 Mistress Overdone.

  ESCALUS.
 Hath she had any more than one husband?
  POMPEY.
 Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.
 Master Froth, I
    would not have you acquainted with tapsters: they will draw you,
    Master Froth, and you will hang them.
 Get you gone, and let me
    hear no more of you.

  FROTH.
 Well, no more of it, Master Froth; farewell.
 [Exit FROTH]
    Come you hither to me, Master Tapster; what's your name, Master
    Tapster?
  POMPEY.

  ESCALUS.
 What else?
  POMPEY.
 Bum, sir.
 Pompey,
    you are partly a bawd, Pompey, howsoever you colour it in being a
    tapster.
 Are you not? Come, tell me true; it shall be the better
    for you.

  POMPEY.
 Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.

  ESCALUS.
 How would you live, Pompey- by being a bawd? What do you
    think of the trade, Pompey? Is it a lawful trade?
  POMPEY.
 If the law would allow it, sir.
 No, Pompey.

  POMPEY.
 Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then.
 If you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten
    year together, you'll be glad to give out a commission for more  
    heads; if this law hold in Vienna ten year, I'll rent the fairest
    house in it, after threepence a bay.

  ESCALUS.
 Thank you, good Pompey; and, in requital of your prophecy,
    hark you: I advise you, let me not find you before me again upon
    any complaint whatsoever- no, not for dwelling where you do; if I
    do, Pompey, I shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd
    Caesar to you; in plain dealing, Pompey, I shall have you whipt.

    Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade;
    The valiant heart's not whipt out of his trade.
         Exit
  ESCALUS.

  ESCALUS.
 You say seven years together?
  ELBOW.
 And a half, sir.
 Alas, it hath been great pains to you! They do you wrong  
    to put you so oft upon't.
 Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters; as they are
    chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; I do it for some
    piece of money, and go through with all.

  ESCALUS.

  ELBOW.
 To your worship's house, sir?
  ESCALUS.
 To my house.
 Fare you well.
              [Exit ELBOW]
    What's o'clock, think you?
  JUSTICE.
 Eleven, sir.

  ESCALUS.

  ESCALUS.

  JUSTICE.

  ESCALUS.
 It is but needful:
    Mercy is not itself that oft looks so;
    Pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
  
    Come, sir.
                                            Exeunt




SCENE II.

Another room in ANGELO'S house

Enter PROVOST and a SERVANT

  SERVANT.
 He's hearing of a cause; he will come straight.

    I'll tell him of you.

  PROVOST.
 Pray you do.
 [Exit SERVANT] I'll know
    His pleasure; may be he will relent.
 Alas,
    He hath but as offended in a dream!
    All sects, all ages, smack of this vice; and he
    To die for 't!

                            Enter ANGELO

  ANGELO.
 Now, what's the matter, Provost?
  PROVOST.
 Is it your will Claudio shall die to-morrow?
  ANGELO.
 Did not I tell thee yea? Hadst thou not order?
    Why dost thou ask again?
  PROVOST.
 Lest I might be too rash;
    Under your good correction, I have seen
    When, after execution, judgment hath  
    Repented o'er his doom.

  ANGELO.
 Go to; let that be mine.

  ANGELO.


                           Re-enter SERVANT

  SERVANT.
 Hath he a sister?
  PROVOST.

  ANGELO.
 Well, let her be admitted.
                Exit SERVANT
    See you the fornicatress be remov'd;  
    Let her have needful but not lavish means;
    There shall be order for't.


                         Enter Lucio and ISABELLA

  PROVOST.
 [To ISABELLA] Y'are welcome; what's
    your will?
  ISABELLA.
 Well; the matter?
  ISABELLA.
 I have a brother is condemn'd to die;
    I do beseech you, let it be his fault,
    And not my brother.
  
  PROVOST.

  ANGELO.
 Condemn the fault and not the actor of it!
    Why, every fault's condemn'd ere it be done;
    Mine were the very cipher of a function,
    To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
    And let go by the actor.

  ISABELLA.
 Heaven keep your honour!
  LUCIO.

    To him, I say.

  ISABELLA.
 Must he needs die?
  ANGELO.
 Maiden, no remedy.

  ISABELLA.

  ISABELLA.
 But can you, if you would?
  ANGELO.
 But might you do't, and do the world no wrong,
    If so your heart were touch'd with that remorse
    As mine is to him?
  ANGELO.
 He's sentenc'd; 'tis too late.

  LUCIO.

  ISABELLA.
 Well, believe this:
    No ceremony that to great ones longs,
    Not the king's crown nor the deputed sword,
    The marshal's truncheon nor the judge's robe,
    Become them with one half so good a grace
    As mercy does.
 Pray you be gone.
 I would to heaven I had your potency,
    And you were Isabel! Should it then be thus?
    No; I would tell what 'twere to be a judge
    And what a prisoner.
  
  LUCIO.
 [To ISABELLA] Ay, touch him; there's the vein.

  ANGELO.
 Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
    And you but waste your words.
 How would you be
    If He, which is the top of judgment, should
    But judge you as you are? O, think on that;
    And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
    Like man new made.

  ANGELO.

    Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
    It should be thus with him.
 He must die to-morrow.

  ISABELLA.
  
    Who is it that hath died for this offence?
    There's many have committed it.
 [Aside] Ay, well said.

  ANGELO.
 The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept.

    Those many had not dar'd to do that evil
    If the first that did th' edict infringe
    Had answer'd for his deed.
 Yet show some pity.

  ANGELO.
 Be satisfied;
    Your brother dies to-morrow; be content.
  
  ISABELLA.
 So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
    And he that suffers.
 O, it is excellent
    To have a giant's strength! But it is tyrannous
    To use it like a giant.
 [To ISABELLA] That's well said.

  ISABELLA.
 Could great men thunder
    As Jove himself does, Jove would never be quiet,
    For every pelting petty officer
    Would use his heaven for thunder,
    Nothing but thunder.
 Merciful Heaven,
    Thou rather, with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt,
    Splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
    Than the soft myrtle.

  LUCIO.
 [To ISABELLA] O, to him, to him, wench! He will relent;  
    He's coming; I perceive 't.
 [Aside] Pray heaven she win him.

    Great men may jest with saints: 'tis wit in them;
    But in the less foul profanation.

  ISABELLA.
 That in the captain's but a choleric word
    Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.

  LUCIO.

  ANGELO.
 Go to your bosom,
    Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
    That's like my brother's fault.
 If it confess
    A natural guiltiness such as is his,
    Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
    Against my brother's life.

  ANGELO.
- Fare you well.
 Gentle my lord, turn back.
 I will bethink me.

  ISABELLA.

  ANGELO.
 How, bribe me?
  ISABELLA.
 [To ISABELLA) You had marr'd all else.

  ISABELLA.
 Not with fond sicles of the tested gold,
    Or stones, whose rate are either rich or poor
    As fancy values them; but with true prayers
    That shall be up at heaven and enter there
    Ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls,
    From fasting maids, whose minds are dedicate
    To nothing temporal.

  ANGELO.
 Well; come to me to-morrow.

  LUCIO.

  ISABELLA.
 Heaven keep your honour safe!
  ANGELO.
 [Aside] Amen; for I
    Am that way going to temptation
    Where prayers cross.

  ISABELLA.
 At what hour to-morrow  
    Shall I attend your lordship?
  ANGELO.
 At any time 'fore noon.
 Save your honour!              Exeunt all but ANGELO
  ANGELO.
 From thee; even from thy virtue!
    What's this, what's this? Is this her fault or mine?
    The tempter or the tempted, who sins most?
    Ha!
    Not she; nor doth she tempt; but it is I
    That, lying by the violet in the sun,
    Do as the carrion does, not as the flow'r,
    Corrupt with virtuous season.
 Can it be
    That modesty may more betray our sense
    Than woman's lightness? Having waste ground enough,
    Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary,
    And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!
    What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?
    Dost thou desire her foully for those things
    That make her good? O, let her brother live!
    Thieves for their robbery have authority
    When judges steal themselves.
 Ever till now,
    When men were fond, I smil'd and wond'red how.
          Exit




SCENE III.

  PROVOST.
 What's your will, good friar?
  DUKE.
 Do me the common right
    To let me see them, and to make me know
    The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
    To them accordingly.
 I would do more than that, if more were needful.


                          Enter JULIET

    Look, here comes one; a gentlewoman of mine,
    Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
    Hath blister'd her report.
 She is with child;
    And he that got it, sentenc'd- a young man
    More fit to do another such offence  
    Than die for this.

  DUKE.
 When must he die?
  PROVOST.
 As I do think, to-morrow.

    [To JULIET] I have provided for you; stay awhile
    And you shall be conducted.

  DUKE.
 I do; and bear the shame most patiently.

  DUKE.
 I'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
    And try your penitence, if it be sound
    Or hollowly put on.

  DUKE.
 Love you the man that wrong'd you?
  JULIET.

  DUKE.
 Mutually.

  DUKE.
 I do confess it, and repent it, father.
 'Tis meet so, daughter; but lest you do repent
    As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,  
    Which sorrow is always toward ourselves, not heaven,
    Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
    But as we stand in fear-
  JULIET.
 I do repent me as it is an evil,
    And take the shame with joy.

    Your partner, as I hear, must die to-morrow,
    And I am going with instruction to him.

    Grace go with you! Benedicite!                          Exit
  JULIET.
                              Exeunt




SCENE IV.
 When I would pray and think, I think and pray
    To several subjects.
 Heaven hath my empty words,
    Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
    Anchors on Isabel.
 Heaven in my mouth,
    As if I did but only chew his name,
    And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
    Of my conception.
 The state whereon I studied
    Is, like a good thing being often read,
    Grown sere and tedious; yea, my gravity,
    Wherein- let no man hear me- I take pride,
    Could I with boot change for an idle plume
    Which the air beats for vain.
 O place, O form,
    How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
    Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls
    To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood.

    Let's write 'good angel' on the devil's horn;
    'Tis not the devil's crest.
 One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.
 Teach her the way.
 I am come to know your pleasure.

  ANGELO.
 That you might know it would much better please me
    Than to demand what 'tis.
 Your brother cannot live.

  ISABELLA.
 Even so! Heaven keep your honour!
  ANGELO.
 Yet may he live awhile, and, it may be,
    As long as you or I; yet he must die.
 Yea.

  ISABELLA.
 When? I beseech you; that in his reprieve,
    Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted
    That his soul sicken not.

  ANGELO.
 Say you so? Then I shall pose you quickly.
 Sir, believe this:
    I had rather give my body than my soul.

  ANGELO.
 I talk not of your soul; our compell'd sins
    Stand more for number than for accompt.

  ISABELLA.
 Nay, I'll not warrant that; for I can speak
    Against the thing I say.
 Answer to this:
    I, now the voice of the recorded law,
    Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life;
    Might there not be a charity in sin
    To save this brother's life?
  ISABELLA.
 Please you to do't,
    I'll take it as a peril to my soul
    It is no sin at all, but charity.
 Pleas'd you to do't at peril of your soul,
    Were equal poise of sin and charity.

  ISABELLA.
 That I do beg his life, if it be sin,
    Heaven let me bear it! You granting of my suit,
    If that be sin, I'll make it my morn prayer
    To have it added to the faults of mine,
    And nothing of your answer.

  ANGELO.
 Nay, but hear me;
    Your sense pursues not mine; either you are ignorant
    Or seem so, craftily; and that's not good.

  ISABELLA.
 Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good
    But graciously to know I am no better.
 Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright
    When it doth tax itself; as these black masks
    Proclaim an enshielded beauty ten times louder
    Than beauty could, display'd.
 But mark me:
    To be received plain, I'll speak more gross-
    Your brother is to die.
 So.

  ANGELO.
 And his offence is so, as it appears,  
    Accountant to the law upon that pain.

  ANGELO.
 As much for my poor brother as myself;
    That is, were I under the terms of death,
    Th' impression of keen whips I'd wear as rubies,
    And strip myself to death as to a bed
    That longing have been sick for, ere I'd yield
    My body up to shame.

  ANGELO.
  
  ISABELLA.

  ANGELO.
 Were not you, then, as cruel as the sentence
    That you have slander'd so?
  ISABELLA.

  ANGELO.
 You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant;
    And rather prov'd the sliding of your brother
    A merriment than a vice.

  ISABELLA.
 O, pardon me, my lord! It oft falls out,
    To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean:
    I something do excuse the thing I hate
    For his advantage that I dearly love.
 Else let my brother die,
    If not a fedary but only he
    Owe and succeed thy weakness.
  
  ANGELO.
 Nay, women are frail too.
 Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves,
    Which are as easy broke as they make forms.

    Women, help heaven! Men their creation mar
    In profiting by them.
 Nay, call us ten times frail;
    For we are soft as our complexions are,
    And credulous to false prints.

  ANGELO.
 I think it well;
    And from this testimony of your own sex,
    Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
    Than faults may shake our frames, let me be bold.
 I have no tongue but one; gentle, my lord,
    Let me intreat you speak the former language.
 My brother did love Juliet,  
    And you tell me that he shall die for't.
 He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.
 I know your virtue hath a license in't,
    Which seems a little fouler than it is,
    To pluck on others.

  ANGELO.

  ISABELLA.
 Ha! little honour to be much believ'd,
    And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!
    I will proclaim thee, Angelo, look for't.

  ANGELO.
 I have begun,
    And now I give my sensual race the rein:  
    Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite;
    Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes
    That banish what they sue for; redeem thy brother
    By yielding up thy body to my will;
    Or else he must not only die the death,
    But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
    To ling'ring sufferance.
 As for you,
    Say what you can: my false o'erweighs your true.

    Though he hath fall'n by prompture of the blood,
    Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour
    That, had he twenty heads to tender down  
    On twenty bloody blocks, he'd yield them up
    Before his sister should her body stoop
    To such abhorr'd pollution.
         Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.

The prison

Enter DUKE, disguised as before, CLAUDIO, and PROVOST

  DUKE.
 So, then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
  CLAUDIO.
 Reason thus with life.
 A breath thou art,
    Servile to all the skyey influences,
    That dost this habitation where thou keep'st
    Hourly afflict.
 Thou art not noble;
    For all th' accommodations that thou bear'st
    Are nurs'd by baseness.
 Thy best of rest is sleep,  
    And that thou oft provok'st; yet grossly fear'st
    Thy death, which is no more.
 Thou art not thyself;
    For thou exists on many a thousand grains
    That issue out of dust.
 Happy thou art not;
    For what thou hast not, still thou striv'st to get,
    And what thou hast, forget'st.
 Thou art not certain;
    For thy complexion shifts to strange effects,
    After the moon.
 Thou hast nor youth nor age,
    But, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep,
    Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth
    Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
    Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
    Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,  
    To make thy riches pleasant.
 What's yet in this
    That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
    Lie hid moe thousand deaths; yet death we fear,
    That makes these odds all even.

    To sue to live, I find I seek to die;
    And, seeking death, find life.
 [Within] What, ho! Peace here; grace and good company!
  PROVOST.
 Dear sir, ere long I'll visit you again.
 Most holy sir, I thank you.
 My business is a word or two with Claudio.

  PROVOST.
 And very welcome.

  DUKE.
 Provost, a word with you.

  PROVOST.
 As many as you please.

  DUKE.

                                         Exeunt DUKE and PROVOST  
  CLAUDIO.
 Now, sister, what's the comfort?
  ISABELLA.

    Therefore, your best appointment make with speed;
    To-morrow you set on.

  CLAUDIO.
 Is there no remedy?
  ISABELLA.

  CLAUDIO.

  CLAUDIO.
  
  CLAUDIO.
 Let me know the point.

  ISABELLA.
 Dar'st thou die?
    The sense of death is most in apprehension;
    And the poor beetle that we tread upon
    In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
    As when a giant dies.

  CLAUDIO.
 Why give you me this shame?
    Think you I can a resolution fetch
    From flow'ry tenderness? If I must die,
    I will encounter darkness as a bride
    And hug it in mine arms.

  ISABELLA.
 Yes, thou must die:  
    Thou art too noble to conserve a life
    In base appliances.
 This outward-sainted deputy,
    Whose settled visage and deliberate word
    Nips youth i' th' head, and follies doth enew
    As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil;
    His filth within being cast, he would appear
    A pond as deep as hell.

  CLAUDIO.
 The precise Angelo!
  ISABELLA.
 O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell
    The damned'st body to invest and cover
    In precise guards! Dost thou think, Claudio,
    If I would yield him my virginity
    Thou mightst be freed?
  CLAUDIO.
 O heavens! it cannot be.

  ISABELLA.

  CLAUDIO.

  CLAUDIO.
 Thanks, dear Isabel.
 Yes.
 Has he affections in him
    That thus can make him bite the law by th' nose
    When he would force it? Sure it is no sin;
    Or of the deadly seven it is the least.

  ISABELLA.
 Which is the least?
  CLAUDIO.
 What says my brother?
  CLAUDIO.
 Death is a fearful thing.

  ISABELLA.
 And shamed life a hateful.
 Alas, alas!
  CLAUDIO.

    What sin you do to save a brother's life,
    Nature dispenses with the deed so far
    That it becomes a virtue.

  ISABELLA.
 Take my defiance;
    Die; perish.
 Might but my bending down
    Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.

  CLAUDIO.
 O fie, fie, fie!
    Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.

    Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd;
    'Tis best that thou diest quickly.

  CLAUDIO.
 O, hear me, Isabella.


                            Re-enter DUKE

  DUKE.
 Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.

  ISABELLA.
 What is your will?
  DUKE.
 Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and by have
    some speech with you; the satisfaction I would require is  
    likewise your own benefit.

  ISABELLA.
 I have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be stolen out
    of other affairs; but I will attend you awhile.

                                                   [Walks apart]
  DUKE.
 Son, I have overheard what hath pass'd between you and your
    sister.
 She, having the truth of honour in her,
    hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to
    receive.
 I am confessor to Angelo, and I know this to be true;
    therefore prepare yourself to death.
 Do not satisfy your
    resolution with hopes that are fallible; to-morrow you must die;
    go to your knees and make ready.

  DUKE.
 Farewell.


                          Re-enter PROVOST
  
  PROVOST.
 That, now you are come, you will be gone.
 Leave me a while
    with the maid; my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch
    her by my company.

  PROVOST.
                            Exit PROVOST
  DUKE.
 The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good; the
    goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in goodness;
    but grace, being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body
    of it ever fair.
 The assault that Angelo hath made to you,
    fortune hath convey'd to my understanding; and, but that frailty
    hath examples for his falling, I should wonder at Angelo.
 How
    will you do to content this substitute, and to save your brother?
  ISABELLA.
 I am now going to resolve him; I had rather my brother
    die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born.
 But, O, how
    much is the good Duke deceiv'd in Angelo! If ever he return, and
    I can speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or discover his
    government.
 That shall not be much amiss; yet, as the matter now stands,
    he will avoid your accusation: he made trial of you only.

    Therefore fasten your ear on my advisings; to the love I have in  
    doing good a remedy presents itself.
 I do make myself believe
    that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited
    benefit; redeem your brother from the angry law; do no stain to
    your own gracious person; and much please the absent Duke, if
    peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this
    business.
 Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful.
 Have you not
    heard speak of Mariana, the sister of Frederick, the great
    soldier who miscarried at sea?
  ISABELLA.

  DUKE.
 But mark how heavily this befell to the poor gentlewoman:
    there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love toward
    her ever most kind and natural; with him the portion and sinew of  
    her fortune, her marriage-dowry; with both, her combinate
    husband, this well-seeming Angelo.
 Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his
    comfort; swallowed his vows whole, pretending in her discoveries
    of dishonour; in few, bestow'd her on her own lamentation, which
    she yet wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is
    washed with them, but relents not.

  ISABELLA.
 What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from
    the world! What corruption in this life that it will let this man
    live! But how out of this can she avail?
  DUKE.
 Show me how, good father.

  DUKE.
 This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her
    first affection; his unjust unkindness, that in all reason should
    have quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current,
    made it more violent and unruly.
 Go you to Angelo; answer his
    requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with his demands to  
    the point; only refer yourself to this advantage: first, that
    your stay with him may not be long; that the time may have all
    shadow and silence in it; and the place answer to convenience.

    This being granted in course- and now follows all: we shall
    advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment, go in your
    place.
 The maid will I frame and make fit for
    his attempt.
 What
    think you of it?
  ISABELLA.
 The image of it gives me content already; and I trust it
    will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
 It lies much in your holding up.
 I will presently to Saint Luke's; there,
    at the moated grange, resides this dejected Mariana.
 At that
    place call upon me; and dispatch with Angelo, that it may be
    quickly.
  
  ISABELLA.
 Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs
    buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the
    world drink brown and white bastard.

  DUKE.
 O heavens! what stuff is here?
  POMPEY.
 'Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the merriest
    was put down, and the worser allow'd by order of law a furr'd
    gown to keep him warm; and furr'd with fox on lamb-skins too, to
    signify that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the
    facing.

  ELBOW.

  DUKE.
 And you, good brother father.
 What offence hath this man made
    you, sir?
  ELBOW.

  DUKE.
 Do thou but think
    What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
    From such a filthy vice; say to thyself
    'From their abominable and beastly touches
    I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.
'
    Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
    So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.

  POMPEY.
 Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet, sir,
    I would prove-
  DUKE.
 Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
    Thou wilt prove his.
 He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning.

    The deputy cannot abide a whoremaster; if he be a whoremonger,
    and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.

  DUKE.

  ELBOW.
 I spy comfort; I cry bail.

  LUCIO.
 Still thus, and thus; still worse!
  LUCIO.
 How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she still,
    ha?
  POMPEY.
 Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is
    herself in the tub.

  LUCIO.
 Art going to prison, Pompey?
  POMPEY.

  LUCIO.
 Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey.
 For being a bawd, for being a bawd.
 Well, then, imprison him.
 If imprisonment be the due of a
    bawd, why, 'tis his right.
 Bawd is he doubtless, and of
    antiquity, too; bawd-born.
 Farewell, good Pompey.
 Commend me to
    the prison, Pompey.
 I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
 I will
    pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage.
 If you take it not
    patiently, why, your mettle is the more.
 Adieu trusty Pompey.

  DUKE.

  POMPEY.
 You will not bail me then, sir?
  LUCIO.
 What news abroad, friar? what news?  
  ELBOW.
 Come your ways, sir; come.
 Go to kennel, Pompey, go.


                               Exeunt ELBOW, POMPEY and OFFICERS

    What news, friar, of the Duke?
  DUKE.
 I know none.
 Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other some, he is
    in Rome; but where is he, think you?
  DUKE.
 I know not where; but wheresoever, I wish him well.

  LUCIO.

  DUKE.
 He does well in't.
 A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him;
    something too crabbed that way, friar.

  DUKE.
 It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.

  LUCIO.
 Is it
    true, think you?
  DUKE.
 How should he be made, then?
  LUCIO.
 Some report a sea-maid spawn'd him; some, that he was begot
    between two stock-fishes.
 And he
    is a motion generative; that's infallible.

  DUKE.

  LUCIO.

  DUKE.
 I never heard the absent Duke much detected for women; he was
    not inclin'd that way.

  LUCIO.
 'Tis not possible.
 Who- not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty; and his use
    was to put a ducat in her clack-dish.
 He would be drunk too; that let me inform you.
 You do him wrong, surely.
 A shy fellow was the Duke; and
    I believe I know the cause of his withdrawing.

  DUKE.
 What, I prithee, might be the cause?
  LUCIO.
 No, pardon; 'tis a secret must be lock'd within the teeth
    and the lips; but this I can let you understand: the greater file
    of the subject held the Duke to be wise.

  DUKE.
 Wise? Why, no question but he was.

  LUCIO.
 A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
 Either this is envy in you, folly, or mistaking; the very
    stream of his life, and the business he hath helmed, must, upon a
    warranted need, give him a better proclamation.
 Let him be but
    testimonied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear to
    the envious a scholar, a statesman, and a soldier.
 Sir, I know him, and I love him.

  DUKE.
  
  LUCIO.

  DUKE.
 I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak.

    But, if ever the Duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me
    desire you to make your answer before him.
 If it be honest you
    have spoke, you have courage to maintain it; I am bound to call
    upon you; and I pray you your name?
  LUCIO.
 He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to report you.
 I fear you not.

  DUKE.
 O, you hope the Duke will return no more; or you imagine me
    too unhurtful an opposite.
 But, indeed, I can do you little harm:
    you'll forswear this again.
 Thou art deceiv'd in me, friar.
 But no
    more of this.
 Canst thou tell if Claudio die to-morrow or no?
  DUKE.
 Why? For filling a bottle with a tun-dish.
 I would the Duke
    we talk of were return'd again.
 This ungenitur'd agent will
    unpeople the province with continency; sparrows must not build in
    his house-eaves because they are lecherous.
 The Duke yet would
    have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to  
    light.
 Farewell, good friar; I prithee pray for me.
 He's not
    past it yet; and, I say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar
    though she smelt brown bread and garlic.
 Say that I said so.
                                               Exit
  DUKE.
 What king so strong
    Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
    But who comes here?

             Enter ESCALUS, PROVOST, and OFFICERS with
                           MISTRESS OVERDONE

  ESCALUS.
 Go, away with her to prison.

  MRS.

  ESCALUS.
  
  PROVOST.
 A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please your
    honour.

  MRS.
 OVERDONE.
 My lord, this is one Lucio's information against me.

    Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the Duke's time;
    he promis'd her marriage.
 That fellow is a fellow of much license.
 Away with her to prison.
 Go to; no more words.
 Let him be furnish'd
    with divines, and have all charitable preparation.
 So please you, this friar hath been with him, and advis'd
    him for th' entertainment of death.

  ESCALUS.
 Good even, good father.
 Bliss and goodness on you!
  ESCALUS.
 Of whence are you?
  DUKE.
 What news abroad i' th' world?
  DUKE.
 None, but that there is so great a fever on goodness that the
    dissolution of it must cure it.
 There is scarce
    truth enough alive to make societies secure; but security enough
    to make fellowships accurst.
 This news is old enough, yet it is every
    day's news.
 I pray you, sir, of what disposition was the Duke?
  ESCALUS.
 One that, above all other strifes, contended especially to
    know himself.
 What pleasure was he given to?
  ESCALUS.
 But leave we him to his events, with a prayer they
    may prove prosperous; and let me desire to know how you find
    Claudio prepar'd.
 I am made to understand that you have lent him
    visitation.
 He professes to have received no sinister measure from his
    judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of
    justice.

  ESCALUS.
 You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner
    the very debt of your calling.
 If his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding, it
    shall become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath
    sentenc'd himself.

  ESCALUS.
 I am going to visit the prisoner.
 Fare you well.

  DUKE.

         Shame to him whose cruel striking
         Kills for faults of his own liking!
         Twice treble shame on Angelo,
         To weed my vice and let his grow!
         O, what may man within him hide,
         Though angel on the outward side!
         How may likeness, made in crimes,
         Make a practice on the times,
         To draw with idle spiders' strings
         Most ponderous and substantial things!
         Craft against vice I must apply.
                    Exit




Act IV.
 Scene I.

The moated grange at Saint Duke's

Enter MARIANA; and BOY singing

                             SONG

           Take, O, take those lips away,
             That so sweetly were forsworn;
           And those eyes, the break of day,
             Lights that do mislead the morn;
           But my kisses bring again, bring again;
           Seals of love, but seal'd in vain, seal'd in vain.

    Let me excuse me, and believe me so,  
    My mirth it much displeas'd, but pleas'd my woe.

  DUKE.
 You have not been inquir'd after; I have sat here all day.


                         Enter ISABELLA

  DUKE.
 I
    shall crave your forbearance a little.

  MARIANA.
 I am always bound to you.

    What is the news from this good deputy?
  ISABELLA.

    There have I made my promise
    Upon the heavy middle of the night
    To call upon him.

  DUKE.
 Are there no other tokens
    Between you 'greed concerning her observance?
  ISABELLA.
 No, none, but only a repair i' th' dark;
    And that I have possess'd him my most stay
    Can be but brief; for I have made him know
    I have a servant comes with me along,
    That stays upon me; whose persuasion is
    I come about my brother.
 'Tis well borne up.

    I have not yet made known to Mariana
    A word of this.
 What ho, within! come forth.
 I do desire the like.

  DUKE.
 Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?
  MARIANA.

  DUKE.
 Take, then, this your companion by the hand,
    Who hath a story ready for your ear.

    I shall attend your leisure; but make haste;
    The vaporous night approaches.
 Volumes of report
    Run with these false, and most contrarious quest
    Upon thy doings.
 Thousand escapes of wit
    Make thee the father of their idle dream,
    And rack thee in their fancies.
 She'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
    If you advise it.

  DUKE.
 It is not my consent,
    But my entreaty too.
 Little have you to say,
    When you depart from him, but, soft and low,
    'Remember now my brother.
'
  MARIANA.

    He is your husband on a pre-contract.

The prison

Enter PROVOST and POMPEY

  PROVOST.
 Come hither, sirrah.
 If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a
    married man, he's his wife's head, and I can never cut of a
    woman's head.

  PROVOST.
 Come, sir, leave me your snatches and yield me a direct
    answer.
 To-morrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine.
 Here
    is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office lacks a
    helper; if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall redeem
    you from your gyves; if not, you shall have your full time of
    imprisonment, and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping, for
    you have been a notorious bawd.

  POMPEY.

  PROVOST.
 Do you call, sir?
  PROVOST.
 Sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in your
    execution.
 If you think it meet, compound with him by the year,
    and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the present,
    and dismiss him.

  ABHORSON.
 A bawd, sir? Fie upon him! He will discredit our mystery.
 Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and your
    whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting, do
    prove my occupation a mystery; but what mystery there should be
    in hanging, if I should be hang'd, I cannot imagine.
 Sir, it is a mystery.

  POMPEY.
 Every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be too
    little for your thief, your true man thinks it big enough; if it
    be too big for your thief, your thief thinks it little enough; so
    every true man's apparel fits your thief.


                          Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST.
 Are you agreed?
  POMPEY.
 Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your hangman is a more
    penitent trade than your bawd; he doth oftener ask forgiveness.
 You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe to-morrow
    four o'clock.
 Come on, bawd; I will instruct thee in my trade; follow.

  POMPEY.
 I do desire to learn, sir; and I hope, if you have occasion
    to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare; for truly,
    sir, for your kindness I owe you a good turn.
 Call hither Barnardine and Claudio.

                                      Exeunt ABHORSON and POMPEY
    Th' one has my pity; not a jot the other,
    Being a murderer, though he were my brother.
  

                           Enter CLAUDIO

    Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death;
    'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
    Thou must be made immortal.

  PROVOST.
 [Knocking within] But hark, what
      noise?
    Heaven give your spirits comfort!               Exit CLAUDIO
    [Knocking continues] By and by.

    I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
    For the most gentle Claudio.
 The best and wholesom'st spirits of the night
    Envelop you, good Provost! Who call'd here of late?
  PROVOST.
 None, since the curfew rung.

  DUKE.

  DUKE.
 They will then, ere't be long.

  PROVOST.
 What comfort is for Claudio?
  DUKE.
 There's some in hope.
 It is a bitter deputy.

  DUKE.
 Not so, not so; his life is parallel'd
    Even with the stroke and line of his great justice;
    He doth with holy abstinence subdue
    That in himself which he spurs on his pow'r
    To qualify in others.
 [Knocking within] Now are they
      come.
                                         Exit PROVOST
    This is a gentle provost; seldom when
    The steeled gaoler is the friend of men.
 [Knocking within]
    How now, what noise! That spirit's possess'd with haste  
    That wounds th' unsisting postern with these strokes.


                        Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST.

  DUKE.
 Have you no countermand for Claudio yet
    But he must die to-morrow?
  PROVOST.
 None, sir, none.

  DUKE.

  DUKE.
 And here comes Claudio's pardon.

  MESSENGER.
 My lord hath sent you this note; and by me this further
    charge, that you swerve not from the smallest article of it,
    neither in time, matter, or other circumstance.
 Good morrow; for
    as I take it, it is almost day.

  PROVOST.
 [Aside] This is his pardon, purchas'd by such sin
    For which the pardoner himself is in;
    Hence hath offence his quick celerity,
    When it is borne in high authority.

    Now, sir, what news?
  PROVOST.

  DUKE.
 Pray you, let's hear.
 [Reads] 'Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let
    Claudio be executed by four of the clock, and, in the afternoon,  
    Barnardine.
 For my better satisfaction, let me have Claudio's
    head sent me by five.
 Let this be duly performed, with a thought
    that more depends on it than we must yet deliver.
 Thus fail not
    to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.
 A Bohemian born; but here nurs'd up and bred.

    One that is a prisoner nine years old.

  PROVOST.

  DUKE.

  DUKE.
 Hath he borne himself penitently in prison? How seems he to
    be touch'd?
  PROVOST.
 A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a  
    drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless, of what's past,
    present, or to come; insensible of mortality and desperately
    mortal.
 He will hear none.
 If I read it not truly, my ancient skill
    beguiles me; but in the boldness of my cunning I will lay myself
    in hazard.
 Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is no
    greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath sentenc'd him.

  PROVOST.
 Pray, sir, in what?
  DUKE.

  PROVOST.
 Alack! How may I do it, having the hour limited, and an  
    express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view
    of Angelo? I may make my case as Claudio's, to cross this in the
    smallest.

  PROVOST.
 O, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it.
 Shave
    the head and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the
    penitent to be so bar'd before his death.
 You know the course is
    common.
 Were you sworn to the Duke, or to the deputy?
  PROVOST.
 To him and to his substitutes.

  DUKE.
 You will think you have made no offence if the Duke avouch
    the justice of your dealing?
  PROVOST.
 But what likelihood is in that?
  DUKE.
 Not a resemblance, but a certainty.

  PROVOST.
 I know them both.

  DUKE.
 The contents of this is the return of the Duke; you shall
    anon over-read it at your pleasure, where you shall find within
    these two days he will be here.
 Put not yourself into
    amazement how these things should be: all difficulties are but
    easy when they are known.
 I will give him a present shrift, and advise
    him for a better place.
 Come away; it is almost clear dawn.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE III.

The prison

Enter POMPEY

  POMPEY.
 I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of
    profession; one would think it were Mistress Overdone's own
    house, for here be many of her old customers.
 First, here's young
    Master Rash; he's in for a commodity of brown paper and old
    ginger, nine score and seventeen pounds, of which he made five
    marks ready money.
 Then is there here one Master
    Caper, at the suit of Master Threepile the mercer, for some four
    suits of peach-colour'd satin, which now peaches him a beggar.
 Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.

  POMPEY.
 Master Barnardine! You must rise and be hang'd, Master
    Barnardine!
  ABHORSON.
 Your friends, sir; the hangman.

  BARNARDINE.
 Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.

  POMPEY.
 Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are executed, and
    sleep afterwards.

  ABHORSON.
 Go in to him, and fetch him out.


                             Enter BARNARDINE

  ABHORSON.
 Very ready, sir.

  BARNARDINE.
 How now, Abhorson, what's the news with you?
  ABHORSON.
 Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your prayers;
    for, look you, the warrant's come.

  BARNARDINE.
 You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I am not
    fitted for't.

  POMPEY.
 O, the better, sir! For he that drinks all night and is
    hanged betimes in the morning may sleep the sounder all the next
    day.
 Look you, sir, here comes your ghostly father.
 Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are
    to depart, I am come to advise you, comfort you, and pray with
    you.

  BARNARDINE.
 Friar, not I; I have been drinking hard all night, and
    I will have more time to prepare me, or they shall beat out my
    brains with billets.
 I will not consent to die this day, that's  
    certain.

  BARNARDINE.
 I swear I will not die to-day for any man's persuasion.

  DUKE.
 But hear you-
  BARNARDINE.
                  Exit
  DUKE.
 Unfit to live or die.

                                      Exeunt ABHORSON and POMPEY

                            Enter PROVOST

  PROVOST.
 Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
  DUKE.
 A creature unprepar'd, unmeet for death;
    And to transport him in the mind he is
    Were damnable.

  PROVOST.
 Here in the prison, father,
    There died this morning of a cruel fever
    One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,  
    A man of Claudio's years; his beard and head
    Just of his colour.
 What if we do omit
    This reprobate till he were well inclin'd,
    And satisfy the deputy with the visage
    Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?
  DUKE.
 See this be done,
    And sent according to command; whiles I
    Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.

  PROVOST.
 This shall be done, good father, presently.

    But Barnardine must die this afternoon;
    And how shall we continue Claudio,
    To save me from the danger that might come
    If he were known alive?
  DUKE.
 Let this be done:
    Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio.
  
  PROVOST.
 I am your free dependant.

  DUKE.

    We shall proceed with Angelo.
 Here is the head; I'll carry it myself.

  DUKE.
 Make a swift return;
    For I would commune with you of such things
    That want no ear but yours.

  PROVOST.
 [ Within ] Peace, ho, be here!
  DUKE.
 The tongue of Isabel.


                           Enter ISABELLA

  ISABELLA.
 Ho, by your leave!
  DUKE.
 Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.

    Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
  DUKE.

  ISABELLA.
 Nay, but it is not so.
 It is no other.
 O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!
  DUKE.
 You shall not be admitted to his sight.
  
  ISABELLA.
 This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot;
    Forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.

    Mark what I say, which you shall find
    By every syllable a faithful verity.
 Nay, dry your eyes.

    One of our covent, and his confessor,
    Gives me this instance.
 Already he hath carried
    Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
    Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
    There to give up their pow'r.
 If you can, pace your wisdom
    In that good path that I would wish it go,
    And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
    Grace of the Duke, revenges to your heart,
    And general honour.
 I am directed by you.

  DUKE.
 This letter, then, to Friar Peter give;
    'Tis that he sent me of the Duke's return.
 For my poor self,
    I am combined by a sacred vow,
    And shall be absent.
 Wend you with this letter.

    Command these fretting waters from your eyes
    With a light heart; trust not my holy order,
    If I pervert your course.
 Who's here?

                           Enter LUCIO

  LUCIO.
 Good even.
 Friar, where's the Provost?
  DUKE.
 Not within, sir.
 O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes
    so red.
 I am fain to dine and sup with
    water and bran; I dare not for my head fill my belly; one
    fruitful meal would set me to't.
 But they say the Duke will be
    here to-morrow.
 By my troth, Isabel, I lov'd thy brother.

  LUCIO.
 Friar, thou knowest not the Duke so well as I do; he's a
    better woodman than thou tak'st him for.

  DUKE.

  LUCIO.
 Nay, tarry; I'll go along with thee; I can tell thee pretty
    tales of the Duke.

  DUKE.
 You have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be
    true; if not true, none were enough.

  LUCIO.
 I was once before him for getting a wench with child.
 Did you such a thing?
  LUCIO.

  DUKE.
 Sir, your company is fairer than honest.
 Rest you well.

  LUCIO.
 By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end.
 Nay, friar, I am a
    kind of burr; I shall stick.

ANGELO'S house

Enter ANGELO and ESCALUS

  ESCALUS.

  ANGELO.
 In most uneven and distracted manner.
 His actions show much
    like to madness; pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted! And why
    meet him at the gates, and redeliver our authorities there?
  ESCALUS.
 I guess not.

  ANGELO.
 He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of
     complaints; and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which
    shall then have no power to stand against us.
 Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaim'd;
    Betimes i' th' morn I'll call you at your house;
    Give notice to such men of sort and suit
    As are to meet him.

  ESCALUS.
 I shall, sir; fare you well.

  ANGELO.
 Good night.
                               Exit ESCALUS  
    This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
    And dull to all proceedings.
 Would yet he had liv'd!
    Alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
    Nothing goes right; we would, and we would not.
 These letters at fit time deliver me.
   [Giving letters]
    The Provost knows our purpose and our plot.

    The matter being afoot, keep your instruction
    And hold you ever to our special drift;
    Though sometimes you do blench from this to that
    As cause doth minister.

    PETER.
 It shall be speeded well.
 I thank thee, Varrius; thou hast made good haste.

    Come, we will walk.
 My gentle Varrius!           Exeunt




SCENE VI.

  MARIANA.

  ISABELLA.
 Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
    He speak against me on the adverse side,
    I should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic
    That's bitter to sweet end.

  MARIANA.
         Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.

The city gate

Enter at several doors DUKE, VARRIUS, LORDS; ANGELO, ESCALUS, Lucio,
PROVOST, OFFICERS, and CITIZENS

  DUKE.

  ANGELO, ESCALUS.
 Happy return be to your royal Grace!
  DUKE.
 Many and hearty thankings to you both.
 You make my bonds still greater.

  DUKE.
 O, your desert speaks loud; and I should wrong it
    To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,
    When it deserves, with characters of brass,
    A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time
    And razure of oblivion.
 Give me your hand.

    And let the subject see, to make them know
    That outward courtesies would fain proclaim  
    Favours that keep within.
 Come, Escalus,
    You must walk by us on our other hand,
    And good supporters are you.


                 Enter FRIAR PETER and ISABELLA

  PETER.
 In what? By whom? Be brief.
 O worthy Duke,
    You bid me seek redemption of the devil!
    Hear me yourself; for that which I must speak
    Must either punish me, not being believ'd,  
    Or wring redress from you.
 My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm;
    She hath been a suitor to me for her brother,
    Cut off by course of justice-
  ISABELLA.
 And she will speak most bitterly and strange.
 Most strange, but yet most truly, will I speak.

  ISABELLA.
 Away with her.
 Poor soul,
    She speaks this in th' infirmity of sense.
 O Prince! I conjure thee, as thou believ'st  
    There is another comfort than this world,
    That thou neglect me not with that opinion
    That I am touch'd with madness.
 Make not impossible
    That which but seems unlike: 'tis not impossible
    But one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground,
    May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute,
    As Angelo; even so may Angelo,
    In all his dressings, characts, titles, forms,
    Be an arch-villain.
 By mine honesty,
    If she be mad, as I believe no other,
    Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
    Such a dependency of thing on thing,
    As e'er I heard in madness.

  ISABELLA.

  DUKE.
 Many that are not mad
    Have, sure, more lack of reason.
 What would you say?
  ISABELLA.
 That's I, an't like your Grace.

    I came to her from Claudio, and desir'd her
    To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo
    For her poor brother's pardon.
 That's he, indeed.
 No, my good lord;
    Nor wish'd to hold my peace.
 I warrant your honour.
 The warrant's for yourself; take heed to't.

  ISABELLA.

  LUCIO.
 Right.

  DUKE.
 It may be right; but you are i' the wrong
    To speak before your time.

  DUKE.
 That's somewhat madly spoken.

  ISABELLA.
 Pardon it;
    The phrase is to the matter.
 Mended again.
 The matter- proceed.

  ISABELLA.
 But the next morn betimes,
    His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
    For my poor brother's head.

  DUKE.
 O that it were as like as it is true!
  DUKE.
 By heaven, fond wretch, thou know'st not what thou speak'st,
    Or else thou art suborn'd against his honour
    In hateful practice.
 First, his integrity
    Stands without blemish; next, it imports no reason
    That with such vehemency he should pursue
    Faults proper to himself.
 If he had so offended,
    He would have weigh'd thy brother by himself,
    And not have cut him off.
 Some one hath set you on;
    Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
    Thou cam'st here to complain.

  ISABELLA.
 I know you'd fain be gone.
 An officer!
    To prison with her! Shall we thus permit
    A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
    On him so near us? This needs must be a practice.

  DUKE.
 My lord, I know him; 'tis a meddling friar.

    I do not like the man; had he been lay, my lord,
    For certain words he spake against your Grace
    In your retirement, I had swing'd him soundly.

  DUKE.
 Words against me? This's a good friar, belike!
    And to set on this wretched woman here
    Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.

  LUCIO.
 Blessed be your royal Grace!
    I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard
    Your royal ear abus'd.

  DUKE.
 We did believe no less.
 I know him for a man divine and holy;
    Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
    As he's reported by this gentleman;
    And, on my trust, a man that never yet
    Did, as he vouches, misreport your Grace.
 My lord, most villainously; believe it.
 Well, he in time may come to clear himself;
    But at this instant he is sick, my lord,
    Of a strange fever.
 Upon his mere request-
    Being come to knowledge that there was complaint
    Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo- came I hither
    To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know  
    Is true and false; and what he, with his oath
    And all probation, will make up full clear,
    Whensoever he's convented.
 Good friar, let's hear it.
         Exit ISABELLA guarded
    Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
    O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
    Give us some seats.
 Come, cousin Angelo;
    In this I'll be impartial; be you judge
    Of your own cause.


                     Enter MARIANA veiled

    Is this the witness, friar?
  FIRST let her show her face, and after speak.

  MARIANA.
 Pardon, my lord; I will not show my face
    Until my husband bid me.
  
  DUKE.
 What, are you married?
  MARIANA.
 Are you a maid?
  MARIANA.

  DUKE.
 Why, you are nothing then; neither maid, widow, nor wife.

  LUCIO.
 Silence that fellow.
 I would he had some cause
    To prattle for himself.

  MARIANA.
 My lord, I do confess I ne'er was married,
    And I confess, besides, I am no maid.
 He was drunk, then, my lord; it can be no better.

  DUKE.
 For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
  LUCIO.
 Well, my lord.
 This is no witness for Lord Angelo.
 Now I come to't, my lord:
    She that accuses him of fornication,
    In self-same manner doth accuse my husband;
    And charges him, my lord, with such a time
    When I'll depose I had him in mine arms,
    With all th' effect of love.

  ANGELO.
 No? You say your husband.

  MARIANA.
 Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo,
    Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,
    But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's.

  ANGELO.
 Let's see thy face.

  MARIANA.
 My husband bids me; now I will unmask.

                                                     [Unveiling]
    This is that face, thou cruel Angelo,
    Which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on;
    This is the hand which, with a vow'd contract,
    Was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body
    That took away the match from Isabel,  
    And did supply thee at thy garden-house
    In her imagin'd person.

  DUKE.
 Know you this woman?
  LUCIO.

  DUKE.
 Enough, my lord.

  ANGELO.
 My lord, I must confess I know this woman;
    And five years since there was some speech of marriage
    Betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
    Partly for that her promised proportions
    Came short of composition; but in chief
    For that her reputation was disvalued
    In levity.
 Since which time of five years
    I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
    Upon my faith and honour.

  MARIANA.
 As this is true,
    Let me in safety raise me from my knees,
    Or else for ever be confixed here,
    A marble monument!
  ANGELO.
 Ay, with my heart;
    And punish them to your height of pleasure.

    There is another friar that set them on;
    Let him be sent for.

  PETER.

    Your provost knows the place where he abides,
    And he may fetch him.
 Go, do it instantly.
                        Exit PROVOST
    And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
    Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
    Do with your injuries as seems you best
    In any chastisement.
 'Cucullus non facit monachum': honest in nothing but in his
    clothes; and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of the
    Duke.
  
  ESCALUS.
 We shall entreat you to abide here till he come and
    enforce them against him.
 As any in Vienna, on my word.

  ESCALUS.
 Call that same Isabel here once again; I would speak with
    her.
 [Exit an ATTENDANT] Pray you, my lord, give me leave to
    question; you shall see how I'll handle her.


       Re-enter OFFICERS with ISABELLA; and PROVOST with the
                    DUKE in his friar's habit

  ESCALUS.

  ESCALUS.
 Come on, mistress; here's a gentlewoman denies all that
    you have said.

  LUCIO.
 My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of, here with the  
    Provost.

  ESCALUS.
 In very good time.
 Speak not you to him till we call upon
    you.

  LUCIO.
 Mum.
 Come, sir; did you set these women on to slander Lord
    Angelo? They have confess'd you did.
 How! Know you where you are?
  DUKE.
 The Duke's in us; and we will hear you speak;
    Look you speak justly.

  DUKE.
 But, O, poor souls,
    Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox,
    Good night to your redress! Is the Duke gone?
    Then is your cause gone too.
 The Duke's unjust
    Thus to retort your manifest appeal,
    And put your trial in the villain's mouth
    Which here you come to accuse.
  
  LUCIO.

  ESCALUS.
 Slander to th' state! Away with him to prison!
  ANGELO.

    Do you know me?
  DUKE.
 I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice.

  LUCIO.
 O did you so? And do you remember what you said of the Duke?
  DUKE.
 Most notedly, sir.
 Do you so, sir? And was the Duke a fleshmonger, a fool, and
    a coward, as you then reported him to be?
  DUKE.
 You must, sir, change persons with me ere you make that my
    report; you, indeed, spoke so of him; and much more, much worse.
 Hark how the villain would close now, after his treasonable
    abuses!
  ESCALUS.
 Such a fellow is not to be talk'd withal.
 Away with him to
    prison! Where is the Provost? Away with him to prison! Lay bolts  
    enough upon him; let him speak no more.
 Stay, sir; stay awhile.
 What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.
 Thou art the first knave that e'er mad'st a duke.

    First, Provost, let me bail these gentle three.

    [To Lucio] Sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you
    Must have a word anon.
 Lay hold on him.

  LUCIO.
 [To ANGELO] Sir, by your leave.

  ANGELO.
 O my dread lord,
    I should be guiltier than my guiltiness,
    To think I can be undiscernible,
    When I perceive your Grace, like pow'r divine,
    Hath look'd upon my passes.
 Then, good Prince,
    No longer session hold upon my shame,
    But let my trial be mine own confession;
    Immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
    Is all the grace I beg.

  DUKE.

    Say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
  ANGELO.

  DUKE.

                Exeunt ANGELO, MARIANA, FRIAR PETER, and PROVOST
  ESCALUS.
 Come hither, Isabel.

  ISABELLA.
 O, give me pardon,
    That I, your vassal have employ'd and pain'd
    Your unknown sovereignty.
 You are pardon'd, Isabel.

    And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.

    Your brother's death, I know, sits at your heart;
    And you may marvel why I obscur'd myself,
    Labouring to save his life, and would not rather
    Make rash remonstrance of my hidden pow'r
    Than let him so be lost.
 O most kind maid,
    It was the swift celerity of his death,
    Which I did think with slower foot came on,
    That brain'd my purpose.
 But peace be with him!
    That life is better life, past fearing death,
    Than that which lives to fear.
 Make it your comfort,
    So happy is your brother.
 I do, my lord.
 For this new-married man approaching here,
    Whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd
    Your well-defended honour, you must pardon
    For Mariana's sake; but as he adjudg'd your brother-
    Being criminal in double violation
    Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach,
    Thereon dependent, for your brother's life-
    The very mercy of the law cries out
    Most audible, even from his proper tongue,
    'An Angelo for Claudio, death for death!'
    Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
    Like doth quit like, and Measure still for Measure.

    We do condemn thee to the very block
    Where Claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.
  
    Away with him!
  MARIANA.
 O my most gracious lord,
    I hope you will not mock me with a husband.
 For his possessions,
    Although by confiscation they are ours,
    We do instate and widow you withal
    To buy you a better husband.

  MARIANA.
 O my dear lord,
    I crave no other, nor no better man.
 Gentle my liege-                           [Kneeling]
  DUKE.

    Away with him to death! [To LUCIO] Now, sir, to you.
  
  DUKE.

    Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
    Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
    And take her hence in horror.

  MARIANA.
 Isabel,
    Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
    Hold up your hands, say nothing; I'll speak all.

  ISABELLA.
 I partly think
    A due sincerity govern'd his deeds
    Till he did look on me; since it is so,
    Let him not die.
 Thoughts are no subjects;
    Intents but merely thoughts.

  DUKE.

    I have bethought me of another fault.

    Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
    At an unusual hour?
  PROVOST.
 It was commanded so.

  DUKE.
 Had you a special warrant for the deed?
  PROVOST.
 No, my good lord; it was by private message.
 For which I do discharge you of your office;
    Give up your keys.

  PROVOST.
 Pardon me, noble lord;
    I thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
    Yet did repent me, after more advice;
    For testimony whereof, one in the prison,
    That should by private order else have died,
    I have reserv'd alive.
 What's he?
  PROVOST.
 His name is Barnardine.

  DUKE.

    Go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.
 I am sorry one so learned and so wise
    As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd,
    Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
    And lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
 I am sorry that such sorrow I procure;
    And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
    That I crave death more willingly than mercy;
    'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.


       Re-enter PROVOST, with BARNARDINE, CLAUDIO (muffled)
                            and JULIET

  DUKE.
 Which is that Barnardine?
  PROVOST.
 This is another prisoner that I sav'd,
    Who should have died when Claudio lost his head;
    As like almost to Claudio as himself.
 [To ISABELLA] If he be like your brother, for his sake
    Is he pardon'd; and for your lovely sake,
    Give me your hand and say you will be mine,
    He is my brother too.

    Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well.

    I find an apt remission in myself;
    And yet here's one in place I cannot pardon.

    To Lucio] You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward,  
    One all of luxury, an ass, a madman!
    Wherein have I so deserv'd of you
    That you extol me thus?
  LUCIO.
 Faith, my lord, I spoke it but according to the trick.

  DUKE.
 Whipt first, sir, and hang'd after.

    Proclaim it, Provost, round about the city,
    If any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow-
    As I have heard him swear himself there's one
    Whom he begot with child, let her appear,
    And he shall marry her.
 The nuptial finish'd,
    Let him be whipt and hang'd.

  LUCIO.
 I beseech your Highness, do not marry me to a whore.
 Your
    Highness said even now I made you a duke; good my lord, do not
    recompense me in making me a cuckold.

  DUKE.
 Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.

    Thy slanders I forgive; and therewithal
    Remit thy other forfeits.
 Take him to prison;
    And see our pleasure herein executed.
 Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, whipping,
    and hanging.

  DUKE.

                                      Exeunt OFFICERS with LUCIO
    She, Claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.

    Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo;
    I have confess'd her, and I know her virtue.
 Dear Isabel,
    I have a motion much imports your good;
    Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline,
    What's mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.

    So, bring us to our palace, where we'll show
    What's yet behind that's meet you all should know.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1597

THE MERCHANT OF VENICE

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  THE DUKE OF VENICE
  THE PRINCE OF MOROCCO, suitor to Portia
  THE PRINCE OF ARRAGON,    "    "    "
  ANTONIO, a merchant of Venice
  BASSANIO, his friend, suitor to Portia
  SOLANIO,   friend to Antonio and Bassanio
  SALERIO,      "    "    "     "     "
  GRATIANO,     "    "    "     "     "
  LORENZO, in love with Jessica
  SHYLOCK, a rich Jew
  TUBAL, a Jew, his friend
  LAUNCELOT GOBBO, a clown, servant to Shylock
  OLD GOBBO, father to Launcelot
  LEONARDO, servant to Bassanio
  BALTHASAR, servant to Portia
  STEPHANO,     "     "    "

  PORTIA, a rich heiress
  NERISSA, her waiting-maid
  JESSICA, daughter to Shylock  

  Magnificoes of Venice, Officers of the Court of Justice,
    Gaoler, Servants, and other Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

Venice.
 A street

Enter ANTONIO, SALERIO, and SOLANIO

  ANTONIO.
 Your mind is tossing on the ocean;
    There where your argosies, with portly sail-
    Like signiors and rich burghers on the flood,
    Or as it were the pageants of the sea-
    Do overpeer the petty traffickers,
    That curtsy to them, do them reverence,
    As they fly by them with their woven wings.

  SOLANIO.
 I should be still  
    Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
    Peering in maps for ports, and piers, and roads;
    And every object that might make me fear
    Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt,
    Would make me sad.

  SALERIO.
 Believe me, no; I thank my fortune for it,
    My ventures are not in one bottom trusted,
    Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
    Upon the fortune of this present year;
    Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.

  SOLANIO.
 Why then you are in love.

  ANTONIO.
 Fie, fie!
  SOLANIO.
 Now, by two-headed Janus,
    Nature hath fram'd strange fellows in her time:
    Some that will evermore peep through their eyes,
    And laugh like parrots at a bag-piper;
    And other of such vinegar aspect
    That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile  
    Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.


               Enter BASSANIO, LORENZO, and GRATIANO

    Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
    Gratiano and Lorenzo.

  SALERIO.
 I would have stay'd till I had made you merry,
    If worthier friends had not prevented me.

  ANTONIO.
 Your worth is very dear in my regard.

    I take it your own business calls on you,
    And you embrace th' occasion to depart.

  SALERIO.
 Good morrow, my good lords.

  BASSANIO.
 We'll make our leisures to attend on yours.

                                      Exeunt SALERIO and SOLANIO
  LORENZO.
 My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio,
    We two will leave you; but at dinner-time,
    I pray you, have in mind where we must meet.
 I will not fail you.

  ANTONIO.

  GRATIANO.
 Let me play the fool.

    With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come;
    And let my liver rather heat with wine
    Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.

    Why should a man whose blood is warm within
    Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster,
    Sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice
    By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio-
    I love thee, and 'tis my love that speaks-
    There are a sort of men whose visages
    Do cream and mantle like a standing pond,
    And do a wilful stillness entertain,  
    With purpose to be dress'd in an opinion
    Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit;
    As who should say 'I am Sir Oracle,
    And when I ope my lips let no dog bark.
'
    O my Antonio, I do know of these
    That therefore only are reputed wise
    For saying nothing; when, I am very sure,
    If they should speak, would almost damn those ears
    Which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools.

    I'll tell thee more of this another time.
 Fare ye well awhile;
    I'll end my exhortation after dinner.
 Well, we will leave you then till dinner-time.

  GRATIANO.
 Well, keep me company but two years moe,
    Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.
 Fare you well; I'll grow a talker for this gear.
  
  GRATIANO.
 Thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable
    In a neat's tongue dried, and a maid not vendible.

                                     Exeunt GRATIANO and LORENZO
  ANTONIO.
 Is that anything now?
  BASSANIO.
 Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than
    any man in all Venice.

  ANTONIO.
 To you, Antonio,  
    I owe the most, in money and in love;
    And from your love I have a warranty
    To unburden all my plots and purposes
    How to get clear of all the debts I owe.
 In my school-days, when I had lost one shaft,
    I shot his fellow of the self-same flight
    The self-same way, with more advised watch,
    To find the other forth; and by adventuring both
    I oft found both.
 I urge this childhood proof,
    Because what follows is pure innocence.
 Sometimes from her eyes
    I did receive fair speechless messages.

    Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth;
    For the four winds blow in from every coast
    Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
    Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,  
    Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strond,
    And many Jasons come in quest of her.

    O my Antonio, had I but the means
    To hold a rival place with one of them,
    I have a mind presages me such thrift
    That I should questionless be fortunate.
 Thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea;
    Neither have I money nor commodity
    To raise a present sum; therefore go forth,
    Try what my credit can in Venice do;
    That shall be rack'd, even to the uttermost,
    To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
 PORTIA'S house

Enter PORTIA with her waiting-woman, NERISSA

  PORTIA.
 You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in the
    same abundance as your good fortunes are; and yet, for aught I
    see, they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that
    starve with nothing.

  PORTIA.
 They would be better, if well followed.

  PORTIA.
 But this reasoning is not in the fashion to
    choose me a husband.
 O me, the word 'choose'! I may neither
    choose who I would nor refuse who I dislike; so is the will of a
    living daughter curb'd by the will of a dead father.
 Is it not
    hard, Nerissa, that I cannot choose one, nor refuse none?
  NERISSA.
 But
    what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these
    princely suitors that are already come?
  PORTIA.
 I pray thee over-name them; and as thou namest them, I will
    describe them; and according to my description, level at my
    affection.

  NERISSA.
 First, there is the Neapolitan prince.

  PORTIA.
 Ay, that's a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but talk of
    his horse; and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good
    parts that he can shoe him himself; I am much afear'd my lady his
    mother play'd false with a smith.
  
  NERISSA.
 Then is there the County Palatine.
 I fear
    he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so
    full of unmannerly sadness in his youth.
 How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le Bon?
  PORTIA.
 God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man.
 In
    truth, I know it is a sin to be a mocker, but he- why, he hath a
    horse better than the Neapolitan's, a better bad habit of
    frowning than the Count Palatine; he is every man in no man.
 If a
    throstle sing he falls straight a-cap'ring; he will fence with
    his own shadow; if I should marry him, I should marry twenty
    husbands.

  NERISSA.
 What say you then to Falconbridge, the young baron of
    England?
  PORTIA.
 You know I say nothing to him, for he understands not me,
    nor I him: he hath neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you  
    will come into the court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth
    in the English.
 He is a proper man's picture; but alas, who can
    converse with a dumb-show? How oddly he is suited! I think he
    bought his doublet in Italy, his round hose in France, his bonnet
    in Germany, and his behaviour everywhere.

  NERISSA.
 How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxony's
    nephew?
  PORTIA.
 An the worst fall that ever fell, I hope I
    shall make shift to go without him.

  NERISSA.
 If he should offer to choose, and choose the right casket,
    you should refuse to perform your father's will, if you should
    refuse to accept him.
  
  PORTIA.
 Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee set a deep
    glass of Rhenish wine on the contrary casket; for if the devil be
    within and that temptation without, I know he will choose it.
 I
    am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable; for there is not
    one among them but I dote on his very absence, and I pray God
    grant them a fair departure.
 Do you not remember, lady, in your father's time, a
    Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither in company of
    the Marquis of Montferrat?
  PORTIA.
 Yes, yes, it was Bassanio; as I think, so was he call'd.

  NERISSA.
 If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good heart as I
    can bid the other four farewell, I should be glad of his
    approach; if he have the condition of a saint and the complexion
    of a devil, I had rather he should shrive me than wive me.

    Come, Nerissa.
 Sirrah, go before.

    Whiles we shut the gate upon one wooer, another knocks at the
      door.

Venice.
 Ay, sir, for three months.
 For three months- well.

  BASSANIO.

  BASSANIO.
 May you stead me? Will you pleasure me? Shall I know your
    answer?
  SHYLOCK.
 Three thousand ducats for three months, and Antonio bound.

  BASSANIO.
 Your answer to that.

  SHYLOCK.
 Antonio is a good man.

  BASSANIO.
 Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?
  SHYLOCK.
 Ho, no, no, no, no; my meaning in saying he is a good man
    is to have you understand me that he is sufficient; yet his means
    are in supposition: he hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another
    to the Indies; I understand, moreover, upon the Rialto, he hath a
    third at Mexico, a fourth for England- and other ventures he
    hath, squand'red abroad.
 But ships are but boards, sailors but  
    men; there be land-rats and water-rats, water-thieves and
    land-thieves- I mean pirates; and then there is the peril of
    waters, winds, and rocks.
 Three thousand ducats- I think I may take his bond.

  BASSANIO.
 I will be assur'd I may; and, that I may be assured, I
    will bethink me.
 May I speak with Antonio?
  BASSANIO.

  SHYLOCK.
 What news on the Rialto? Who is he comes here?

                            Enter ANTONIO

  BASSANIO.
 This is Signior Antonio.

  SHYLOCK.
  [Aside]  How like a fawning publican he looks!
    I hate him for he is a Christian;
    But more for that in low simplicity  
    He lends out money gratis, and brings down
    The rate of usance here with us in Venice.

    He hates our sacred nation; and he rails,
    Even there where merchants most do congregate,
    On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
    Which he calls interest.
 Cursed be my tribe
    If I forgive him!
  BASSANIO.
 Shylock, do you hear?
  SHYLOCK.

  ANTONIO.
 Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
    By taking nor by giving of excess,  
    Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
    I'll break a custom.
 Ay, ay, three thousand ducats.

  SHYLOCK.

    Well then, your bond; and, let me see- but hear you,
    Methoughts you said you neither lend nor borrow
    Upon advantage.
 I do never use it.
 And what of him? Did he take interest?
  SHYLOCK.
 No, not take interest; not, as you would say,
    Directly int'rest; mark what Jacob did:
    When Laban and himself were compromis'd
    That all the eanlings which were streak'd and pied
    Should fall as Jacob's hire, the ewes, being rank,  
    In end of autumn turned to the rams;
    And when the work of generation was
    Between these woolly breeders in the act,
    The skilful shepherd pill'd me certain wands,
    And, in the doing of the deed of kind,
    He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes,
    Who, then conceiving, did in eaning time
    Fall parti-colour'd lambs, and those were Jacob's.

  ANTONIO.
 I cannot tell; I make it breed as fast.
  [Aside]  Mark you this, Bassanio,
    The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose.

    An evil soul producing holy witness  
    Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
    A goodly apple rotten at the heart.

    Three months from twelve; then let me see, the rate-
  ANTONIO.
 Signior Antonio, many a time and oft
    In the Rialto you have rated me
    About my moneys and my usances;
    Still have I borne it with a patient shrug,
    For suff'rance is the badge of all our tribe;
    You call me misbeliever, cut-throat dog,
    And spit upon my Jewish gaberdine,
    And all for use of that which is mine own.
  
    What should I say to you? Should I not say
    'Hath a dog money? Is it possible
    A cur can lend three thousand ducats?' Or
    Shall I bend low and, in a bondman's key,
    With bated breath and whisp'ring humbleness,
    Say this:
    'Fair sir, you spit on me on Wednesday last,
    You spurn'd me such a day; another time
    You call'd me dog; and for these courtesies
    I'll lend you thus much moneys'?
  ANTONIO.
 I am as like to call thee so again,
    To spit on thee again, to spurn thee too.
 Why, look you, how you storm!
    I would be friends with you, and have your love,  
    Forget the shames that you have stain'd me with,
    Supply your present wants, and take no doit
    Of usance for my moneys, and you'll not hear me.

    This is kind I offer.
 This were kindness.

  SHYLOCK.
 This kindness will I show.

    Go with me to a notary, seal me there
    Your single bond, and, in a merry sport,
    If you repay me not on such a day,
    In such a place, such sum or sums as are
    Express'd in the condition, let the forfeit
    Be nominated for an equal pound
    Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
    In what part of your body pleaseth me.
 Content, in faith; I'll seal to such a bond,
    And say there is much kindness in the Jew.

  ANTONIO.
 O father Abram, what these Christians are,
    Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
    The thoughts of others! Pray you, tell me this:
    If he should break his day, what should I gain
    By the exaction of the forfeiture?
    A pound of man's flesh taken from a man
    Is not so estimable, profitable neither,
    As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats.

  SHYLOCK.
 Then meet me forthwith at the notary's;
    Give him direction for this merry bond,
    And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
    See to my house, left in the fearful guard
    Of an unthrifty knave, and presently
    I'll be with you.
  
  ANTONIO.
 Hie thee, gentle Jew.
                    Exit SHYLOCK
    The Hebrew will turn Christian: he grows kind.
 I like not fair terms and a villain's mind.
            Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.
 SCENE I.
 PORTIA'S house

Flourish of cornets.
 Enter the PRINCE of MOROCCO, a tawny Moor all in white,
and three or four FOLLOWERS accordingly, with PORTIA, NERISSA, and train

  PRINCE OF Morocco.
 Mislike me not for my complexion,
    The shadowed livery of the burnish'd sun,
    To whom I am a neighbour, and near bred.

    Bring me the fairest creature northward born,
    Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles,
    And let us make incision for your love
    To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.

    I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine
    Hath fear'd the valiant; by my love, I swear
    The best-regarded virgins of our clime
    Have lov'd it too.

  PORTIA.
 In terms of choice I am not solely led
    By nice direction of a maiden's eyes;
    Besides, the lott'ry of my destiny  
    Bars me the right of voluntary choosing.

  PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
 By this scimitar,
    That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince,
    That won three fields of Sultan Solyman,
    I would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look,
    Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth,
    Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear,
    Yea, mock the lion when 'a roars for prey,
    To win thee, lady.
  
    So is Alcides beaten by his page;
    And so may I, blind Fortune leading me,
    Miss that which one unworthier may attain,
    And die with grieving.

  PORTIA.
 You must take your chance,
    And either not attempt to choose at all,
    Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong,
    Never to speak to lady afterward
    In way of marriage; therefore be advis'd.

  PORTIA.
 After dinner
    Your hazard shall be made.
 Good fortune then,
    To make me blest or cursed'st among men!
                                           [Cornets, and exeunt]




SCENE II.

Venice.
 A street

Enter LAUNCELOT GOBBO

  LAUNCELOT.
 Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this
    Jew my master.
 The fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me, saying
    to me 'Gobbo, Launcelot Gobbo, good Launcelot' or 'good Gobbo' or
    'good Launcelot Gobbo, use your legs, take the start, run away.
 'Via!' says the fiend; 'away!' says the
    fiend.
 'For the heavens, rouse up a brave mind' says the fiend
    'and run.
'
    'Budge,' says the fiend.
 'Budge not,' says my conscience.

    'Conscience,' say I, (you counsel well.
' 'Fiend,' say I, 'you
    counsel well.


                     Enter OLD GOBBO, with a basket

  GOBBO.
 Master young man, you, I pray you, which is the way to
    master Jew's?
  LAUNCELOT.
 Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is the way to
    master Jew's?
  LAUNCELOT.
 Turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but, at
    the next turning of all, on your left; marry, at the very next  
    turning, turn of no hand, but turn down indirectly to the Jew's
    house.

  GOBBO.
 Be God's sonties, 'twill be a hard way to hit! Can you tell
    me whether one Launcelot, that dwells with him, dwell with him or
    no?
  LAUNCELOT.
 No master, sir, but a poor man's son; his father, though I
    say't, is an honest exceeding poor man, and, God be thanked, well
    to live.
 Your worship's friend, and Launcelot, sir.

  LAUNCELOT.
 But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech you, talk
    you of young Master Launcelot?
  GOBBO.
 Ergo, Master Launcelot.
 Alack the day, I know you not, young gentleman; but I pray
    you tell me, is my boy- God rest his soul!- alive or dead?
  LAUNCELOT.
 Do you not know me, father?
  GOBBO.
 Alack, sir, I am sand-blind; I know you not.

  LAUNCELOT.
 Nay, indeed, if you had your eyes, you might fail of the
    knowing me: it is a wise father that knows his own child.
 Well,
    old man, I will tell you news of your son.
 Pray you, sir, stand up; I am sure you are not Launcelot my
    boy.

  LAUNCELOT.

  LAUNCELOT.
 Her name is Margery, indeed.
 I'll be sworn, if thou be
    Launcelot, thou art mine own flesh and blood.
 Lord worshipp'd
    might he be, what a beard hast thou got! Thou hast got more hair
    on thy chin than Dobbin my fill-horse has on his tail.
 It should seem, then, that Dobbin's tail grows backward;
    I am sure he had more hair of his tail than I have of my face
    when I last saw him.

  GOBBO.
 Lord, how art thou chang'd! How dost thou and thy master
    agree? I have brought him a present.
 How 'gree you now?
  LAUNCELOT.
 Well, well; but, for mine own part, as I have set up my
    rest to run away, so I will not rest till I have run some ground.

    My master's a very Jew.
 Give him a present! Give him a halter.
 To him, father, for I am a Jew, if I
    serve the Jew any longer.
 You may do so; but let it be so hasted that supper be
    ready at the farthest by five of the clock.
 See these letters
    delivered, put the liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to
    come anon to my lodging.
                      Exit a SERVANT
  LAUNCELOT.
 To him, father.

  GOBBO.
 God bless your worship!
  BASSANIO.
 Gramercy; wouldst thou aught with me?
  GOBBO.
 Here's my son, sir, a poor boy-
  LAUNCELOT.
 Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew, and
    have a desire, as my father shall specify-
  GOBBO.
 To be brief, the very truth is that the Jew, having done
    me wrong, doth cause me, as my father, being I hope an old man,
    shall frutify unto you-
  GOBBO.
 I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow upon your
    worship; and my suit is-
  LAUNCELOT.
 In very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as
    your worship shall know by this honest old man; and, though I say
    it, though old man, yet poor man, my father.
 What would you?
  LAUNCELOT.
 That is the very defect of the matter, sir.

  BASSANIO.
 I know thee well; thou hast obtain'd thy suit.

    Shylock thy master spoke with me this day,
    And hath preferr'd thee, if it be preferment
    To leave a rich Jew's service to become
    The follower of so poor a gentleman.
 Go, father, with thy son.

  LAUNCELOT.
 Go to, here's a simple line of life;
    here's a small trifle of wives; alas, fifteen wives is nothing;
    a'leven widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in for one man.
 Well, if
    Fortune be a woman, she's a good wench for this gear.

                                  Exeunt LAUNCELOT and OLD GOBBO
  BASSANIO.

    These things being bought and orderly bestowed,
    Return in haste, for I do feast to-night
    My best esteem'd acquaintance; hie thee, go.
 Yonder, sir, he walks.
                          Exit
  GRATIANO.
 Gratiano!
  GRATIANO.
 I have suit to you.

  BASSANIO.

  GRATIANO.
 You must not deny me: I must go with you to Belmont.

  BASSANIO.
 Pray thee, take pain
    To allay with some cold drops of modesty
    Thy skipping spirit; lest through thy wild behaviour
    I be misconst'red in the place I go to
    And lose my hopes.

  GRATIANO.
 Signior Bassanio, hear me:  
    If I do not put on a sober habit,
    Talk with respect, and swear but now and then,
    Wear prayer-books in my pocket, look demurely,
    Nay more, while grace is saying hood mine eyes
    Thus with my hat, and sigh, and say amen,
    Use all the observance of civility
    Like one well studied in a sad ostent
    To please his grandam, never trust me more.

  BASSANIO.
 Nay, but I bar to-night; you shall not gauge me
    By what we do to-night.
 But fare you well;
    I have some business.

  GRATIANO.
 And I must to Lorenzo and the rest;
    But we will visit you at supper-time.

Venice.
 SHYLOCK'S house

Enter JESSICA and LAUNCELOT

  JESSICA.
 I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so.

    Our house is hell; and thou, a merry devil,
    Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness.

    But fare thee well; there is a ducat for thee;
    And, Launcelot, soon at supper shalt thou see
    Lorenzo, who is thy new master's guest.

    Give him this letter; do it secretly.

  LAUNCELOT.
 Adieu! tears exhibit my tongue.
 But, adieu! these foolish drops do
    something drown my manly spirit; adieu!
  JESSICA.
 Farewell, good Launcelot.
              Exit LAUNCELOT
    Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
    To be asham'd to be my father's child!
    But though I am a daughter to his blood,  
    I am not to his manners.
 O Lorenzo,
    If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife,
    Become a Christian and thy loving wife.
                 Exit




SCENE IV.

  GRATIANO.
 We have not made good preparation.

  SALERIO.
 We have not spoke us yet of torch-bearers.

  SOLANIO.
 'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered;
    And better in my mind not undertook.

  LORENZO.
 'Tis now but four o'clock; we have two hours
    To furnish us.


                 Enter LAUNCELOT, With a letter

    Friend Launcelot, what's the news?
  LAUNCELOT.
 An it shall please you to break up this, it shall seem
    to signify.

  GRATIANO.
 Love-news, in faith!
  LAUNCELOT.
 By your leave, sir.

  LORENZO.

  LORENZO.
 Hold, here, take this.
 Tell gentle Jessica
    I will not fail her; speak it privately.

  SALERIO.
 Ay, marry, I'll be gone about it straight.

  LORENZO.
 Meet me and Gratiano
    At Gratiano's lodging some hour hence.
        Exeunt SALERIO and SOLANIO
  GRATIANO.
 Was not that letter from fair Jessica?
  LORENZO.
 She hath directed
    How I shall take her from her father's house;
    What gold and jewels she is furnish'd with;  
    What page's suit she hath in readiness.

    If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven,
    It will be for his gentle daughter's sake;
    And never dare misfortune cross her foot,
    Unless she do it under this excuse,
    That she is issue to a faithless Jew.

Venice.
 Before SHYLOCK'S house

Enter SHYLOCK and LAUNCELOT

  SHYLOCK.
-
    What, Jessica!- Thou shalt not gormandize
    As thou hast done with me- What, Jessica!-
    And sleep and snore, and rend apparel out-
    Why, Jessica, I say!
  LAUNCELOT.
 Why, Jessica!
  SHYLOCK.
 Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.
 Your worship was wont to tell me I could do nothing
    without bidding.


                          Enter JESSICA

  JESSICA.
 Call you? What is your will?
  SHYLOCK.
 I am bid forth to supper, Jessica;
    There are my keys.
 But wherefore should I go?
    I am not bid for love; they flatter me;  
    But yet I'll go in hate, to feed upon
    The prodigal Christian.

  LAUNCELOT.
 I beseech you, sir, go; my young master doth expect your
    reproach.
 So do I his.

  SHYLOCK.
 What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica:
    Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum,
    And the vile squealing of the wry-neck'd fife,
    Clamber not you up to the casements then,
    Nor thrust your head into the public street
    To gaze on Christian fools with varnish'd faces;
    But stop my house's ears- I mean my casements;  
    Let not the sound of shallow fopp'ry enter
    My sober house.
 By Jacob's staff, I swear
    I have no mind of feasting forth to-night;
    But I will go.
 Go you before me, sirrah;
    Say I will come.

  LAUNCELOT.
 Mistress, look out at window for
    all this.

        There will come a Christian by
        Will be worth a Jewess' eye.
                        Exit
  SHYLOCK.
 What says that fool of Hagar's offspring, ha?
  JESSICA.
 The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder,
    Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day
    More than the wild-cat; drones hive not with me,
    Therefore I part with him; and part with him
    To one that I would have him help to waste
    His borrowed purse.
 Well, Jessica, go in;
    Perhaps I will return immediately.
 Farewell; and if my fortune be not crost,
    I have a father, you a daughter, lost.
                  Exit




SCENE VI.

Venice.
 This is the pent-house under which Lorenzo
    Desired us to make stand.

  SALERIO.

  SALERIO.
 Here comes Lorenzo; more of this hereafter.
 Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode!
    Not I, but my affairs, have made you wait.

    When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,
    I'll watch as long for you then.
 Approach;
    Here dwells my father Jew.
 Who are you? Tell me, for more certainty,
    Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue.

  LORENZO.
 Lorenzo, and thy love.
 Lorenzo, certain; and my love indeed;
    For who love I so much? And now who knows  
    But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours?
  LORENZO.
 Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.

    I am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me,
    For I am much asham'd of my exchange;
    But love is blind, and lovers cannot see
    The pretty follies that themselves commit,
    For, if they could, Cupid himself would blush
    To see me thus transformed to a boy.

  LORENZO.
 What! must I hold a candle to my shames?
    They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light.

    Why, 'tis an office of discovery, love,
    And I should be obscur'd.

  LORENZO.
 So are you, sweet,
    Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.
 Now, by my hood, a gentle, and no Jew.

  LORENZO.

                                   Exit with JESSICA and SALERIO

                        Enter ANTONIO

  ANTONIO.
 Signior Antonio?
  ANTONIO.
 Fie, fie, Gratiano, where are all the rest?
    'Tis nine o'clock; our friends all stay for you;
    No masque to-night; the wind is come about;
    Bassanio presently will go aboard;
    I have sent twenty out to seek for you.

  GRATIANO.
 I am glad on't; I desire no more delight
    Than to be under sail and gone to-night.
              Exeunt




SCENE VII.

Belmont.
 Go draw aside the curtains and discover
    The several caskets to this noble Prince.

    Now make your choice.

  PRINCE OF MOROCCO.
 The first, of gold, who this inscription bears:
    'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.
'
    The second, silver, which this promise carries:
    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.
'
    How shall I know if I do choose the right?
  PORTIA.

    What says this leaden casket?
    'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.
'  
    Must give- for what? For lead? Hazard for lead!
    This casket threatens; men that hazard all
    Do it in hope of fair advantages.

    A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross;
    I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead.

    What says the silver with her virgin hue?
    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.
'
    As much as he deserves! Pause there, Morocco,
    And weigh thy value with an even hand.

    As much as I deserve? Why, that's the lady!
    I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,
    In graces, and in qualities of breeding;
    But more than these, in love I do deserve.

    What if I stray'd no farther, but chose here?
    Let's see once more this saying grav'd in gold:  
    'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.

    One of these three contains her heavenly picture.

    Is't like that lead contains her? 'Twere damnation
    To think so base a thought; it were too gross
    To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave.
 They have in England
    A coin that bears the figure of an angel  
    Stamp'd in gold; but that's insculp'd upon.

    But here an angel in a golden bed
    Lies all within.
 Deliver me the key;
    Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may!
  PORTIA.
 There, take it, Prince, and if my form lie there,
    Then I am yours.
                [He opens the golden casket]
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO.

         Had you been as wise as bold,
         Young in limbs, in judgment old,
         Your answer had not been inscroll'd.

         Fare you well, your suit is cold.
  
    Portia, adieu! I have too griev'd a heart
    To take a tedious leave; thus losers part.

                        Exit with his train.
 Flourish of cornets
  PORTIA.
 A gentle riddance.
 Draw the curtains, go.

    Let all of his complexion choose me so.

Venice.
 A street

Enter SALERIO and SOLANIO

  SALERIO.
 Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail;
    With him is Gratiano gone along;
    And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.
 The villain Jew with outcries rais'd the Duke,
    Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship.

  SALERIO.
 He came too late, the ship was under sail;
    But there the Duke was given to understand
    That in a gondola were seen together
    Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica;
    Besides, Antonio certified the Duke
    They were not with Bassanio in his ship.

  SOLANIO.
'
  SALERIO.
 Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,
    Crying, his stones, his daughter, and his ducats.

  SOLANIO.

    I thought upon Antonio when he told me,
    And wish'd in silence that it were not his.

  SOLANIO.
 You were best to tell Antonio what you hear;
    Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.

  SALERIO.
 A kinder gentleman treads not the earth.
 He answered 'Do not so;
    Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio,
    But stay the very riping of the time;
    And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me,
    Let it not enter in your mind of love;
    Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
    To courtship, and such fair ostents of love
    As shall conveniently become you there.
'
    And even there, his eye being big with tears,
    Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
    And with affection wondrous sensible
    He wrung Bassanio's hand; and so they parted.
 I think he only loves the world for him.

    I pray thee, let us go and find him out,
    And quicken his embraced heaviness
    With some delight or other.

  SALERIO.
                                      Exeunt




SCENE IX.
 PORTIA'S house

Enter NERISSA, and a SERVITOR

  NERISSA.
 Enter the PRINCE OF ARRAGON,
                    PORTIA, and their trains

  PORTIA.
 Behold, there stand the caskets, noble Prince.

    If you choose that wherein I am contain'd,
    Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemniz'd;
    But if you fail, without more speech, my lord,
    You must be gone from hence immediately.
 I am enjoin'd by oath to observe three things:
    First, never to unfold to any one
    Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail
    Of the right casket, never in my life
    To woo a maid in way of marriage;  
    Lastly,
    If I do fail in fortune of my choice,
    Immediately to leave you and be gone.

  PORTIA.

  ARRAGON.
 And so have I address'd me.

    What says the golden chest? Ha! let me see:
    'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.

    I will not choose what many men desire,
    Because I will not jump with common spirits
    And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.

    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.

    O that estates, degrees, and offices,
    Were not deriv'd corruptly, and that clear honour
    Were purchas'd by the merit of the wearer!
    How many then should cover that stand bare!
    How many be commanded that command!
    How much low peasantry would then be gleaned
    From the true seed of honour! and how much honour
    Pick'd from the chaff and ruin of the times,
    To be new varnish'd! Well, but to my choice.

    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.
 Give me a key for this,
    And instantly unlock my fortunes here.
'
    Did I deserve no more than a fool's head?
    Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?
  PORTIA.
 What is here?  [Reads]

         'The fire seven times tried this;
         Seven times tried that judgment is
         That did never choose amiss.

         Some there be that shadows kiss,
         Such have but a shadow's bliss.

         There be fools alive iwis
         Silver'd o'er, and so was this.

         Take what wife you will to bed,  
         I will ever be your head.

         So be gone; you are sped.
         Exit with his train

  PORTIA.
 Thus hath the candle sing'd the moth.

    O, these deliberate fools! When they do choose,
    They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.

  NERISSA.

  PORTIA.
 Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.


                       Enter a SERVANT

  SERVANT.
 Here; what would my lord?
  SERVANT.
 Madam, there is alighted at your gate
    A young Venetian, one that comes before
    To signify th' approaching of his lord,
    From whom he bringeth sensible regreets;
    To wit, besides commends and courteous breath,
    Gifts of rich value.

    A day in April never came so sweet
    To show how costly summer was at hand
    As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.

  PORTIA.

    Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see
    Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly.

  NERISSA.
 Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!        Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.

Venice.
 A street

Enter SOLANIO and SALERIO

  SOLANIO.
 Why, yet it lives there uncheck'd that Antonio hath a ship
    of rich lading wreck'd on the narrow seas; the Goodwins I think
    they call the place, a very dangerous flat and fatal, where the
    carcases of many a tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my
    gossip Report be an honest woman of her word.

  SOLANIO.
 I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapp'd
    ginger or made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a
    third husband.
 Let me say amen betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer,  
    for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew.


                             Enter SHYLOCK

    How now, Shylock? What news among the merchants?
  SHYLOCK.
 You knew, none so well, none so well as you, of my
    daughter's flight.

  SALERIO.

  SOLANIO.

  SALERIO.

  SHYLOCK.

  SALERIO.
 There is more difference between thy flesh and hers than
    between jet and ivory; more between your bloods than there is
    between red wine and Rhenish.
 But tell us, do you hear whether
    Antonio have had any loss at sea or no?  
  SHYLOCK.
 There I have another bad match: a bankrupt, a prodigal,
    who dare scarce show his head on the Rialto; a beggar, that was
    us'd to come so smug upon the mart.
 Why, I am sure, if he forfeit, thou wilt not take his
    flesh.
 If it will feed nothing else, it will
    feed my revenge.
 He hath disgrac'd me and hind'red me half a
    million; laugh'd at my losses, mock'd at my gains, scorned my
    nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine
    enemies.
 Hath not a Jew eyes?
    Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections,
    passions, fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons,
    subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed
    and cooled by the same winter and summer, as a Christian is? If
    you prick us, do we not bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh?
    If you poison us, do we not die? And if you wrong us, shall we
    not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you
    in that.
 If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility?  
    Revenge.
 The villainy you teach me
    I will execute; and itshall go hard but I will better the
    instruction.

  SALERIO.
 We have been up and down to seek him.


                          Enter TUBAL

  SOLANIO.
 Here comes another of the tribe; a third cannot be
    match'd, unless the devil himself turn Jew.
 How now, Tubal, what news from Genoa? Hast thou found my
    daughter?
  TUBAL.
 I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her.

  SHYLOCK.
 Why there, there, there, there! A diamond gone, cost me  
    two thousand ducats in Frankfort! The curse never fell upon our
    nation till now; I never felt it till now.
 Two thousand ducats in
    that, and other precious, precious jewels.
 I would my daughter
    were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her ear; would she were
    hears'd at my foot, and the ducats in her coffin! No news of
    them? Why, so- and I know not what's spent in the search.
 Yes, other men have ill luck too: Antonio, as I heard in
    Genoa-
  SHYLOCK.
 What, what, what? Ill luck, ill luck?
  TUBAL.
 Hath an argosy cast away coming from Tripolis.
 I thank God, I thank God.
 Is it true, is it true?
  TUBAL.

  SHYLOCK.
 Good news, good news- ha, ha!-
    heard in Genoa.

  TUBAL.
 Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, one night,
    fourscore ducats.
  
  SHYLOCK.

  SHYLOCK.
 I am very glad of it; I'll plague him, I'll torture him; I
    am glad of it.

  TUBAL.
 One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter
    for a monkey.
 Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal.
 But Antonio is certainly undone.
 Nay, that's true; that's very true.
 I will have the heart of
    him, if he forfeit; for, were he out of Venice, I can make what
    merchandise I will.
                  Exeunt




SCENE II.

    But lest you should not understand me well-
    And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought-
    I would detain you here some month or two
    Before you venture for me.
 I could teach you
    How to choose right, but then I am forsworn;
    So will I never be; so may you miss me;
    But if you do, you'll make me wish a sin,
    That I had been forsworn.
 Beshrew your eyes!
    They have o'erlook'd me and divided me;
    One half of me is yours, the other half yours-  
    Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours,
    And so all yours.
 O! these naughty times
    Puts bars between the owners and their rights;
    And so, though yours, not yours.

  BASSANIO.
 Promise me life, and I'll confess the truth.

  PORTIA.
 Well then, confess and live.
  
  BASSANIO.

    O happy torment, when my torturer
    Doth teach me answers for deliverance!
    But let me to my fortune and the caskets.

  PORTIA.

    If you do love me, you will find me out.

    Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof;
    Let music sound while he doth make his choice;
    Then, if he lose, he makes a swan-like end,
    Fading in music.
 He may win;
    And what is music then? Then music is
    Even as the flourish when true subjects bow
    To a new-crowned monarch; such it is
    As are those dulcet sounds in break of day
    That creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear
    And summon him to marriage.
 Now he goes,
    With no less presence, but with much more love,  
    Than young Alcides when he did redeem
    The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy
    To the sea-monster.
 I stand for sacrifice;
    The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives,
    With bleared visages come forth to view
    The issue of th' exploit.
 With much much more dismay
    I view the fight than thou that mak'st the fray.

                 It is engend'red in the eyes,
                 With gazing fed; and fancy dies
                 In the cradle where it lies.
  
                   Let us all ring fancy's knell:
                   I'll begin it- Ding, dong, bell.
           Ding, dong, bell.


  BASSANIO.
 So may the outward shows be least themselves;
    The world is still deceiv'd with ornament.

    In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt
    But, being season'd with a gracious voice,
    Obscures the show of evil? In religion,
    What damned error but some sober brow
    Will bless it, and approve it with a text,
    Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?
    There is no vice so simple but assumes
    Some mark of virtue on his outward parts.

    How many cowards, whose hearts are all as false
    As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
    The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars;
    Who, inward search'd, have livers white as milk!
    And these assume but valour's excrement
    To render them redoubted.

    Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
    To a most dangerous sea; the beauteous scarf
    Veiling an Indian beauty; in a word,
    The seeming truth which cunning times put on
    To entrap the wisest.
 Joy be the consequence!
  PORTIA.

  BASSANIO.
 Here in her hairs
    The painter plays the spider, and hath woven
    A golden mesh t' entrap the hearts of men
    Faster than gnats in cobwebs.
 Yet look how far
    The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow  
    In underprizing it, so far this shadow
    Doth limp behind the substance.
 Here's the scroll,
    The continent and summary of my fortune.
'
    A gentle scroll.

    Like one of two contending in a prize,
    That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes,
    Hearing applause and universal shout,
    Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt
    Whether those peals of praise be his or no;
    So, thrice-fair lady, stand I even so,
    As doubtful whether what I see be true,  
    Until confirm'd, sign'd, ratified by you.

  PORTIA.
 You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,
    Such as I am.

    Myself and what is mine to you and yours
    Is now converted.
 Madam, you have bereft me of all words;
    Only my blood speaks to you in my veins;
    And there is such confusion in my powers
    As, after some oration fairly spoke
    By a beloved prince, there doth appear
    Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
    Where every something, being blent together,
    Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy
    Express'd and not express'd.
 But when this ring
    Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence;
    O, then be bold to say Bassanio's dead!
  NERISSA.
 My lord and lady, it is now our time
    That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper  
    To cry 'Good joy.

  BASSANIO.
 With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.
 I thank your lordship, you have got me one.

  PORTIA.

  BASSANIO.
 And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?
  GRATIANO.
 Our feast shall be much honoured in your marriage.

  NERISSA.
 What, and stake down?
  GRATIANO.
 No; we shall ne'er win at that sport, and stake down-
    But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel?
    What, and my old Venetian friend, Salerio!

          Enter LORENZO, JESSICA, and SALERIO, a messenger
                           from Venice

  BASSANIO.
 By your leave,
    I bid my very friends and countrymen,  
    Sweet Portia, welcome.

  PORTIA.

  LORENZO.
 I thank your honour.
 For my part, my lord,
    My purpose was not to have seen you here;
    But meeting with Salerio by the way,
    He did entreat me, past all saying nay,
    To come with him along.

  SALERIO.
 Signior Antonio
    Commends him to you.
               [Gives BASSANIO a letter]
  BASSANIO.
 Ere I ope his letter,
    I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.
 Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind;
    Nor well, unless in mind; his letter there
    Will show you his estate.
 Nerissa, cheer yond stranger; bid her welcome.

    Your hand, Salerio.
 What's the news from Venice?
    How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio?
    I know he will be glad of our success:  
    We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece.

  PORTIA.
 What, worse and worse!
    With leave, Bassanio: I am half yourself,
    And I must freely have the half of anything
    That this same paper brings you.

  BASSANIO.
 O sweet Portia,
    Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words
    That ever blotted paper! Gentle lady,
    When I did first impart my love to you,
    I freely told you all the wealth I had
    Ran in my veins- I was a gentleman;
    And then I told you true.
 And yet, dear lady,
    Rating myself at nothing, you shall see
    How much I was a braggart.
 Twenty merchants,
    The Duke himself, and the magnificoes
    Of greatest port, have all persuaded with him;
    But none can drive him from the envious plea
    Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.

  JESSICA.
 When I was with him, I have heard him swear
    To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen,
    That he would rather have Antonio's flesh
    Than twenty times the value of the sum
    That he did owe him; and I know, my lord,
    If law, authority, and power, deny not,
    It will go hard with poor Antonio.

  PORTIA.
 Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?
  BASSANIO.

    When it is paid, bring your true friend along.

    My maid Nerissa and myself meantime
    Will live as maids and widows.
 Come, away;
    For you shall hence upon your wedding day.

    Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer;
    Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.

  BASSANIO.
  [Reads]  'Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried,
    my creditors grow cruel, my estate is very low, my bond to the
    Jew is forfeit; and since, in paying it, it is impossible I  
    should live, all debts are clear'd between you and I, if I might
    but see you at my death.
'
  PORTIA.

Venice.

  ANTONIO.
 Hear me yet, good Shylock.
 I'll have my bond; speak not against my bond.

    I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond.

    Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause,
    But, since I am a dog, beware my fangs;
    The Duke shall grant me justice.

  ANTONIO.
 I pray thee hear me speak.
 I'll have my bond.

    I'll not be made a soft and dull-ey'd fool,
    To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield,
    To Christian intercessors.
 Follow not;  
    I'll have no speaking; I will have my bond.
             Exit
  SOLANIO.
 It is the most impenetrable cur
    That ever kept with men.
 Let him alone;
    I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers.

  SOLANIO.

  ANTONIO.
 Therefore, go;
    These griefs and losses have so bated me
    That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
    To-morrow to my bloody creditor.

Belmont.
 Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
    You have a noble and a true conceit
    Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly
    In bearing thus the absence of your lord.

    But if you knew to whom you show this honour,
    How true a gentleman you send relief,
    How dear a lover of my lord your husband,
    I know you would be prouder of the work
    Than customary bounty can enforce you.
 I never did repent for doing good,
    Nor shall not now; for in companions
    That do converse and waste the time together,
    Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love,
    There must be needs a like proportion
    Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit,
    Which makes me think that this Antonio,
    Being the bosom lover of my lord,  
    Must needs be like my lord.
 If it be so,
    How little is the cost I have bestowed
    In purchasing the semblance of my soul
    From out the state of hellish cruelty!
    This comes too near the praising of myself;
    Therefore, no more of it; hear other things.

    Lorenzo, I commit into your hands
    The husbandry and manage of my house
    Until my lord's return; for mine own part,
    I have toward heaven breath'd a secret vow
    To live in prayer and contemplation,
    Only attended by Nerissa here,
    Until her husband and my lord's return.

    There is a monastery two miles off,
    And there we will abide.
  
  PORTIA.
 My people do already know my mind,
    And will acknowledge you and Jessica
    In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.

    So fare you well till we shall meet again.

  LORENZO.
 Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!
  JESSICA.

                                      Exeunt JESSICA and LORENZO
    Now, Balthasar,
    As I have ever found thee honest-true,
    So let me find thee still.
 Waste no time in words,
    But get thee gone; I shall be there before thee.
 Madam, I go with all convenient speed.

  NERISSA.
 Shall they see us?
  PORTIA.
 They shall, Nerissa; but in such a habit
    That they shall think we are accomplished
    With that we lack.
 I'll hold thee any wager,
    When we are both accoutred like young men,
    I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two,
    And wear my dagger with the braver grace,
    And speak between the change of man and boy
    With a reed voice; and turn two mincing steps
    Into a manly stride; and speak of frays
    Like a fine bragging youth; and tell quaint lies,
    How honourable ladies sought my love,
    Which I denying, they fell sick and died-
    I could not do withal.
 Then I'll repent,
    And wish for all that, that I had not kill'd them.

    And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell,  
    That men shall swear I have discontinued school
    About a twelvemonth.
 I have within my mind
    A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks,
    Which I will practise.
 Fie, what a question's that,
    If thou wert near a lewd interpreter!
    But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device
    When I am in my coach, which stays for us
    At the park gate; and therefore haste away,
    For we must measure twenty miles to-day.

Belmont.
 The garden

Enter LAUNCELOT and JESSICA

  LAUNCELOT.

    I was always plain with you, and so now I speak my agitation of
    the matter; therefore be o' good cheer, for truly I think you are
    damn'd.

  JESSICA.
 Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not-
   that you are not the Jew's daughter.

  JESSICA.
 That were a kind of bastard hope indeed; so the sins of my
    mother should be visited upon me.

  LAUNCELOT.

  JESSICA.
 I shall be sav'd by my husband; he hath made me a
    Christian.

  LAUNCELOT.
 Truly, the more to blame he; we were Christians enow  
    before, e'en as many as could well live one by another.


                             Enter LORENZO

  JESSICA.

  LORENZO.

  LORENZO.
 Go in, sirrah; bid them
    prepare for dinner.

  LAUNCELOT.
 That is done, sir; they have all stomachs.
 Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you! Then bid them
    prepare dinner.

  LAUNCELOT.
 That is done too, sir, only 'cover' is the word.
 Will you cover, then, sir?
  LAUNCELOT.
 Not so, sir, neither; I know my duty.

  LAUNCELOT.
 For the table, sir, it shall be serv'd in; for the meat,
    sir, it shall be cover'd; for your coming in to dinner, sir, why,
    let it be as humours and conceits shall govern.
 O dear discretion, how his words are suited!
    The fool hath planted in his memory
    An army of good words; and I do know
    A many fools that stand in better place,
    Garnish'd like him, that for a tricksy word
    Defy the matter.
 How cheer'st thou, Jessica?
    And now, good sweet, say thy opinion,
    How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife?
  JESSICA.
 Past all expressing.
 Even such a husband  
    Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.

  LORENZO.

  JESSICA.
 Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach.
 No, pray thee, let it serve for table-talk;
    Then howsome'er thou speak'st, 'mong other things
    I shall digest it.

  JESSICA.
 SCENE I.

Venice.
 The court of justice

Enter the DUKE, the MAGNIFICOES, ANTONIO, BASSANIO, GRATIANO, SALERIO,
and OTHERS

  DUKE OF VENICE.

  DUKE OF VENICE.

  ANTONIO.
 I have heard
    Your Grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify
    His rigorous course; but since he stands obdurate,
    And that no lawful means can carry me
    Out of his envy's reach, I do oppose
    My patience to his fury, and am arm'd
    To suffer with a quietness of spirit
    The very tyranny and rage of his.
 Go one, and call the Jew into the court.

    Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,
    That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice
    To the last hour of act; and then, 'tis thought,
    Thou'lt show thy mercy and remorse, more strange
    Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;
    And where thou now exacts the penalty,
    Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh,
    Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,
    But, touch'd with human gentleness and love,
    Forgive a moiety of the principal,
    Glancing an eye of pity on his losses,
    That have of late so huddled on his back-
    Enow to press a royal merchant down,
    And pluck commiseration of his state
    From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint,
    From stubborn Turks and Tartars, never train'd  
    To offices of tender courtesy.

    We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.
 I have possess'd your Grace of what I purpose,
    And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
    To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
 Now, for your answer:  
    As there is no firm reason to be rend'red
    Why he cannot abide a gaping pig;
    Why he, a harmless necessary cat;
    Why he, a woollen bagpipe, but of force
    Must yield to such inevitable shame
    As to offend, himself being offended;
    So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
    More than a lodg'd hate and a certain loathing
    I bear Antonio, that I follow thus
    A losing suit against him.
 This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
    To excuse the current of thy cruelty.
 I am not bound to please thee with my answers.

  BASSANIO.
 Do all men kill the things they do not love?
  SHYLOCK.
 Hates any man the thing he would not kill?
  BASSANIO.

  SHYLOCK.

  SHYLOCK.
 If every ducat in six thousand ducats
    Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
    I would not draw them; I would have my bond.

  DUKE OF VENICE.
 What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
    You have among you many a purchas'd slave,
    Which, fike your asses and your dogs and mules,
    You use in abject and in slavish parts,  
    Because you bought them; shall I say to you
    'Let them be free, marry them to your heirs-
    Why sweat they under burdens?- let their beds
    Be made as soft as yours, and let their palates
    Be season'd with such viands'? You will answer
    'The slaves are ours.

    If you deny me, fie upon your law!
    There is no force in the decrees of Venice.
 Upon my power I may dismiss this court,
    Unless Bellario, a learned doctor,
    Whom I have sent for to determine this,
    Come here to-day.
 My lord, here stays without
    A messenger with letters from the doctor,
    New come from Padua.

  DUKE OF VENICE.
 Bring us the letters; call the messenger.
 Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!  
    The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all,
    Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.

  ANTONIO.
 I am a tainted wether of the flock,
    Meetest for death; the weakest kind of fruit
    Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me.

    You cannot better be employ'd, Bassanio,
    Than to live still, and write mine epitaph.
 Came you from Padua, from Bellario?
  NERISSA.
 To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.

  GRATIANO.
 Not on thy sole, but on thy soul, harsh Jew,
    Thou mak'st thy knife keen; but no metal can,
    No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness
    Of thy sharp envy.
  
  GRATIANO.

    Thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith,
    To hold opinion with Pythagoras
    That souls of animals infuse themselves
    Into the trunks of men.
 Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,
    Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud;
    Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
    To cureless ruin.
 I stand here for law.

    Where is he?
  NERISSA.
 He attendeth here hard by
    To know your answer, whether you'll admit him.
  
  DUKE OF VENICE.
 With all my heart.

    Meantime, the court shall hear Bellario's letter.
  [Reads]  'Your Grace shall understand that at the receipt
    of your letter I am very sick; but in the instant that your
    messenger came, in loving visitation was with me a young doctor
    of Rome- his name is Balthazar.
 I acquainted him with the cause
    in controversy between the Jew and Antonio the merchant; we
    turn'd o'er many books together; he is furnished with my opinion
    which, bettered with his own learning-the greatness whereof I
    cannot enough commend- comes with him at my importunity to fill
    up your Grace's request in my stead.
 I leave him
    to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his
    commendation.

  DUKE OF VENICE.

    Are you acquainted with the difference
    That holds this present question in the court?
  PORTIA.

    Which is the merchant here, and which the Jew?
  DUKE OF VENICE.
 Shylock is my name.

  PORTIA.
 Of a strange nature is the suit you follow;
    Yet in such rule that the Venetian law
    Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.

    You stand within his danger, do you not?
  ANTONIO.

  PORTIA.
 Do you confess the bond?
  ANTONIO.
 Then must the Jew be merciful.
 On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.
  
  PORTIA.
 The quality of mercy is not strain'd;
    It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
    Upon the place beneath.
 It is twice blest:
    It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.

    'Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
    The throned monarch better than his crown;
    His sceptre shows the force of temporal power,
    The attribute to awe and majesty,
    Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;
    But mercy is above this sceptred sway,
    It is enthroned in the hearts of kings,
    It is an attribute to God himself;
    And earthly power doth then show likest God's
    When mercy seasons justice.
 I have spoke thus much
    To mitigate the justice of thy plea,  
    Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice
    Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there.

  SHYLOCK.
 My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
    The penalty and forfeit of my bond.
 Yes; here I tender it for him in the court;
    Yea, twice the sum; if that will not suffice,
    I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er
    On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart;
    If this will not suffice, it must appear
    That malice bears down truth.
 And, I beseech you,
    Wrest once the law to your authority;
    To do a great right do a little wrong,
    And curb this cruel devil of his will.
 It must not be; there is no power in Venice
    Can alter a decree established;
    'Twill be recorded for a precedent,
    And many an error, by the same example,
    Will rush into the state; it cannot be.

  SHYLOCK.
 I pray you, let me look upon the bond.

  SHYLOCK.

  PORTIA.
 An oath, an oath! I have an oath in heaven.
 Why, this bond is forfeit;
    And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
    A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
    Nearest the merchant's heart.

  SHYLOCK.
 By my soul I swear
    There is no power in the tongue of man
    To alter me.

  ANTONIO.
 Most heartily I do beseech the court  
    To give the judgment.
 Why then, thus it is:
    You must prepare your bosom for his knife.

  SHYLOCK.
 'Tis very true.
 O wise and upright judge,
    How much more elder art thou than thy looks!
  PORTIA.

  SHYLOCK.

  PORTIA.
 It is so.
 I have them ready.

  PORTIA.
 Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,
    To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.

  SHYLOCK.
 It is not so express'd, but what of that?  
    'Twere good you do so much for charity.

  SHYLOCK.
 I cannot find it; 'tis not in the bond.

  PORTIA.
 But little: I am arm'd and well prepar'd.

    Give me your hand, Bassanio; fare you well.
 It is still her use
    To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
    To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow
    An age of poverty; from which ling'ring penance
    Of such misery doth she cut me off.

    Commend me to your honourable wife;
    Tell her the process of Antonio's end;
    Say how I lov'd you; speak me fair in death;
    And, when the tale is told, bid her be judge
    Whether Bassanio had not once a love.

  BASSANIO.
 Antonio, I am married to a wife
    Which is as dear to me as life itself;
    But life itself, my wife, and all the world,
    Are not with me esteem'd above thy life;
    I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all
    Here to this devil, to deliver you.

  PORTIA.

  GRATIANO.
 I have a wife who I protest I love;
    I would she were in heaven, so she could
    Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.

  SHYLOCK.
  [Aside]  These be the Christian husbands! I have a
    daughter-
    Would any of the stock of Barrabas
    Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!-
    We trifle time; I pray thee pursue sentence.

  PORTIA.
 A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine.
  
    The court awards it and the law doth give it.

    The law allows it and the court awards it.

  SHYLOCK.
 Most learned judge! A sentence! Come, prepare.

  PORTIA.
 Tarry a little; there is something else.
'
    Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh;
    But, in the cutting it, if thou dost shed
    One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
    Are, by the laws of Venice, confiscate
    Unto the state of Venice.

  GRATIANO.
 O learned judge!
  SHYLOCK.
 Is that the law?
  PORTIA.
 Thyself shalt see the act;
    For, as thou urgest justice, be assur'd
    Thou shalt have justice, more than thou desir'st.

  GRATIANO.
 O learned judge! Mark, Jew.
 A learned judge!
  SHYLOCK.

  BASSANIO.
 Here is the money.
 Soft!
    The Jew shall have all justice.
 Soft! No haste.

    He shall have nothing but the penalty.
 O Jew! an upright judge, a learned judge!
  PORTIA.
 Therefore, prepare thee to cut off the flesh.
 A second Daniel, a Daniel, Jew!
    Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.
 Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.

  SHYLOCK.
 Give me my principal, and let me go.

  BASSANIO.
 I have it ready for thee; here it is.
  
  PORTIA.
 He hath refus'd it in the open court;
    He shall have merely justice, and his bond.

  GRATIANO.
 A Daniel still say I, a second Daniel!
    I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.

  SHYLOCK.
 Why, then the devil give him good of it!
    I'll stay no longer question.

  PORTIA.
 Tarry, Jew.

  GRATIANO.
 Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself;
    And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
    Thou hast not left the value of a cord;
    Therefore thou must be hang'd at the state's charge.

  DUKE OF VENICE.

    For half thy wealth, it is Antonio's;
    The other half comes to the general state,
    Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.

  PORTIA.

  SHYLOCK.
 Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that.

    You take my house when you do take the prop
    That doth sustain my house; you take my life  
    When you do take the means whereby I live.

  PORTIA.
 What mercy can you render him, Antonio?
  GRATIANO.
 So please my lord the Duke and all the court
    To quit the fine for one half of his goods;
    I am content, so he will let me have
    The other half in use, to render it
    Upon his death unto the gentleman
    That lately stole his daughter-
    Two things provided more; that, for this favour,
    He presently become a Christian;
    The other, that he do record a gift,
    Here in the court, of all he dies possess'd
    Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.

  DUKE OF VENICE.

  PORTIA.
 I am content.
 Clerk, draw a deed of gift.
 I pray you, give me leave to go from hence;  
    I am not well; send the deed after me
    And I will sign it.

  DUKE OF VENICE.

  GRATIANO.
 In christ'ning shalt thou have two god-fathers;
    Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more,
    To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.

                                                    Exit SHYLOCK
  DUKE OF VENICE.
 Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.

  PORTIA.
 I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon;
    I must away this night toward Padua,
    And it is meet I presently set forth.

  DUKE OF VENICE.
 I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.

    Antonio, gratify this gentleman,
    For in my mind you are much bound to him.

                             Exeunt DUKE, MAGNIFICOES, and train
  BASSANIO.
 And stand indebted, over and above,
    In love and service to you evermore.

  PORTIA.

    My mind was never yet more mercenary.

  PORTIA.
 You press me far, and therefore I will yield.

    [To BASSANIO]  And, for your love, I'll take this ring from you.

    Do not draw back your hand; I'll take no more,
    And you in love shall not deny me this.

  BASSANIO.
.
 There's more depends on this than on the value.
 I see, sir, you are liberal in offers;
    You taught me first to beg, and now, methinks,
    You teach me how a beggar should be answer'd.

  BASSANIO.
 That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts.
 Well, peace be with you!
                                       Exeunt PORTIA and NERISSA
  ANTONIO.

    Let his deservings, and my love withal,
    Be valued 'gainst your wife's commandment.
  
  BASSANIO.
 Away, make haste.
                    Exeunt




SCENE II.

Venice.
 A street

Enter PORTIA and NERISSA

  PORTIA.
 Inquire the Jew's house out, give him this deed,
    And let him sign it; we'll away tonight,
    And be a day before our husbands home.

    My Lord Bassanio, upon more advice,
    Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat
    Your company at dinner.
 That cannot be.

    His ring I do accept most thankfully,
    And so, I pray you, tell him.
 That will I do.
  [To NERISSA]  Thou Mayst, I warrant.
 We shall have old
      swearing
    That they did give the rings away to men;
    But we'll outface them, and outswear them too.

    [Aloud]  Away, make haste, thou know'st where I will tarry.

  NERISSA.
 The garden before PORTIA'S house

Enter LORENZO and JESSICA

  LORENZO.
 In such a night as this,
    When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
    And they did make no noise- in such a night,
    Troilus methinks mounted the Troyan walls,
    And sigh'd his soul toward the Grecian tents,
    Where Cressid lay that night.
 In such a night
    Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
    Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love
    To come again to Carthage.

  JESSICA.
 In such a night  
    Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
    And with an unthrift love did run from Venice
    As far as Belmont.
 In such a night
    Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,
    Slander her love, and he forgave it her.
 I would out-night you, did no body come;
    But, hark, I hear the footing of a man.
 A friend.
 A friend! What friend? Your name, I pray you, friend?
  STEPHANO.
 Who comes with her?
  STEPHANO.
 None but a holy hermit and her maid.

    I pray you, is my master yet return'd?
  LORENZO.
 He is not, nor we have not heard from him.

    But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica,
    And ceremoniously let us prepare
    Some welcome for the mistress of the house.


                         Enter LAUNCELOT

  LAUNCELOT.
 Leave holloaing, man.
 Sola! Where, where?
  LORENZO.
 Here!  
  LAUNCELOT.
 Sweet soul, let's in, and there expect their coming.

    And yet no matter- why should we go in?
    My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you,
    Within the house, your mistress is at hand;
    And bring your music forth into the air.

    Sit, Jessica.
  

                          Enter MUSICIANS

    Come, ho, and wake Diana with a hymn;
    With sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear.
 I am never merry when I hear sweet music.
 The reason is your spirits are attentive;
    For do but note a wild and wanton herd,
    Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
    Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
    Which is the hot condition of their blood-
    If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
    Or any air of music touch their ears,
    You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
    Their savage eyes turn'd to a modest gaze
    By the sweet power of music.
 Therefore the poet
    Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods;
    Since nought so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
    But music for the time doth change his nature.
 Mark the music.

    How far that little candle throws his beams!
    So shines a good deed in a naughty world.

  PORTIA.
 Music! hark!
  NERISSA.
 Nothing is good, I see, without respect;  
    Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.

  NERISSA.
 Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.

  PORTIA.
 The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark
    When neither is attended; and I think
    ne nightingale, if she should sing by day,
    When every goose is cackling, would be thought
    No better a musician than the wren.
 That is the voice,
    Or I am much deceiv'd, of Portia.
 He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo,
    By the bad voice.
 Dear lady, welcome home.
 We have been praying for our husbands' welfare,
    Which speed, we hope, the better for our words.

  PORTIA.
.
 Your husband is at hand; I hear his trumpet.

    We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.
 We should hold day with the Antipodes,
    If you would walk in absence of the sun.

  PORTIA.
 Let me give light, but let me not be light,
    For a light wife doth make a heavy husband,
    And never be Bassanio so for me;
    But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.
  
  BASSANIO.
 You should in all sense be much bound to him,
    For, as I hear, he was much bound for you.

  ANTONIO.

  PORTIA.
 Sir, you are very welcome to our house.

    It must appear in other ways than words,
    Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.

  GRATIANO.
 A quarrel, ho, already! What's the matter?
  GRATIANO.
 About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring
    That she did give me, whose posy was
    For all the world like cutler's poetry
    Upon a knife, 'Love me, and leave me not.
 What talk you of the posy or the value?
    You swore to me, when I did give it you,  
    That you would wear it till your hour of death,
    And that it should lie with you in your grave;
    Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
    You should have been respective and have kept it.

  GRATIANO.

  NERISSA.

  GRATIANO.

  PORTIA.

    I gave my love a ring, and made him swear
    Never to part with it, and here he stands;
    I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it  
    Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth
    That the world masters.
 Now, in faith, Gratiano,
    You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief;
    An 'twere to me, I should be mad at it.

  BASSANIO.

  GRATIANO.
 My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
    Unto the judge that begg'd it, and indeed
    Deserv'd it too; and then the boy, his clerk,
    That took some pains in writing, he begg'd mine;
    And neither man nor master would take aught
    But the two rings.
 What ring gave you, my lord?
    Not that, I hope, which you receiv'd of me.

  BASSANIO.

  PORTIA.
  
  NERISSA.
 Nor I in yours
    Till I again see mine.
 Sweet Portia,
    If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
    If you did know for whom I gave the ring,
    And would conceive for what I gave the ring,
    And how unwillingly I left the ring,
    When nought would be accepted but the ring,
    You would abate the strength of your displeasure.

    What man is there so much unreasonable,
    If you had pleas'd to have defended it
    With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
    To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
    Nerissa teaches me what to believe:
    I'll die for't but some woman had the ring.

  BASSANIO.
 No, by my honour, madam, by my soul,  
    No woman had it, but a civil doctor,
    Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me,
    And begg'd the ring; the which I did deny him,
    And suffer'd him to go displeas'd away-
    Even he that had held up the very life
    Of my dear friend.
 What should I say, sweet lady?
    I was enforc'd to send it after him;
    I was beset with shame and courtesy;
    My honour would not let ingratitude
    So much besmear it.
 Pardon me, good lady;
    For by these blessed candles of the night,
    Had you been there, I think you would have begg'd
    The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.

  PORTIA.
 Let not that doctor e'er come near my house;
    Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
    And that which you did swear to keep for me,
    I will become as liberal as you;
    I'll not deny him anything I have,
    No, not my body, nor my husband's bed.
  
    Lie not a night from home; watch me like Argus;
    If you do not, if I be left alone,
    Now, by mine honour which is yet mine own,
    I'll have that doctor for mine bedfellow.

  NERISSA.

  GRATIANO.
 Well, do you so, let not me take him then;
    For, if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen.

  ANTONIO.

  PORTIA.
 Sir, grieve not you; you are welcome not withstanding.

  BASSANIO.
 Mark you but that!
    In both my eyes he doubly sees himself,
    In each eye one; swear by your double self,
    And there's an oath of credit.

  BASSANIO.
 Nay, but hear me.

  ANTONIO.
 Then you shall be his surety.
 Give him this,
    And bid him keep it better than the other.
 Here, Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.
 I had it of him.
 Why, this is like the mending of highways
    In summer, where the ways are fair enough.

    Here is a letter; read it at your leisure;  
    It comes from Padua, from Bellario;
    There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
    Nerissa there her clerk.
 Antonio, you are welcome;
    And I have better news in store for you
    Than you expect.
 Unseal this letter soon;
    There you shall find three of your argosies
    Are richly come to harbour suddenly.

    You shall not know by what strange accident
    I chanced on this letter.

  BASSANIO.
 Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?
  NERISSA.
 Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow;
    When I am absent, then lie with my wife.

  ANTONIO.
 Sweet lady, you have given me life and living;  
    For here I read for certain that my ships
    Are safely come to road.
 How now, Lorenzo!
    My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.

  NERISSA.
 Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.

    There do I give to you and Jessica,
    From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
    After his death, of all he dies possess'd of.

  LORENZO.
 It is almost morning,
    And yet I am sure you are not satisfied
    Of these events at full.
 Let us go in,
    And charge us there upon inter'gatories,
    And we will answer all things faithfully.
 Let it be so.

    But were the day come, I should wish it dark,  
    Till I were couching with the doctor's clerk.

    Well, while I live, I'll fear no other thing
    So sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1601

THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  SIR JOHN FALSTAFF
  FENTON, a young gentleman
  SHALLOW, a country justice
  SLENDER, cousin to Shallow

    Gentlemen of Windsor
  FORD
  PAGE
  WILLIAM PAGE, a boy, son to Page
  SIR HUGH EVANS, a Welsh parson
  DOCTOR CAIUS, a French physician
  HOST of the Garter Inn

    Followers of Falstaff
  BARDOLPH
  PISTOL
  NYM
  ROBIN, page to Falstaff
  SIMPLE, servant to Slender
  RUGBY, servant to Doctor Caius  

  MISTRESS FORD
  MISTRESS PAGE
  MISTRESS ANNE PAGE, her daughter
  MISTRESS QUICKLY, servant to Doctor Caius
  SERVANTS to Page, Ford, etc.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



SCENE:
Windsor, and the neighbourhood


The Merry Wives of Windsor



ACT I.


Windsor.
 Before PAGE'S house

Enter JUSTICE SHALLOW, SLENDER, and SIR HUGH EVANS

  SHALLOW.
 Sir Hugh, persuade me not; I will make a Star
    Chamber matter of it; if he were twenty Sir John Falstaffs,
    he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.

  SLENDER.
 In the county of Gloucester, Justice of Peace, and
    Coram.
 Ay, cousin Slender, and Custalorum.
 Ay, and Ratolorum too; and a gentleman born,
    Master Parson, who writes himself 'Armigero' in any bill,
    warrant, quittance, or obligation-'Armigero.

  SLENDER.
 All his successors, gone before him, hath done't;
    and all his ancestors, that come after him, may: they may
    give the dozen white luces in their coat.

  SHALLOW.
 It is an old coat.

  EVANS.
 The dozen white louses do become an old coat well;  
    it agrees well, passant; it is a familiar beast to man, and
    signifies love.

  SLENDER.
 I may quarter, coz.

  SHALLOW.
 You may, by marrying.

  EVANS.
 Yes, py'r lady! If he has a quarter of your coat, there
    is but three skirts for yourself, in my simple conjectures;
    but that is all one.
 If Sir John Falstaff have committed
    disparagements unto you, I am of the church, and will be
    glad to do my benevolence, to make atonements and
    compremises between you.

  SHALLOW.

  EVANS.
 It is not meet the Council hear a riot; there is no
    fear of Got in a riot; the Council, look you, shall desire
    to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a riot; take your
    vizaments in that.

  SHALLOW.
 There is Anne
    Page, which is daughter to Master George Page, which is
    pretty virginity.

  SLENDER.
 Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and
    speaks small like a woman.

  EVANS.
 It is that fery person for all the orld, as just as you
    will desire; and seven hundred pounds of moneys, and
    gold, and silver, is her grandsire upon his death's-bed-Got
    deliver to a joyful resurrections!-give, when she is able to
    overtake seventeen years old.
 It were a goot motion if we
    leave our pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage
    between Master Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.
 Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.

  EVANS.
 Seven hundred pounds, and possibilities, is goot gifts.
 Well, let us see honest Master Page.

    [Knocks]  What, hoa! Got pless your house here!
  PAGE.
 Here is Got's plessing, and your friend, and Justice
  Shallow; and here young Master Slender, that peradventures
    shall tell you another tale, if matters grow to your
    likings.
 I am glad to see your worships well.
 I thank you for
    my venison, Master Shallow.
 Master Page, I am glad to see you; much good do
    it your good heart! I wish'd your venison better; it was ill  
    kill'd.
 How doth good Mistress Page?-and I thank you
    always with my heart, la! with my heart.

  SHALLOW.
 Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.

  PAGE.
 I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.

  SLENDER.

  SHALLOW.
 That he will not.

  PAGE.
 A cur, sir.

  SHALLOW.
 Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog.
 Can there be
    more said? He is good, and fair.
 Is Sir John Falstaff here?
  PAGE.
 It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.

  SHALLOW.
 He hath wrong'd me, Master Page.

  PAGE.

  SHALLOW.
 Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me to
    the King?
  SHALLOW.
 But not kiss'd your keeper's daughter.
 Tut, a pin! this shall be answer'd.

  FALSTAFF.
 I will answer it straight: I have done all this.

    That is now answer'd.

  SHALLOW.
 The Council shall know this.

  FALSTAFF.
 'Twere better for you if it were known in counsel:
    you'll be laugh'd at.

  EVANS.

  FALSTAFF.
 Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you;
    and against your cony-catching rascals, Bardolph, Nym,
    and Pistol.
 They carried me to the tavern, and made me
    drunk, and afterwards pick'd my pocket.
 You Banbury cheese!
  SLENDER.
 Ay, it is no matter.

  PISTOL.
 How now, Mephostophilus!
  SLENDER.

  NYM.
 Slice, I say! pauca, pauca; slice! That's my humour.

  SLENDER.
 Where's Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?
  EVANS.
 There is
    three umpires in this matter, as I understand: that is,
    Master Page, fidelicet Master Page; and there is myself,
    fidelicet myself; and the three party is, lastly and
    finally, mine host of the Garter.

  PAGE.
 We three to hear it and end it between them.

  EVANS.
 Fery goot.
 He hears with ears.

  EVANS.
 The tevil and his tam! What phrase is this, 'He hears
    with ear'? Why, it is affectations.

  FALSTAFF.
 Pistol, did you pick Master Slender's purse?
  SLENDER.
 Is this true, Pistol?
  EVANS.
 Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and master
    mine,
    I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.

  SLENDER.
 By these gloves, then, 'twas he.

  NYM.

  FALSTAFF.
 Why, sir, for my part, I say the gentleman had
    drunk himself out of his five sentences.

  EVANS.
 And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashier'd;
    and so conclusions pass'd the careers.

  SLENDER.
 Ay, you spake in Latin then too; but 'tis no matter;
    I'll ne'er be drunk whilst I live again, but in honest,
    civil, godly company, for this trick.
 So Got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.

  FALSTAFF.


          Enter MISTRESS ANNE PAGE with wine; MISTRESS  
               FORD and MISTRESS PAGE, following

  PAGE.

                                                  Exit ANNE PAGE
  SLENDER.

  PAGE.
 Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well
    met; by your leave, good mistress.
 Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome.

                      Exeunt all but SHALLOW, SLENDER, and EVANS
  SLENDER.


                          Enter SIMPLE

    How, Simple! Where have you been? I must wait on
    myself, must I? You have not the Book of Riddles about you,
    have you?  
  SIMPLE.
 Book of Riddles! Why, did you not lend it to Alice
    Shortcake upon Allhallowmas last, a fortnight afore
    Michaelmas?
  SHALLOW.
 Come, coz; come, coz; we stay for you.
 A word
    with you, coz; marry, this, coz: there is, as 'twere, a
    tender, a kind of tender, made afar off by Sir Hugh here.
 Do
    you understand me?
  SLENDER.
 Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so, I
    shall do that that is reason.
 Nay, but understand me.
 So I do, sir.

  EVANS.
 Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says; I pray
    you pardon me; he's a justice of peace in his country,
    simple though I stand here.

  EVANS.
 But that is not the question.

  EVANS.
 Marry is it; the very point of it; to Mistress Anne  
    Page.

  SLENDER.
 But can you affection the oman? Let us command to
    know that of your mouth or of your lips; for divers philosophers
    hold that the lips is parcel of the mouth.
 Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?
  SLENDER.

  EVANS.
 That you must.

  SHALLOW.
 Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz; what
    I do is to pleasure you, coz.
 Can you love the maid?
  SLENDER.
 I will marry her, sir, at your request; but if there
    be no great love in the beginning, yet heaven may decrease  
    it upon better acquaintance, when we are married and
    have more occasion to know one another.
 I hope upon
    familiarity will grow more contempt.

  EVANS.
 It is a fery discretion answer, save the fall is in the
    ord 'dissolutely': the ort is, according to our meaning,
    'resolutely'; his meaning is good.

  SHALLOW.
 Ay, I think my cousin meant well.

  SLENDER.
 Here comes fair Mistress Anne.
 Would I were
    young for your sake, Mistress Anne!
  ANNE.
 The dinner is on the table; my father desires your
    worships' company.

  SHALLOW.
 I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne!
  EVANS.
 Od's plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.

                                        Exeunt SHALLOW and EVANS  
  ANNE.
 Will't please your worship to come in, sir?
  SLENDER.

  ANNE.
 The dinner attends you, sir.
 I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth.
  [Exit SIMPLE]  A justice of peace sometime may
    be beholding to his friend for a man.
 I keep but three men
    and a boy yet, till my mother be dead.

  ANNE.
 I may not go in without your worship; they will not
    sit till you come.

  ANNE.
 I pray you, sir, walk in.
 I had rather walk here, I thank you.
 I think there are, sir; I heard them talk'd of.
 You are afraid, if you see the
    bear loose, are you not?
  ANNE.
 That's meat and drink to me now.
 I have seen
    Sackerson loose twenty times, and have taken him by the
    chain; but I warrant you, the women have so cried and
    shriek'd at it that it pass'd; but women, indeed, cannot
    abide 'em; they are very ill-favour'd rough things.
 Come, gentle Master Slender, come; we stay for you.

  SLENDER.

  PAGE.
 By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! Come,
    come.
 Nay, pray you lead the way.
  
  PAGE.
 Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.

  ANNE.

  SLENDER.

  ANNE.
 You
    do yourself wrong indeed, la!                         Exeunt




SCENE 2.


Before PAGE'S house

Enter SIR HUGH EVANS and SIMPLE

  EVANS.
 Well, sir.

  EVANS.
 Nay, it is petter yet.
 Give her this letter; for it is a
    oman that altogether's acquaintance with Mistress Anne
    Page; and the letter is to desire and require her to solicit
    your master's desires to Mistress Anne Page.
 I pray you
    be gone.
 I will make an end of my dinner; there's pippins
    and cheese to come.
                                   Exeunt




SCENE 3.
 Mine host of the Garter!
  HOST.
 What says my bully rook? Speak scholarly and
    wisely.

  FALSTAFF.
 Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of my
    followers.

  HOST.

  FALSTAFF.
 I sit at ten pounds a week.

  HOST.
 Thou'rt an emperor-Caesar, Keiser, and Pheazar.
 I
    will entertain Bardolph; he shall draw, he shall tap; said I
    well, bully Hector?
  FALSTAFF.

  HOST.
   Exit HOST
  FALSTAFF.
 A tapster is a good trade;
    an old cloak makes a new jerkin; a wither'd serving-man a  
    fresh tapster.
 Go; adieu.

  BARDOLPH.
 It is a life that I have desir'd; I will thrive.

  PISTOL.
 O base Hungarian wight! Wilt thou the spigot
    wield?                                         Exit BARDOLPH
  NYM.
 He was gotten in drink.
 Is not the humour conceited?
  FALSTAFF.
 I am glad I am so acquit of this tinder-box: his
    thefts were too open; his filching was like an unskilful
    singer-he kept not time.

  NYM.
 The good humour is to steal at a minute's rest.

  PISTOL.
 'Convey' the wise it call.
 'Steal' foh! A fico for the
    phrase!
  FALSTAFF.

  PISTOL.
 Why, then, let kibes ensue.

  FALSTAFF.
 There is no remedy; I must cony-catch; I must
    shift.

  PISTOL.
 Young ravens must have food.
 Which of you know Ford of this town?
  PISTOL.
 I ken the wight; he is of substance good.
 My honest lads, I will tell you what I am about.

  PISTOL.
 Two yards, and more.
  
  FALSTAFF.
 No quips now, Pistol.
 Indeed, I am in the waist
    two yards about; but I am now about no waste; I am about
    thrift.
'
    PISTOL.

  NYM.

  PISTOL.

  NYM.

  FALSTAFF.
 I have writ me here a letter to her; and here
    another to Page's wife, who even now gave me good eyes
    too, examin'd my parts with most judicious oeillades;
    sometimes the beam of her view gilded my foot, sometimes my
    portly belly.

  PISTOL.
 Then did the sun on dunghill shine.
 O, she did so course o'er my exteriors with such
    a greedy intention that the appetite of her eye did seem to
    scorch me up like a burning-glass! Here's another letter to
    her.
 She bears the purse too; she is a region in Guiana, all
    gold and bounty.
 I will be cheaters to them both, and they
    shall be exchequers to me; they shall be my East and West
    Indies, and I will trade to them both.
 Go, bear thou this
    letter to Mistress Page; and thou this to Mistress Ford.
 We
    will thrive, lads, we will thrive.

  PISTOL.
 I will run no base humour.

  FALSTAFF.
  [To ROBIN]  Hold, sirrah; bear you these letters
    tightly;
    Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.

    Rogues, hence, avaunt! vanish like hailstones, go;
    Trudge, plod away i' th' hoof; seek shelter, pack!
    Falstaff will learn the humour of the age;  
    French thrift, you rogues; myself, and skirted page.

                                       Exeunt FALSTAFF and ROBIN
  PISTOL.
 Let vultures gripe thy guts! for gourd and fullam
    holds,
    And high and low beguiles the rich and poor;
    Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
    Base Phrygian Turk!
  NYM.

  PISTOL.
 Wilt thou revenge?
  NYM.
 By welkin and her star!
  PISTOL.
 With wit or steel?
  NYM.
 With both the humours, I.

  PISTOL.
 And I to Ford shall eke unfold
    How Falstaff, varlet vile,
    His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
    And his soft couch defile.

  NYM.

  PISTOL.


DOCTOR CAIUS'S house

Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY, SIMPLE, and RUGBY

  QUICKLY.
 What, John Rugby! I pray thee go to the casement
    and see if you can see my master, Master Doctor
    Caius, coming.
 If he do, i' faith, and find anybody in the
    house, here will be an old abusing of God's patience and
    the King's English.

  RUGBY.
 I'll go watch.

  QUICKLY.
 Does he not wear a great round beard, like a
    glover's paring-knife?
  SIMPLE.
 How say you? O, I should remember him.
 Yes, indeed, does he.

  QUICKLY.
  [Shuts SIMPLE in the closet]  He  
    will not stay long.
 Pray you, go
    and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert-a box, a green-a
    box.

  QUICKLY.
 Ay, forsooth, I'll fetch it you.

  CAIUS.
 Je m'en vais a
    la cour-la grande affaire.
 Is it this, sir?
  CAIUS.
 Vere
    is dat knave, Rugby?
  QUICKLY.
 What, John Rugby? John!
  RUGBY.
 Here, sir.
  
  CAIUS.
 You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby.

    Come, take-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the
    court.
 'Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.

    CAIUS.
 Od's me! Qu'ai j'oublie?
    Dere is some simples in my closet dat I vill not for the
    varld I shall leave behind.

  CAIUS.
 Wherefore shall I be content-a?
  QUICKLY.
 The young man is an honest man.
 What shall de honest man do in my closet? Dere is
    no honest man dat shall come in my closet.

  QUICKLY.
 I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic; hear the
    truth of it.

  CAIUS.
 Vell?
  SIMPLE.
 Ay, forsooth, to desire her to-  
  QUICKLY.
 Peace, I pray you.
 Peace-a your tongue.

  SIMPLE.

  QUICKLY.
 This is all, indeed, la! but I'll ne'er put my finger
    in the fire, and need not.

  CAIUS.
 Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, baillez me some paper.

    Tarry you a little-a-while.
                        [Writes]
  QUICKLY.
  [Aside to SIMPLE]  I am glad he is so quiet; if he
    had been throughly moved, you should have heard him
    so loud and so melancholy.
 But notwithstanding, man, I'll
    do you your master what good I can; and the very yea and
    the no is, the French doctor, my master-I may call him
    my master, look you, for I keep his house; and I wash,
    wring, brew, bake, scour, dress meat and drink, make the
    beds, and do all myself-
  SIMPLE.
  [Aside to QUICKLY]  'Tis a great charge to come
    under one body's hand.

  QUICKLY.

  CAIUS.
 You jack'nape; give-a this letter to Sir Hugh; by gar,
    it is a shallenge; I will cut his troat in de park; and I will
    teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest to meddle or make.
 You
    may be gone; it is not good you tarry here.
 By gar, I will
    cut all his two stones; by gar, he shall not have a stone
    to throw at his dog.
                             Exit SIMPLE
  QUICKLY.
 Alas, he speaks but for his friend.

  CAIUS.
 It is no matter-a ver dat.
 What the good-year!
  CAIUS.
 By gar, if I have  
    not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my door.

    Follow my heels, Rugby.
               Exeunt CAIUS and RUGBY
  QUICKLY.
 You shall have-An fool's-head of your own.
 No,
    I know Anne's mind for that; never a woman in Windsor
    knows more of Anne's mind than I do; nor can do more
    than I do with her, I thank heaven.
 Who's there, I trow? Come near the house, I pray
    you.
 How now, good woman, how dost thou?
  QUICKLY.

  FENTON.
 Shall I do any good, think'st thou? Shall I not lose  
    my suit?
  QUICKLY.
 Well, thereby hangs a tale; good faith, it is such
    another Nan; but, I detest, an honest maid as ever broke
    bread.
 We had an hour's talk of that wart; I shall never
    laugh but in that maid's company! But, indeed, she is
    given too much to allicholy and musing; but for you-well,
    go to.
 Hold, there's money
    for thee; let me have thy voice in my behalf.

  FENTON.
 Well, farewell; I am in great haste now.
 Farewell to your worship.
  [Exit FENTON]  Truly,
    an honest gentleman; but Anne loves him not; for I know  
    Anne's mind as well as another does.
 Out upon 't, what
    have I forgot?                                          Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
 SCENE 1.


Before PAGE'S house

Enter MISTRESS PAGE, with a letter

  MRS.
 What! have I scap'd love-letters in the holiday-time
    of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them? Let
    me see.
                                              [Reads]
    'Ask me no reason why I love you; for though Love use
    Reason for his precisian, he admits him not for his counsellor.
 You love sack, and so do I; would you
    desire better sympathy? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page
    at the least, if the love of soldier can suffice-that I love
    thee.
 By me,
    Thine own true knight,
    By day or night,
    Or any kind of light,
    With all his might,  
    For thee to fight,
    JOHN FALSTAFF.

    Heaven forgive me! Why, I'll exhibit a bill in the parliament
    for the putting down of men.


                       Enter MISTRESS FORD

  MRS.
 FORD.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 And, trust me, I was coming to you.
 You look
    very ill.
  
  MRS.
 Nay, I'll ne'er believe that; I have to show to
    the contrary.
 PAGE.
 Faith, but you do, in my mind.
 Well, I do, then; yet, I say, I could show you to
    the contrary.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect,
    I could come to such honour!
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 What
    is it? Dispense with trifles; what is it?
  MRS.
 If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment
    or so, I could be knighted.
 PAGE.
 What? Thou liest.
 Sir Alice Ford! These knights
    will hack; and so thou shouldst not alter the article of thy
    gentry.
 We burn daylight.
 Here, read, read; perceive
    how I might be knighted.
 I shall think the worse of fat
    men as long as I have an eye to make difference of men's
    liking.
' What tempest, I trow,
    threw this whale, with so many tuns of oil in his belly,
    ashore at Windsor? How shall I be revenged on him? I
    think the best way were to entertain him with hope, till
    the wicked fire of lust have melted him in his own grease.

    Did you ever hear the like?
  MRS.
 Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and
    Ford differs.
 To thy great comfort in this mystery of ill
    opinions, here's the twin-brother of thy letter; but let thine
    inherit first, for, I protest, mine never shall.
 I warrant he
    hath a thousand of these letters, writ with blank space for
    different names-sure, more!-and these are of the second
    edition.
 He will print them, out of doubt; for he cares not
    what he puts into the press when he would put us two.
 I
    had rather be a giantess and lie under Mount Pelion.
 Well,
    I will find you twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste
    man.
 Why, this is the very same; the very hand, the
    very words.
 What doth he think of us?
  MRS.
 Nay, I know not; it makes me almost ready to
    wrangle with mine own honesty.
 FORD.
 'Boarding' call you it? I'll be sure to keep him
    above deck.
 So will I; if he come under my hatches, I'll never
    to sea again.
 FORD.
 Nay, I will consent to act any villainy against
    him that may not sully the chariness of our honesty.
 PAGE.
 Why, look where he comes; and my good man
    too; he's as far from jealousy as I am from giving him  
    cause; and that, I hope, is an unmeasurable distance.
 FORD.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Let's consult together against this greasy knight.

    Come hither.

  PISTOL.
 Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs.

    Sir John affects thy wife.

  FORD.
 He woos both high and low, both rich and poor,
    Both young and old, one with another, Ford;
    He loves the gallimaufry.

  FORD.
 With liver burning hot.
 Prevent, or go thou,
    Like Sir Actaeon he, with Ringwood at thy heels.

    O, odious is the name!
  FORD.
 What name, sir?
  PISTOL.
 The horn, I say.

    Away, Sir Corporal Nym.
  [Aside]  I will be patient; I will find out this.

  NYM.
  [To PAGE]  And this is true; I like not the humour of
    lying.
 He hath wronged me in some humours; I should
    have borne the humour'd letter to her; but I have a sword,
    and it shall bite upon my necessity.
 He loves your wife;
    there's the short and the long.

    My name is Corporal Nym; I speak, and I avouch;
    'Tis true.

    Adieu! I love not the humour of bread and cheese; and
    there's the humour of it.
 Adieu.
                    Exit Nym
  PAGE.
 'The humour of it,' quoth 'a! Here's a fellow frights
    English out of his wits.
 I will seek out Falstaff.

  PAGE.
 I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.

  FORD.

  PAGE.
 I will not believe such a Cataian though the priest o'  
    th' town commended him for a true man.

  FORD.
 Well.


             MISTRESS PAGE and MISTRESS FORD come forward

  PAGE.
 How now, Meg!
  MRS.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 How now, sweet Frank, why art thou melancholy?
  FORD.

  MRS.
 FORD.

    Will you go, Mistress Page?

                     Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Have with you.
 FORD.
  [Aside to MRS.
 PAGE]  Trust me, I thought on
    her; she'll fit it.
  
  MRS.
 You are come to see my daughter Anne?
  QUICKLY.
 PAGE.
           Exeunt MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and
                                                MISTRESS QUICKLY
  PAGE.
 Yes; and you heard what the other told me?
  FORD.
 Do you think there is truth in them?
  PAGE.
 Hang 'em, slaves! I do not think the knight would offer it;
    but these that accuse him in his intent towards our
    wives are a yoke of his discarded men; very rogues, now
    they be out of service.

  FORD.
 Were they his men?
  PAGE.
 Marry, were they.
 I like it never the better for that.
 If he should intend this voyage
    toward my wife, I would turn her loose to him; and what
    he gets more of her than sharp words, let it lie on my head.
 A man may be too confident.
 I would
    have nothing lie on my head.
 I cannot be thus satisfied.

    There is either liquor in his pate or money in his purse
    when he looks so merrily.
 How now, bully rook! Thou'rt a gentleman.
  [To
    SHALLOW following]  Cavaleiro Justice, I say.
 I follow, mine host, I follow.
 Good even and
    twenty, good Master Page! Master Page, will you go with
    us? We have sport in hand.
 Tell him, Cavaleiro Justice; tell him, bully rook.

  SHALLOW.
  [To PAGE] Will you go with us to behold it? My
    merry host hath had the measuring of their weapons; and,
    I think, hath appointed them contrary places; for, believe
    me, I hear the parson is no jester.
 None, I protest; but I'll give you a pottle of burnt
    sack to give me recourse to him, and tell him my name is
    Brook-only for a jest.

  HOST.
 My hand, bully; thou shalt have egress and regress-
    said I well?-and thy name shall be Brook.
 Will you go, Mynheers?
  SHALLOW.
 Have with you, mine host.

  PAGE.
 I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in his
    rapier.

  SHALLOW.
 Tut, sir, I could have told you more.
 In these
    times you stand on distance, your passes, stoccadoes, and
    I know not what.
 I have seen the time with my long sword I would
    have made you four tall fellows skip like rats.

  HOST.
 Have with you.
                                   Exeunt all but FORD
  FORD.
 Though Page be a secure fool, and stands so firmly on
    his wife's frailty, yet I cannot put off my opinion so
    easily.
 She was in his company at Page's house, and what
    they made there I know not.
 Well, I will look further into
    't, and I have a disguise to sound Falstaff.
 If I find her
    honest, I lose not my labour; if she be otherwise, 'tis labour
    well bestowed.
                                          Exit




SCENE 2.

  PISTOL.
 I will retort the sum in equipage.

  FALSTAFF.
 Not a penny.

  PISTOL.

  FALSTAFF.
 Not a penny.
 I have been content, sir, you should
    lay my countenance to pawn.

  PISTOL.
 Reason, you rogue, reason.
 Think'st thou I'll
    endanger my soul gratis? At a word, hang no more about me,  
    I am no gibbet for you.
 Go-a short knife and a throng!-
    to your manor of Pickt-hatch; go.
 You'll not bear a letter
    for me, you rogue! You stand upon your honour! Why,
    thou unconfinable baseness, it is as much as I can do to
    keep the terms of my honour precise.
 I do relent; what would thou more of man?

                          Enter ROBIN

  ROBIN.
 Sir, here's a woman would speak with you.

  FALSTAFF.
 Let her approach.
 Give your worship good morrow.

  FALSTAFF.
 Good morrow, good wife.

  QUICKLY.
 Not so, an't please your worship.

  FALSTAFF.
 Good maid, then.
 I'll be sworn;
    As my mother was, the first hour I was born.
 Two thousand, fair woman; and I'll vouchsafe
    thee the hearing.

  QUICKLY.
 There is one Mistress Ford, sir-I pray, come a little
    nearer this ways.

  FALSTAFF.
 Your worship says very true.
 I warrant thee nobody hears-mine own people,
    mine own people.
 Are they so? God bless them, and make them his
    servants!  
  FALSTAFF.
 Well; Mistress Ford, what of her?
  QUICKLY.
 Why, sir, she's a good creature.

  FALSTAFF.
 Mistress Ford; come, Mistress Ford-
  QUICKLY.
 Marry, this is the short and the long of it: you
    have brought her into such a canaries as 'tis wonderful.

    The best courtier of them all, when the court lay at Windsor,
    could never have brought her to such a canary.

  FALSTAFF.
 But what says she to me? Be brief, my good she-
    Mercury.

  QUICKLY.

  FALSTAFF.
 Ten and eleven?
  QUICKLY.
 Ay, forsooth; and then you may come and see
    the picture, she says, that you wot of.
 Alas, the sweet woman leads
    an ill life with him! He's a very jealousy man; she leads a
    very frampold life with him, good heart.
 Woman, commend me to her; I
    will not fail her.

  QUICKLY.
 Why, you say well.
 Mistress Page hath her hearty commendations
    to you too; and let me tell you in your ear, she's as
    fartuous a civil modest wife, and one, I tell you, that will  
    not miss you morning nor evening prayer, as any is in
    Windsor, whoe'er be the other; and she bade me tell your
    worship that her husband is seldom from home, but she
    hopes there will come a time.
 Not I, I assure thee; setting the attraction of my
    good parts aside, I have no other charms.

  QUICKLY.
 Blessing on your heart for 't!
  FALSTAFF.
 Never a wife in
    Windsor leads a better life than she does; do what she will,
    say what she will, take all, pay all, go to bed when she
    list, rise when she list, all is as she will; and truly she
    deserves it; for if there be a kind woman in Windsor, she  
    is one.
 You must send her your page; no remedy.

  FALSTAFF.
 Fare thee well; commend me to them both.

    There's my purse; I am yet thy debtor.
 Boy, go along with
    this woman.
  [Exeunt QUICKLY and ROBIN]  This news
    distracts me.
  [Aside]  This punk is one of Cupid's carriers;
    Clap on more sails; pursue; up with your fights;
    Give fire; she is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!    Exit
  FALSTAFF.
 Say'st thou so, old Jack; go thy ways; I'll make
    more of thy old body than I have done.
  

                         Enter BARDOLPH

  BARDOLPH.
 Ay, sir.

  FALSTAFF.
 Call him in.
 Ah, ha! Mistress
    Ford and Mistress Page, have I encompass'd you? Go to;
    via!

              Re-enter BARDOLPH, with FORD disguised

  FORD.
 Bless you, sir!
  FALSTAFF.

  FALSTAFF.
 You're welcome.
 What's your will? Give us leave,  
    drawer.
                                        Exit BARDOLPH
  FORD.
 Sir, I am a gentleman that have spent much; my name
    is Brook.

  FALSTAFF.

  FORD.

  FALSTAFF.
 Money is a good soldier, sir, and will on.
 Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles me; if
    you will help to bear it, Sir John, take all, or half, for easing
    me of the carriage.
 I will tell you, sir, if you will give me the hearing.

  FORD.
 I shall discover a thing to you, wherein
    I must very much lay open mine own imperfection; but,
    good Sir John, as you have one eye upon my follies, as you
    hear them unfolded, turn another into the register of your
    own, that I may pass with a reproof the easier, sith you
    yourself know how easy is it to be such an offender.

  FALSTAFF.
 Very well, sir; proceed.
 There is a gentlewoman in this town, her husband's
    name is Ford.

  FORD.
 But whatsoever I  
    have merited, either in my mind or in my means, meed, I
    am sure, I have received none, unless experience be a jewel;
    that I have purchased at an infinite rate, and that hath
    taught me to say this:
    'Love like a shadow flies when substance love pursues;
    Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.
 Have you receiv'd no promise of satisfaction at
    her hands?
  FORD.
 Never.

  FALSTAFF.
 Have you importun'd her to such a purpose?
  FORD.
 Never.

    FALSTAFF.
 When I have told you that, I have told you all.
 Some
    say that though she appear honest to me, yet in other
    places she enlargeth her mirth so far that there is shrewd
    construction made of her.
 Now, Sir John, here is the heart  
    of my purpose: you are a gentleman of excellent
    breeding, admirable discourse, of great admittance, authentic in
    your place and person, generally allow'd for your many
    war-like, courtlike, and learned preparations.
 Would it apply well to the vehemency of your
    affection, that I should win what you would enjoy?
    Methinks you prescribe to yourself very preposterously.
 O, understand my drift.
 She dwells so securely on the
    excellency of her honour that the folly of my soul dares
    not present itself; she is too bright to be look'd against.
 Master Brook, I will first make bold with your
    money; next, give me your hand; and last, as I am a gentleman,
    you shall, if you will, enjoy Ford's wife.
 O good sir!
  FALSTAFF.
 I say you shall.

  FORD.

  FALSTAFF.
 Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook; you shall
    want none.
 I shall be with her, I may tell you, by her own
    appointment; even as you came in to me her assistant, or
    go-between, parted from me; I say I shall be with her between
    ten and eleven; for at that time the jealous rascally
    knave, her husband, will be forth.
 I am blest in your acquaintance.
 I will use her as the
    key of the cuckoldly rogue's coffer; and there's my harvest-home.

  FORD.
 I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might avoid him
    if you saw him.
 Master
    Brook, thou shalt know I will predominate over the
    peasant, and thou shalt lie with his wife.
 Come to me soon at
    night.
 Ford's a knave, and I will aggravate his style; thou,
    Master Brook, shalt know him for knave and cuckold.
                               Exit
  FORD.
 Would any man have thought this? See
    the hell of having a false woman! My bed shall be abus'd,
    my coffers ransack'd, my reputation gnawn at; and I shall
    not only receive this villainous wrong, but stand under the  
    adoption of abominable terms, and by him that does me
    this wrong.
 Then
    she plots, then she ruminates, then she devises; and what
    they think in their hearts they may effect, they will break
    their hearts but they will effect.
 Fie, fie, fie! cuckold! cuckold! cuckold!     Exit




SCENE 3.


A field near Windsor

Enter CAIUS and RUGBY

  CAIUS.
 Vat is de clock, Jack?
  RUGBY.
 'Tis past the hour, sir, that Sir Hugh promis'd to
    meet.
 By gar, he has save his soul dat he is no come; he has
    pray his Pible well dat he is no come; by gar, Jack Rugby,
    he is dead already, if he be come.

  RUGBY.

  CAIUS.
 Take
    your rapier, Jack; I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
 Alas, sir, I cannot fence!
  CAIUS.

  RUGBY.
 Forbear; here's company.
 Save you, Master Doctor Caius!
  PAGE.
 Now, good Master Doctor!
  SLENDER.
 Give you good morrow, sir.

  CAIUS.
 Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come for?
  HOST.
 To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee traverse;
    to see thee here, to see thee there; to see thee pass thy
    punto, thy stock, thy reverse, thy distance, thy montant.

    Is he dead, my Ethiopian? Is he dead, my Francisco? Ha,
    bully! What says my Aesculapius? my Galen? my heart
    of elder? Ha! is he dead, bully stale? Is he dead?
  CAIUS.
 By gar, he is de coward Jack priest of de world; he is
    not show his face.

  HOST.
 Thou art a Castalion-King-Urinal.
 Hector of Greece,
    my boy!
  CAIUS.

  SHALLOW.

  SHALLOW.
 Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old, and
    of the peace, if I see a sword out, my finger itches to make
    one.
 Though we are justices, and doctors, and churchmen,
    Master Page, we have some salt of our youth in us; we are
    the sons of women, Master Page.

  PAGE.

  SHALLOW.
 It will be found so, Master Page.
 I am sworn of the peace;
    you have show'd yourself a wise physician, and Sir Hugh
    hath shown himself a wise and patient churchman.
 You
    must go with me, Master Doctor.

  HOST.
 Pardon, Guest Justice.
 A word, Mounseur Mockwater.

  CAIUS.
 Mockwater, in our English tongue, is valour, bully.
 By gar, then I have as much mockvater as de Englishman.
  
    Scurvy jack-dog priest! By gar, me vill cut his ears.

  HOST.
 He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.

  CAIUS.
 Clapper-de-claw! Vat is dat?
  HOST.
 That is, he will make thee amends.
 By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me; for,
    by gar, me vill have it.
 And I will provoke him to't, or let him wag.

  CAIUS.
 Me tank you for dat.

  HOST.
  [Aside]  Sir Hugh is there, is he?
  HOST.
  [Aside]  He is there.
 See what humour he is in; and
    I will bring the doctor about by the fields.
 Will it do well?
  SHALLOW.
  [Aside]  We will do it.

                               Exeunt PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
  CAIUS.
 By gar, me vill kill de priest; for he speak for a jack-
    an-ape to Anne Page.

  HOST.
 Sheathe thy impatience; throw cold water  
    on thy choler; go about the fields with me through Frogmore;
    I will bring thee where Mistress Anne Page is, at a a
    farm-house, a-feasting; and thou shalt woo her.
 Cried
    game! Said I well?
  CAIUS.
 By gar, me dank you vor dat; by gar, I love you; and
    I shall procure-a you de good guest, de earl, de knight, de
    lords, de gentlemen, my patients.

  HOST.
 Said I well?
  CAIUS.

  HOST.
 Let us wag, then.

  CAIUS.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
 I pray you now, good Master Slender's serving-man,
    and friend Simple by your name, which way have you
    look'd for Master Caius, that calls himself Doctor of
    Physic?
  SIMPLE.
 Marry, sir, the pittie-ward, the park-ward; every
    way; old Windsor way, and every way but the town way.

  EVANS.

  SIMPLE.
 I will, Sir.
 Pless my soul, how full of chollors I am, and trempling
    of mind! I shall be glad if he have deceived me.
 Pless
    my soul!                                             [Sings]
    To shallow rivers, to whose falls
    Melodious birds sings madrigals;  
    There will we make our peds of roses,
    And a thousand fragrant posies.

    To shallow-
    Mercy on me! I have a great dispositions to cry.
     [Sings]
    Melodious birds sing madrigals-
    Whenas I sat in Pabylon-
    And a thousand vagram posies.

    To shallow, etc.


                       Re-enter SIMPLE

  SIMPLE.
 Yonder he is, coming this way, Sir Hugh.

  EVANS.
 No weapons, sir.
 There comes my master, Master
    Shallow, and another gentleman, from Frogmore, over the
    stile, this way.

  EVANS.
                                     [Takes out a book]  

               Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER

  SHALLOW.
 How now, Master Parson! Good morrow, good
    Sir Hugh.

  SLENDER.
  [Aside]  Ah, sweet Anne Page!
  PAGE.
 Save you, good Sir Hugh!
  EVANS.
 What, the sword and the word! Do you study
    them both, Master Parson?
  PAGE.
 There is reasons and causes for it.

  PAGE.
 Yonder is a most reverend gentleman, who, belike having
    received wrong by some person, is at most odds with
    his own gravity and patience that ever you saw.
  
  SHALLOW.
 I have lived fourscore years and upward; I never
    heard a man of his place, gravity, and learning, so wide of
    his own respect.

  EVANS.
 What is he?
  PAGE.
 I think you know him: Master Doctor Caius, the
    renowned French physician.
 Got's will and his passion of my heart! I had as lief
    you would tell me of a mess of porridge.
 Why?
  EVANS.
 He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and
    Galen, and he is a knave besides-a cowardly knave as you
    would desires to be acquainted withal.

  PAGE.
 I warrant you, he's the man should fight with him.
 It appears so, by his weapons.
 Keep them asunder;
    here comes Doctor Caius.


                 Enter HOST, CAIUS, and RUGBY

  PAGE.
 Nay, good Master Parson, keep in your weapon.
 So do you, good Master Doctor.

  HOST.

  CAIUS.

    Verefore will you not meet-a me?
  EVANS.

  CAIUS.

  EVANS.
  [Aside to CAIUS]  Pray you, let us not be
    laughing-stocks to other men's humours; I desire you in
    friendship, and I will one way or other make you amends.

    [Aloud]  I will knog your urinals about your knave's cogscomb
    for missing your meetings and appointments.
 Diable! Jack Rugby-mine Host de Jarteer-have I
    not stay for him to kill him? Have I not, at de place I did
    appoint?
  EVANS.
 I'll be judgment by mine host of the
    Garter.
 Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh,  
    soul-curer and body-curer.
 Ay, dat is very good! excellent!
  HOST.
 Am I
    politic? am I subtle? am I a Machiavel? Shall I lose my
    doctor? No; he gives me the potions and the motions.
 Shall I
    lose my parson, my priest, my Sir Hugh? No; he gives me
    the proverbs and the noverbs.
 Give me thy hand, terrestrial;
    so.
 Give me thy hand, celestial; so.
 Come, lay their swords to pawn.

  SHALLOW.
 Ha, do I perceive dat? Have you make-a de sot of us,
    ha, ha?
  EVANS.
 This is well; he has made us his vlouting-stog.
 I
    desire you that we may be friends; and let us knog our prains
    together to be revenge on this same scall, scurvy, cogging  
    companion, the host of the Garter.

  CAIUS.
 By gar, with all my heart.
 He promise to bring me
    where is Anne Page; by gar, he deceive me too.

  EVANS.

                                                          Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



SCENE 2.


The street in Windsor

Enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN

  MRS.
 Nay, keep your way, little gallant; you were
    wont to be a follower, but now you are a leader.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 O, you are a flattering boy; now I see you'll be a
    courtier.
 Whither go you?
  MRS.
 Truly, sir, to see your wife.
 Ay; and as idle as she may hang together, for want of
    company.
 I think, if your husbands were dead, you two
    would marry.
 PAGE.
 PAGE.
 I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my
    husband had him of.
 Sir John Falstaff.

  FORD.
 He, he; I can never hit on's name.
 PAGE.
 By your leave, sir.

                                      Exeunt MRS.
 PAGE and ROBIN
  FORD.
 Has Page any brains? Hath he any eyes? Hath he any
    thinking? Sure, they sleep; he hath no use of them.
 Why,
    this boy will carry a letter twenty mile as easy as a cannon
    will shoot pointblank twelve score.
 A
    man may hear this show'r sing in the wind.
 Well; I will take him,
    then torture my wife, pluck the borrowed veil of modesty
    from the so seeming Mistress Page, divulge Page himself
    for a secure and wilful Actaeon; and to these violent proceedings
    all my neighbours shall cry aim.
 I shall be rather prais'd
    for this than mock'd; for it is as positive as the earth is firm
    that Falstaff is there.


     Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, SLENDER, HOST, SIR HUGH EVANS,
                              CAIUS, and RUGBY

  SHALLOW, PAGE, &C.
 Well met, Master Ford.

  FORD.

  SHALLOW.
 And so must I, sir; we have appointed to dine with
    Mistress Anne, and I would not break with her for more
    money than I'll speak of.
 We have linger'd about a match between Anne
    Page and my cousin Slender, and this day we shall have
    our answer.
 I hope I have your good will, father Page.

  PAGE.
 You have, Master Slender; I stand wholly for you.
 But
    my wife, Master Doctor, is for you altogether.
 Ay, be-gar; and de maid is love-a me; my nursh-a
    Quickly tell me so mush.

  HOST.
 What say you to young Master Fenton? He capers,
    he dances, he has eyes of youth, he writes verses, he speaks
    holiday, he smells April and May; he will carry 't, he will
    carry 't; 'tis in his buttons; he will carry 't.
 The gentleman is
    of no having: he kept company with the wild Prince and
    Poins; he is of too high a region, he knows too much.
 No,
    he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes with the finger of
    my substance; if he take her, let him take her simply; the
    wealth I have waits on my consent, and my consent goes
    not that way.
 Well, fare you well; we shall have the freer
    wooing at Master Page's.
          Exeunt SHALLOW and SLENDER
  CAIUS.
 Farewell, my hearts; I will to my honest knight
    Falstaff, and drink canary with him.
  [Aside]  I think I shall drink in pipe-wine first with
    him.
 I'll make him dance.
 Will you go, gentles?
  ALL.
 Have with you to see this monster.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



SCENE 3.
 What, John! what, Robert!
  MRS.
 Quickly, quickly! Is the buck-basket-
  MRS.
 FORD.
 I warrant.
 What, Robin, I say!

                 Enter SERVANTS with a basket

  MRS.
 PAGE.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 Here, set it down.
 PAGE.
 Give your men the charge; we must be brief.

  MRS.
 Marry, as I told you before, John and Robert, be
    ready here hard by in the brew-house; and when I suddenly
    call you, come forth, and, without any pause or
    staggering, take this basket on your shoulders.
 That done,
    trudge with it in all haste, and carry it among the whitsters
    in Datchet Mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch
    close by the Thames side.
 PAGE.
 FORD.
 I ha' told them over and over; they lack no
    direction.

                                               Exeunt SERVANTS
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Here comes little Robin.


                         Enter ROBIN

  MRS.
 FORD.
 How now, my eyas-musket, what news with
    you?
  ROBIN.
 My Master Sir John is come in at your back-door,
    Mistress Ford, and requests your company.
 PAGE.
 You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us?
  ROBIN.
 Ay, I'll be sworn.
 My master knows not of your
    being here, and hath threat'ned to put me into everlasting
    liberty, if I tell you of it; for he swears he'll turn me away.
 PAGE.
 Thou 'rt a good boy; this secrecy of thine shall
    be a tailor to thee, and shall make thee a new doublet and
    hose.

  MRS.
 Go tell thy master I am alone.
  [Exit  
  ROBIN]  Mistress Page, remember you your cue.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 I warrant thee; if I do not act it, hiss me.

                                                Exit MRS.
 PAGE
  MRS.
 Go to, then; we'll use this unwholesome
    humidity, this gross wat'ry pumpion; we'll teach him to
    know turtles from jays.


                      Enter FALSTAFF

  FALSTAFF.
 O sweet Sir John!
  FALSTAFF.
 Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate,
    Mistress Ford.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 I your lady, Sir John? Alas, I should be a pitiful
    lady.

  FALSTAFF.
 Let the court of France show me such another.
 I  
    see how thine eye would emulate the diamond; thou hast
    the right arched beauty of the brow that becomes the
    ship-tire, the tire-valiant, or any tire of Venetian admittance.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 A plain kerchief, Sir John; my brows become
    nothing else, nor that well neither.
 By the Lord, thou art a tyrant to say so; thou
    wouldst make an absolute courtier, and the firm fixture of
    thy foot would give an excellent motion to thy gait in a
    semi-circled farthingale.
 I see what thou wert, if Fortune
    thy foe were, not Nature, thy friend.
 Come, thou canst not
    hide it.
 FORD.
 Believe me, there's no such thing in me.
 Come, I cannot
    cog, and say thou art this and that, like a many of these
    lisping hawthorn-buds that come like women in men's
    apparel, and smell like Bucklersbury in simple time; I
    cannot; but I love thee, none but thee; and thou deserv'st it.

  MRS.
 FORD.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 Well, heaven knows how I love you; and you
    shall one day find it.
 Keep in that mind; I'll deserve it.
 FORD.
 She shall not see me; I will ensconce me behind
    the arras.
 FORD.

                                      [FALSTAFF hides himself]

               Re-enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN

    What's the matter? How now!
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 O Mistress Ford, what have you done? You're  
    sham'd, y'are overthrown, y'are undone for ever.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 PAGE.
 O well-a-day, Mistress Ford, having an honest
    man to your husband, to give him such cause of suspicion!
  MRS.
 FORD.
 What cause of suspicion?
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 What cause of suspicion? Out upon you, how
    am I mistook in you!
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Your husband's coming hither, woman, with all
    the officers in Windsor, to search for a gentleman that he
    says is here now in the house, by your consent, to take an
    ill advantage of his absence.
 You are undone.
 FORD.
 'Tis not so, I hope.
 PAGE.
 Pray heaven it be not so that you have such a
    man here; but 'tis most certain your husband's coming,
    with half Windsor at his heels, to search for such a one.
 I
    come before to tell you.

  MRS.

  MRS.
 For shame, never stand 'you had rather' and 'you
    had rather'! Your husband's here at hand; bethink you of
    some conveyance; in the house you cannot hide him.

  MRS.
 What shall I do?
  FALSTAFF.
 O,
    let me see 't! I'll in, I'll in; follow your friend's counsel;
    I'll in.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
-Let me creep in here; I'll never-
    [Gets into the basket; they cover him with foul linen]
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Call your men,
    Mistress Ford.
 You dissembling knight!
  MRS.
 Pray you come near.
 If I suspect without cause, why
    then make sport at me, then let me be your jest; I deserve
    it.
 How now, whither bear you this?
  SERVANT.
 To the laundress, forsooth.

  MRS.
 Why, what have you to do whither they bear it?
    You were best meddle with buck-washing.
  [Exeunt SERVANTS with
    basket]  Gentlemen, I have dream'd to-night; I'll tell you my
    dream.
 Here, here, here be my keys; ascend my chambers,
    search, seek, find out.
 I'll warrant we'll unkennel the fox.

  PAGE.
 Good Master Ford, be contented; you wrong yourself
    too much.
 True, Master Page.
                             Exit
  EVANS.

  CAIUS.
 By gar, 'tis no the fashion of France; it is not jealous
    in France.

  PAGE.
 Nay, follow him, gentlemen; see the issue of his
    search.
 Is there not a double excellency in this?
  MRS.
 I know not which pleases me better, that my
    husband is deceived, or Sir John.
  
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 I am half afraid he will have need of washing; so
    throwing him into the water will do him a benefit.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the
    same strain were in the same distress.

  MRS.
 FORD.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 His dissolute disease will scarce
    obey this medicine.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 PAGE.


       Re-enter FORD, PAGE, CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS  

  FORD.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 FORD]  Heard you that?
  MRS.
 You use me well, Master Ford, do you?
  FORD.
 Ay, I do so.

  MRS.
 Heaven make you better than your thoughts!
  FORD.
 PAGE.
 You do yourself mighty wrong, Master Ford.
 Ay, ay; I must bear it.

  EVANS.
 If there be any pody in the house, and in the
    chambers, and in the coffers, and in the presses, heaven forgive
    my sins at the day of judgment!
  CAIUS.

  PAGE.
 Fie, fie, Master Ford, are you not asham'd? What
    spirit, what devil suggests this imagination? I would not ha'
    your distemper in this kind for the wealth of Windsor
    Castle.

  EVANS.
 You suffer for a pad conscience.
 Your wife is as  
    honest a omans as I will desires among five thousand, and five
    hundred too.

  CAIUS.
 By gar, I see 'tis an honest woman.

  FORD.
 Well, I promis'd you a dinner.
 Come, come, walk in
    the Park.
 Come, wife, come,
    Mistress Page; I pray you pardon me; pray heartly,
    pardon me.

  PAGE.
 Let's go in, gentlemen; but, trust me, we'll mock him.

    I do invite you to-morrow morning to my house to breakfast;
    after, we'll a-birding together; I have a fine hawk for
    the bush.
 Any thing.

  EVANS.
 If there is one, I shall make two in the company.

  CAIUS.

  FORD.
 Pray you go, Master Page.

  EVANS.

  CAIUS.

  EVANS.
 A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries!  
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE 4.


Before PAGE'S house

Enter FENTON and ANNE PAGE

  FENTON.

    Besides these, other bars he lays before me,
    My riots past, my wild societies;
    And tells me 'tis a thing impossible
    I should love thee but as a property.
 May be he tells you true.

  FENTON.
 No, heaven so speed me in my time to come!
    Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth
    Was the first motive that I woo'd thee, Anne;
    Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value  
    Than stamps in gold, or sums in sealed bags;
    And 'tis the very riches of thyself
    That now I aim at.

  ANNE.

                                           [They converse apart]

        Enter SHALLOW, SLENDER, and MISTRESS QUICKLY

  SHALLOW.

  SLENDER.
 I'll make a shaft or a bolt on 't; 'slid, 'tis but
    venturing.
 No, she shall not dismay me.
 I come to him.

    O, what a world of vile ill-favour'd faults
    Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year!
  QUICKLY.
 And how does good Master Fenton? Pray you, a
    word with you.
 She's coming; to her, coz.
 I had a father, Mistress Anne; my uncle can tell
    you good jests of him.
 Pray you, uncle, tell Mistress Anne
    the jest how my father stole two geese out of a pen, good
    uncle.

  SHALLOW.
 He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.
 Ay, that I will come cut and longtail, under the
    degree of a squire.

  ANNE.
 Good Master Shallow, let him woo for himself.
 She calls you, coz; I'll leave you.

  ANNE.
 Now, good Mistress Anne-
  ANNE.
 What is your will?
  SLENDER.
 My Will! 'Od's heartlings, that's a pretty jest
    indeed! I ne'er made my will yet, I thank heaven; I am not
    such a sickly creature, I give heaven praise.
 I mean, Master Slender, what would you with me?
  SLENDER.
 Truly, for mine own part I would little or nothing
    with you.
 You may ask
    your father; here he comes.


            Enter PAGE and MISTRESS PAGE

  PAGE.
 Now, Master Slender! Love him, daughter Anne-
    Why, how now, what does Master Fenton here?
    You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house.
  
    I told you, sir, my daughter is dispos'd of.
 Nay, Master Page, be not impatient.

  MRS.
 PAGE.

  PAGE.
 She is no match for you.
 Sir, will you hear me?
  PAGE.

    Come, Master Shallow; come, son Slender; in.

                               Exeunt PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
  QUICKLY.

  FENTON.
 Let me have your good will.

  ANNE.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 I mean it not; I seek you a better husband.

  QUICKLY.
 That's my master, Master Doctor.

  ANNE.

    And bowl'd to death with turnips.
 PAGE.
 Come, trouble not yourself.
 Good Master
    Fenton,
    I will not be your friend, nor enemy;
    My daughter will I question how she loves you,
    And as I find her, so am I affected;
    Till then, farewell, sir; she must needs go in;
    Her father will be angry.

  FENTON.

                                       Exeunt MRS.
 This is my doing now: 'Nay,' said I 'will you cast
    away your child on a fool, and a physician? Look on
    Master Fenton.
' This is my doing.

  FENTON.

  QUICKLY.
 Now Heaven send thee good fortune!  [Exit
    FENTON]  A kind heart he hath; a woman would run through
    fire and water for such a kind heart.
 Well, I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff
    from my two mistresses.
 What a beast am I to slack it!
 Exit




SCENE 5.

  FALSTAFF.
 Go fetch me a quart of sack; put a toast in 't.

    The rogues slighted me into the river with as little remorse
    as they would have drown'd a blind bitch's puppies, fifteen
    i' th' litter; and you may know by my size that I have
    a kind of alacrity in sinking; if the bottom were as deep as
    hell I should down.
 I had been drown'd but that the shore
    was shelvy and shallow-a death that I abhor; for the water
    swells a man; and what a thing should I have been when
    had been swell'd! I should have been a mountain of  
    mummy.


                  Re-enter BARDOLPH, with sack

  BARDOLPH.
 Here's Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with you
  FALSTAFF.

  BARDOLPH.
 Come in, woman.


                     Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY

  QUICKLY.

  FALSTAFF.
 Take away these chalices.

  BARDOLPH.
 With eggs, sir?
  FALSTAFF.
 Simple of itself; I'll no pullet-sperm in my
    brewage.
  [Exit BARDOLPH]  How now!
  QUICKLY.
 Marry, sir, I come to your worship from Mistress  
    Ford.

  FALSTAFF.
 Mistress Ford! I have had ford enough; I was
    thrown into the ford; I have my belly full of ford.

  QUICKLY.
 Alas the day, good heart, that was not her fault!
    She does so take on with her men; they mistook their
    erection.
 So did I mine, to build upon a foolish woman's
    promise.

  FALSTAFF.
 Let her consider his frailty, and then
    judge of my merit.

  QUICKLY.

  FALSTAFF.
 Do so.
 Between nine and ten, say'st thou?
  QUICKLY.
 Peace be with you, sir.
                          Exit
  FALSTAFF.
 I marvel I hear not of Master Brook; he sent me
    word to stay within.
 O, here he
    comes.
 Bless you, sir!
  FALSTAFF.
 Now, Master Brook, you come to know what
    hath pass'd between me and Ford's wife?
  FORD.
 That, indeed, Sir John, is my business.

  FORD.
 And sped you, sir?
  FALSTAFF.

  FORD.
 How so, sir; did she change her determination?
  FALSTAFF.
 Master Brook; but the peaking cornuto her
    husband, Master Brook, dwelling in a continual 'larum of
    jealousy, comes me in the instant of our, encounter, after
    we had embrac'd, kiss'd, protested, and, as it were, spoke  
    the prologue of our comedy; and at his heels a rabble of his
    companions, thither provoked and instigated by his
    distemper, and, forsooth, to search his house for his wife's
    love.
 What, while you were there?
  FALSTAFF.
 While I was there.

  FORD.
 You shall hear.
 As good luck would have it, comes
    in one Mistress Page, gives intelligence of Ford's approach;
    and, in her invention and Ford's wife's distraction, they
    convey'd me into a buck-basket.
 A buck-basket!
  FALSTAFF.
 By the Lord, a buck-basket! Ramm'd me in with
    foul shirts and smocks, socks, foul stockings, greasy
    napkins, that, Master Brook, there was the rankest compound
    of villainous smell that ever offended nostril.
 And how long lay you there?
  FALSTAFF.
 Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook, what I have
    suffer'd to bring this woman to evil for your good.
 Being
    thus cramm'd in the basket, a couple of Ford's knaves, his  
    hinds, were call'd forth by their mistress to carry me in
    the name of foul clothes to Datchet Lane; they took me on
    their shoulders; met the jealous knave their master in the
    door; who ask'd them once or twice what they had in their
    basket.
 Well, on went he for a search, and away
    went I for foul clothes.
 But mark the sequel, Master
    Brook-I suffered the pangs of three several deaths: first,
    an intolerable fright to be detected with a jealous rotten
    bell-wether; next, to be compass'd like a good bilbo in the
    circumference of a peck, hilt to point, heel to head; and
    then, to be stopp'd in, like a strong distillation, with
    stinking clothes that fretted in their own grease.
 Think of that-that am as subject to
    heat as butter; a man of continual dissolution and thaw.
 It
    was a miracle to scape suffocation.
 And in the height of
    this bath, when I was more than half-stew'd in grease, like
    a Dutch dish, to be thrown into the Thames, and cool'd,
    glowing hot, in that surge, like a horse-shoe; think of that  
    -hissing hot.
 Think of that, Master Brook.

  FORD.
 In good sadness, sir, I am sorry that for my sake you
    have suffer'd all this.
 My suit, then, is desperate;
    you'll undertake her no more.
 Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna, as I
    have been into Thames, ere I will leave her thus.

  FORD.
 'Tis past eight already, sir.

  FALSTAFF.
 Is it? I Will then address me to my appointment.

    Come to me at your convenient leisure, and you shall
    know how I speed; and the conclusion shall be crowned
    with your enjoying her.
 Adieu.
            Exit
  FORD.
 There's a hole
    made in your best coat, Master Ford.
 This 'tis to be
    married; this 'tis to have linen and buck-baskets! Well, I will
    proclaim myself what I am; I will now take the lecher; he  
    is at my house.
 He cannot scape me; 'tis impossible he
    should; he cannot creep into a halfpenny purse nor into
    a pepper box.
 But, lest the devil that guides him should aid
    him, I will search impossible places.
 Though what I am I
    cannot avoid, yet to be what I would not shall not make
    me tame.
 SCENE I.
 PAGE.
 Is he at Master Ford's already, think'st thou?
  QUICKLY.
 Sure he is by this; or will be presently; but truly
    he is very courageous mad about his throwing into the
    water.
 Mistress Ford desires you to come suddenly.
 PAGE.


                     Enter SIR HUGH EVANS

    How now, Sir Hugh, no school to-day?
  EVANS.
 PAGE.
  
  EVANS.
 Come hither, William; hold up your head; come.
 PAGE.
 Come on, sirrah; hold up your head; answer your
    master; be not afraid.
 William, how many numbers is in nouns?
  WILLIAM.
 Truly, I thought there had been one number
    more, because they say 'Od's nouns.
 Pulcher.

  QUICKLY.

  EVANS.
 You are a very simplicity oman; I pray you, peace.
 A stone.

  EVANS.
 And what is 'a stone,' William?
  WILLIAM.

  EVANS.

  EVANS.
 That is a good William.
 What is he, William, that
    does lend articles?  
  WILLIAM.
 Nominativo, hig, hag, hog; pray you, mark: genitivo,
    hujus.
 Well, what is your accusative case?
  WILLIAM.
 Accusativo, hinc.

  EVANS.
 I pray you, have your remembrance, child.

  QUICKLY.
 'Hang-hog' is Latin for bacon, I warrant you.

  EVANS.
 What is the focative
    case, William?
  WILLIAM.

  EVANS.

  QUICKLY.

  EVANS.

  MRS.
 Peace.

  EVANS.
 Genitive case?
  EVANS.

  WILLIAM.

  QUICKLY.

  EVANS.
 YOU do ill to teach the child such words.
 He
    teaches him to hick and to hack, which they'll do fast
    enough of themselves; and to call 'horum'; fie upon you!
  EVANS.
 Oman, art thou lunatics? Hast thou no understandings
    for thy cases, and the numbers of the genders? Thou
    art as foolish Christian creatures as I would desires.

  MRS.
 Prithee hold thy peace.

  WILLIAM.
 Forsooth, I have forgot.

  EVANS.
 It is qui, quae, quod; if you forget your qui's, your
    quae's, and your quod's, you must be preeches.
 Go your
    ways and play; go.
 PAGE.
 He is a better scholar than I thought he was.
 He is a good sprag memory.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Adieu, good Sir Hugh.


FORD'S house

Enter FALSTAFF and MISTRESS FORD

  FALSTAFF.
 I see you are obsequious in your love, and I
    profess requital to a hair's breadth; not only, Mistress Ford, in
    the simple office of love, but in all the accoutrement,
    complement, and ceremony of it.
 But are you sure of your
    husband now?
  MRS.
 FORD.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 How now, sweetheart, who's at home besides
    yourself?
  MRS.
 FORD.
 Why, none but mine own people.
 Indeed?  
  MRS.
 FORD.
  [Aside to her]  Speak louder.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Truly, I am so glad you have nobody here.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 PAGE.
 Why, woman, your husband is in his old lunes
    again.
 FORD.
 PAGE.
 Of none but him; and swears he was carried out,
    the last time he search'd for him, in a basket; protests to
    my husband he is now here; and hath drawn him and the
    rest of their company from their sport, to make another
    experiment of his suspicion.
 But I am glad the knight is not
    here; now he shall see his own foolery.
 FORD.
 Hard by, at street end; he will be here anon.
  
  MRS.
 I am undone: the knight is here.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Why, then, you are utterly sham'd, and he's but
    a dead man.
 May I not go
    out ere he come?
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 But what make you here?
  FALSTAFF.
 FORD.
 PAGE.

  FALSTAFF.
 Where is it?
  MRS.
 He will seek there, on my word.
 There is no hiding you in the house.
 I'll go out then.
 PAGE.
 If you go out in your own semblance, you die,
    Sir John.
 Unless you go out disguis'd.

  MRS.
 How might we disguise him?
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Alas the day, I know not! There is no woman's
    gown big enough for him; otherwise he might put on a
    hat, a muffler, and a kerchief, and so escape.

  FALSTAFF.
 FORD.
 My Maid's aunt, the fat woman of Brainford, has
    a gown above.

  MRS.
 On my word, it will serve him; she's as big as he
    is; and there's her thrumm'd hat, and her muffler too.
 Run
    up, Sir John.
 FORD.

  MRS.
 Quick, quick; we'll come dress you straight.
 Put  
    on the gown the while.
 FORD.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 But is my husband coming?
  MRS.
 PAGE.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 Nay, but he'll be here presently; let's go dress
    him like the witch of Brainford.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 Go up; I'll bring linen for him straight.
   Exit
  MRS.

    We'll leave a proof, by that which we will do,  
    Wives may be merry and yet honest too.

    We do not act that often jest and laugh;
    'Tis old but true: Still swine eats all the draff.
      Exit

            Re-enter MISTRESS FORD, with two SERVANTS

  MRS.
 FORD.

  FIRST SERVANT.
 I hope not; I had lief as bear so much lead.


    Enter FORD, PAGE, SHALLOW, CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS

  FORD.
 What, wife, I  
    say! Come, come forth; behold what honest clothes you
    send forth to bleaching.

  PAGE.
 Why, this passes, Master Ford; you are not to go loose
    any longer; you must be pinion'd.
 Why, this is lunatics.
 This is mad as a mad dog.
 Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.

  FORD.
 So say I too, sir.


                     Re-enter MISTRESS FORD

    Come hither, Mistress Ford; Mistress Ford, the honest
    woman, the modest wife, the virtuous creature, that hath
    the jealous fool to her husband! I suspect without cause,
    Mistress, do I?
  MRS.
 FORD.
 Heaven be my witness, you do, if you suspect
    me in any dishonesty.

  FORD.
 This passes!
  MRS.
 Are you not asham'd? Let the clothes alone.
  
  FORD.

  EVANS.
 'Tis unreasonable.

  FORD.
 Empty the basket, I say.
 FORD.
 Why, man, why?
  FORD.
 Master Page, as I am a man, there was one convey'd
    out of my house yesterday in this basket.
 Why may not
    he be there again? In my house I am sure he is; my
    intelligence is true; my jealousy is reasonable.

  MRS.
 If you find a man there, he shall die a flea's
    death.

  PAGE.
 Here's no man.
 By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford; this
    wrongs you.

  EVANS.
 Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the
    imaginations of your own heart; this is jealousies.
 Well, he's not here I seek for.

  FORD.
 Help to search my house this one time.
 If I find not  
    what I seek, show no colour for my extremity; let me for
    ever be your table sport; let them say of me 'As jealous as
    Ford, that search'd a hollow walnut for his wife's leman.
'
    Satisfy me once more; once more search with me.
 FORD.

  FORD.
 Old woman? what old woman's that?
  MRS.
 FORD.
 Why, it is my maid's aunt of Brainford.
 Come down, you
    witch, you hag you; come down, I say.
 FORD.
 Come, Mother Prat; come.
 give me your hand.

  FORD.
  [Beating him]  Out of my door, you
    witch, you hag, you.

                                                   Exit FALSTAFF
  MRS.
 Are you not asham'd? I think you have kill'd the
    poor woman.

  MRS.
 Nay, he will do it.
 'Tis a goodly credit for you.

  FORD.
 Will you follow, gentlemen? I beseech you follow;
    see but the issue of my jealousy; if I cry out thus upon no
    trail, never trust me when I open again.

  PAGE.
 Let's obey his humour a little further.
 Come,
    gentlemen.
            Exeunt all but MRS.
 PAGE.
 Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 Nay, by th' mass, that he did not; he beat him
    most unpitifully methought.
  
  MRS.
 I'll have the cudgel hallow'd and hung o'er the
    altar; it hath done meritorious service.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 The spirit of wantonness is sure scar'd out of
    him; if the devil have him not in fee-simple, with fine and
    recovery, he will never, I think, in the way of waste,
    attempt us again.

  MRS.
 PAGE.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 I'll warrant they'll have him publicly sham'd;
    and methinks there would be no period to the jest, should
    he not be publicly sham'd.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Come, to the forge with it then; shape it.
 I
    would not have things cool.
                           Exeunt  




SCENE 3.

  HOST.
 What duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear
    not of him in the court.
 Let me speak with the gentlemen;
    they speak English?
  BARDOLPH.
 Ay, sir; I'll call them to you.

  HOST.
 They must
    come off; I'll sauce them.
 Come.
                      Exeunt




SCENE 4

FORD'S house

Enter PAGE, FORD, MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and SIR HUGH EVANS

  EVANS.
 'Tis one of the best discretions of a oman as ever
    did look upon.
 And did he send you both these letters at an instant?
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Within a quarter of an hour.
 Now doth thy honour stand,
    In him that was of late an heretic,
    As firm as faith.

  PAGE.
 'Tis well, 'tis well; no more.

    Be not as extreme in submission as in offence;
    But let our plot go forward.
 Let our wives
    Yet once again, to make us public sport,
    Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
    Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.
  
  FORD.

  PAGE.
 How? To send him word they'll meet him in the Park
    at midnight? Fie, fie! he'll never come!
  EVANS.
 You say he has been thrown in the rivers; and has
    been grievously peaten as an old oman; methinks there
    should be terrors in him, that he should not come;
    methinks his flesh is punish'd; he shall have no desires.
 So think I too.

  MRS.
 Devise but how you'll use him when he comes,
    And let us two devise to bring him thither.

  MRS.

    But what of this?
  MRS.
 FORD.
 Marry, this is our device-
    That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us,
    Disguis'd, like Heme, with huge horns on his head.
 When you have brought him thither,
    What shall be done with him? What is your plot?
  MRS.
 PAGE.

    Then let them all encircle him about,
    And fairy-like, to pinch the unclean knight;
    And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
    In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
    In shape profane.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 And till he tell the truth,
    Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound,
    And burn him with their tapers.
 PAGE.
 The truth being known,
    We'll all present ourselves; dis-horn the spirit,
    And mock him home to Windsor.

  FORD.
 The children must
    Be practis'd well to this or they'll nev'r do 't.
 I will teach the children their behaviours; and I will
    be like a jack-an-apes also, to burn the knight with my
    taber.
 I'll go buy them vizards.
 PAGE.
 My Nan shall be the Queen of all the Fairies,
    Finely attired in a robe of white.
 That silk will I go buy.
  [Aside]  And in that time
    Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away,
    And marry her at Eton.
 Sure, he'll come.
 PAGE.
 Go get us properties
    And tricking for our fairies.

  EVANS.
 Let us about it.
 PAGE.
 FORD
    I'll to the Doctor; he hath my good will,
    And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.

    The Doctor is well money'd, and his friends
    Potent at court; he, none but he, shall have her,
    Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.
 What wouldst thou have, boor? What, thick-skin?
    Speak, breathe, discuss; brief, short, quick, snap.

  SIMPLE.

  HOST.
 There's his chamber, his house, his castle, his
    standing-bed and truckle-bed; 'tis painted about with the
    story of the Prodigal, fresh and new.
 Go, knock and can; he'll
    speak like an Anthropophaginian unto thee.
 Knock, I say.
 Ha! a fat woman? The knight may be robb'd.
 Art thou there? It is thine host, thine Ephesian, calls.
 Here's a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of  
    thy fat woman.
 Let her descend, bully, let her descend;
    my chambers are honourible.
 Fie, privacy, fie!

                    Enter FALSTAFF

  FALSTAFF.

  SIMPLE.
 Ay, marry was it, mussel-shell.
 My master, sir, my Master Slender, sent to her,
    seeing her go thorough the streets, to know, sir, whether one
    Nym, sir, that beguil'd him of a chain, had the chain or no.
 I spake with the old woman about it.

  SIMPLE.
 And what says she, I pray, sir?
  FALSTAFF Marry, she says that the very same man that
    beguil'd Master Slender of his chain cozen'd him of it.

  HOST.
 Ay, come; quick.

  FALSTAFF.
 Conceal them, or thou diest.

    SIMPLE.

  FALSTAFF.
 What sir?
  FALSTAFF.
 To have her, or no.
 Go; say the woman told me
    so.

  SIMPLE.
 May I be bold to say so, sir?
  FALSTAFF.
 Ay, sir, like who more bold?
  SIMPLE.
, I thank your worship; I shall make my master glad
    with these tidings.
                              Exit SIMPLE
  HOST.
 Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John.
 Was
    there a wise woman with thee?
  FALSTAFF.
 Ay, that there was, mine host; one that hath
    taught me more wit than ever I learn'd before in my life;  
    and I paid nothing for it neither, but was paid for my
    learning.


                    Enter BARDOLPH

  BARDOLPH.
 Out, alas, sir, cozenage, mere cozenage!
  HOST.
 Where be my horses? Speak well of them, varletto.

  BARDOLPH.
 Run away with the cozeners; for so soon as I
    came beyond Eton, they threw me off from behind one of
    them, in a slough of mire; and set spurs and away, like
    three German devils, three Doctor Faustuses.
 Germans are honest men.
 I tell you for
    good will, look you; you are wise, and full of gibes and
    vlouting-stogs, and 'tis not convenient you should be
    cozened.
 Fare you well.
                                 Exit

                  Enter DOCTOR CAIUS

  CAIUS.
 Here, Master Doctor, in perplexity and doubtful
    dilemma.
 I cannot tell vat is dat; but it is tell-a me dat you
    make grand preparation for a Duke de Jamany.
 Hue and cry, villain, go! Assist me, knight; I am
    undone.
 Fly, run, hue and cry, villain; I am undone.
 I would all the world might be cozen'd, for I have
    been cozen'd and beaten too.
 If it should come to the car  
    of the court how I have been transformed, and how my
    transformation hath been wash'd and cudgell'd, they
    would melt me out of my fat, drop by drop, and liquor
    fishermen's boots with me; I warrant they would whip me
    with their fine wits till I were as crestfall'n as a dried pear.
 Well,
    if my wind were but long enough to say my prayers,
    would repent.


                Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY

    Now! whence come you?
  QUICKLY.

  FALSTAFF.
 I have suffer'd more
    for their sakes, more than the villainous inconstancy of
    man's disposition is able to bear.

  QUICKLY.
 What tell'st thou me of black and blue? I was
    beaten myself into all the colours of the rainbow; and
    was like to be apprehended for the witch of Brainford.

  QUICKLY.
 Sir, let me speak with you in your chamber; you
    shall hear how things go, and, I warrant, to your content.

    Here is a letter will say somewhat.
 Good hearts, what ado
    here is to bring you together! Sure, one of you does not
    serve heaven well, that you are so cross'd.
                      Exeunt




SCENE 6.


The Garter Inn

Enter FENTON and HOST

  HOST.
 Yet hear me speak.
 Assist me in my purpose,
    And, as I am a gentleman, I'll give the
    A hundred pound in gold more than your loss.

  HOST.
 I will hear you, Master Fenton; and I will, at the least,
    keep your counsel.

  FENTON.
 From time to time I have acquainted you
    With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page;
    Who, mutually, hath answer'd my affection,
    So far forth as herself might be her chooser,
    Even to my wish.
 I have a letter from her
    Of such contents as you will wonder at;
    The mirth whereof so larded with my matter
    That neither, singly, can be manifested
    Without the show of both.
 Fat Falstaff  
    Hath a great scene.
 The image of the jest
    I'll show you here at large.
 Hark, good mine host:
    To-night at Heme's oak, just 'twixt twelve and one,
    Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen-
    The purpose why is here-in which disguise,
    While other jests are something rank on foot,
    Her father hath commanded her to slip
    Away with Slender, and with him at Eton
    Immediately to marry; she hath consented.

    Now, sir,
    Her mother, even strong against that match
    And firm for Doctor Caius, hath appointed
    That he shall likewise shuffle her away
    While other sports are tasking of their minds,
    And at the dean'ry, where a priest attends,
    Straight marry her.

  HOST.
 Both, my good host, to go along with me.

    And here it rests-that you'll procure the vicar
    To stay for me at church, 'twixt twelve and one,
    And in the lawful name of marrying,
    To give our hearts united ceremony.

  HOST.
 Well, husband your device; I'll to the vicar.

  FENTON.
              Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE 1.
 Prithee, no more prattling; go.
 I'll, hold.

    Away, go; they say there is divinity in odd numbers, either
    in nativity, chance, or death.

  FALSTAFF.
 Away, I say; time wears; hold up your head, and
    mince.
                                     Exit MRS.
 QUICKLY

                 Enter FORD disguised

    How now, Master Brook.
 Be you in the Park about
    midnight, at Herne's oak, and you shall see wonders.
 I went to her, Master Brook, as you see, like a
    poor old man; but I came from her, Master Brook, like a
    poor old woman.
 I will tell you-he beat me grievously
    in the shape of a woman; for in the shape of man, Master
    Brook, I fear not Goliath with a weaver's beam; because
    I know also life is a shuttle.
 tell you all, Master Brook.
 Since I pluck'd geese,
    play'd truant, and whipp'd top, I knew not what 'twas to
    be beaten till lately.
 Follow me.
 I'll tell you strange things
    of this knave-Ford, on whom to-night I will be revenged,
    and I will deliver his wife into your hand.
 Follow.
 Strange
    things in hand, Master Brook! Follow.


Windsor Park

Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER

  PAGE.
 Remember, son Slender, my daughter.

  SLENDER.
 Ay, forsooth; I have spoke with her, and we have
    a nay-word how to know one another.
 I come to her in
    white and cry 'mum'; she cries 'budget,' and by that we
    know one another.

  PAGE.

    Heaven prosper our sport! No man means evil but the
    devil, and we shall know him by his horns.
 Let's away;
    follow me.
                                            Exeunt




SCENE 3.


A street leading to the Park

Enter MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and DOCTOR CAIUS

  MRS.
 Master Doctor, my daughter is in green; when
    you see your time, take her by the hand, away with her to
    the deanery, and dispatch it quickly.
 Go before into the
    Park; we two must go together.

  CAIUS.

  MRS.
  [Exit CAIUS]  My husband
    will not rejoice so much at the abuse of Falstaff as he will
    chafe at the doctor's marrying my daughter; but 'tis no
    matter; better a little chiding than a great deal of
    heartbreak.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 Where is Nan now, and her troop of fairies, and
    the Welsh devil, Hugh?
  MRS.
 PAGE.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 PAGE.
 If he be not amaz'd, he will be mock'd; if he be  
    amaz'd, he will every way be mock'd.
 FORD.
 We'll betray him finely.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
 Against such lewdsters and their lechery,
    Those that betray them do no treachery.
 FORD.
 The hour draws on.
 To the oak, to the oak!
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE 4.


Windsor Park

Enter SIR HUGH EVANS like a satyr, with OTHERS as fairies

  EVANS.
                                                 Exeunt




SCENE 5.
 The Windsor bell hath struck twelve; the minute
    draws on.
 Now the hot-blooded gods assist me!
    Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull for thy Europa; love set on thy
    horns.
 O powerful love! that in some respects makes a
    beast a man; in some other a man a beast.
 O omnipotent love!
    how near the god drew to the complexion of a goose! A
    fault done first in the form of a beast-O Jove, a beastly
    fault!-and then another fault in the semblance of a fowl-
    think on't, Jove, a foul fault! When gods have hot backs
    what shall poor men do? For me, I am here a Windsor
    stag; and the fattest, I think, i' th' forest.
 FORD.
 Sir John! Art thou there, my deer, my male deer.
      [Embracing her]
  MRS.
 Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.

  FALSTAFF.
 Divide me like a brib'd buck, each a haunch; I
    will keep my sides to myself, my shoulders for the fellow
    of this walk, and my horns I bequeath your husbands.
 Am
    I a woodman, ha? Speak I like Heme the Hunter? Why,
    now is Cupid a child of conscience; he makes restitution.

    As I am a true spirit, welcome!           [A noise of horns]
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 FORD.
 Heaven forgive our sins!
  FALSTAFF.
 FORD.
                        [They run off]
  FALSTAFF.
 I think the devil will not have me damn'd, lest the
    oil that's in me should set hell on fire; he would never else  
    cross me thus.


        Enter SIR HUGH EVANS like a satyr, ANNE PAGE as
      a fairy, and OTHERS as the Fairy Queen, fairies, and
               Hobgoblin; all with tapers

  FAIRY QUEEN.

  PUCK.

    Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap;
    Where fires thou find'st unrak'd, and hearths unswept,
    There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry;
    Our radiant Queen hates sluts and sluttery.

    I'll wink and couch; no man their works must eye.

  FAIRY QUEEN.

    The several chairs of order look you scour
    With juice of balm and every precious flower;
    Each fair instalment, coat, and sev'ral crest,
    With loyal blazon, evermore be blest!
    And nightly, meadow-fairies, look you sing,
    Like to the Garter's compass, in a ring;
    Th' expressure that it bears, green let it be,
    More fertile-fresh than all the field to see;
    And 'Honi soit qui mal y pense' write  
    In em'rald tufts, flow'rs purple, blue and white;
    Like sapphire, pearl, and rich embroidery,
    Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee.

  EVANS.
 Pray you, lock hand in hand; yourselves in order set;
    And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be,
    To guide our measure round about the tree.

    But, stay.
 Vile worm, thou wast o'erlook'd even in thy birth.

  FAIRY QUEEN.
 With trial-fire touch me his finger-end;
    If he be chaste, the flame will back descend,
    And turn him to no pain; but if he start,
    It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.

  PUCK.
 A trial, come.
 Come, will this wood take fire?  
             [They put the tapers to his fingers, and he starts]
  FALSTAFF.
 Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire!
    About him, fairies; sing a scornful rhyme;
    And, as you trip, still pinch him to your time.

  THE SONG.

    Fie on sinful fantasy!
    Fie on lust and luxury!
    Lust is but a bloody fire,
    Kindled with unchaste desire,
    Fed in heart, whose flames aspire,
    As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher.
 DOCTOR
        CAIUS comes one way, and steals away a fairy in
        green; SLENDER another way, and takes off a fairy in  
        white; and FENTON steals away ANNE PAGE.
 A noise
        of hunting is heard within.
 All the fairies run away.
 Nay, do not fly; I think we have watch'd you now.

    Will none but Heme the Hunter serve your turn?
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher.
 Now, sir, who's a cuckold now? Master Brook,
    Falstaff's a knave, a cuckoldly knave; here are his horns,
    Master Brook; and, Master Brook, he hath enjoyed nothing of
    Ford's but his buck-basket, his cudgel, and twenty pounds
    of money, which must be paid to Master Brook; his horses
    are arrested for it, Master Brook.

  MRS.
 FORD.
 Sir John, we have had ill luck; we could never  
    meet.
 I will never take you for my love again; but I will
    always count you my deer.

  FALSTAFF.
 I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass.

  FORD.
 And these are not fairies? I was three or four
    times in the thought they were not fairies; and yet the
    guiltiness of my mind, the sudden surprise of my powers,
    drove the grossness of the foppery into a receiv'd belief,
    in despite of the teeth of all rhyme and reason, that they
    were fairies.
 See now how wit may be made a Jack-a-Lent
    when 'tis upon ill employment.
 Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your desires,
    and fairies will not pinse you.
 Well said, fairy Hugh.

  EVANS.
 And leave you your jealousies too, I pray you.
 I will never mistrust my wife again, till thou art able
    to woo her in good English.

  FALSTAFF.
 Have I laid my brain in the sun, and dried it, that
    it wants matter to prevent so gross, o'er-reaching as this?
    Am I ridden with a Welsh goat too? Shall I have a cox-comb  
    of frieze? 'Tis time I were chok'd with a piece of
    toasted cheese.

  EVANS.
 Seese is not good to give putter; your belly is all
    putter.
 'Seese' and 'putter'! Have I liv'd to stand at the
    taunt of one that makes fritters of English? This is enough
    to be the decay of lust and late-walking through the realm.
 PAGE.
 PAGE.
 A puff'd man?
  PAGE.
 And as poor as Job?
  FORD.
 And as wicked as his wife?
  EVANS.
 And given to fornications, and to taverns, and sack,
    and wine, and metheglins, and to drinkings, and swearings,
    and starings, pribbles and prabbles?  
  FALSTAFF.

  FORD.
 Marry, sir, we'll bring you to Windsor, to one Master
    Brook, that you have cozen'd of money, to whom you
    should have been a pander.
 Over and above that you have
    suffer'd, I think to repay that money will be a biting
    affliction.

  PAGE.
 Yet be cheerful, knight; thou shalt eat a posset
    tonight at my house, where I will desire thee to laugh at my
    wife, that now laughs at thee.
 Tell her Master Slender hath
    married her daughter.

  MRS.
 PAGE.
  [Aside]  Doctors doubt that; if Anne Page be
    my daughter, she is, by this, Doctor Caius' wife.


                        Enter SLENDER

  SLENDER.
 Dispatch'd! I'll make the best in Gloucestershire  
    know on't; would I were hang'd, la, else!
  PAGE.
 Of what, son?
  SLENDER.
 If I did not think it had been Anne Page,
    would I might never stir!-and 'tis a postmaster's boy.

  SLENDER.
 What need you tell me that? I think so, when I
    took a boy for a girl.
 If I had been married to him, for all
    he was in woman's apparel, I would not have had him.
 Why, this is your own folly.
 Did not I tell you how
    you should know my daughter by her garments?
  SLENDER.

  MRS.
 PAGE.

  
                         Enter CAIUS

  CAIUS.

  MRS.
 Ay, be gar, and 'tis a boy; be gar, I'll raise all
    Windsor.
 This is strange.
 Who hath got the right Anne?
  PAGE.
 My heart misgives me; here comes Master Fenton.


                  Enter FENTON and ANNE PAGE

    How now, Master Fenton!
  ANNE.
 Now, Mistress, how chance you went not with Master
    Slender?
  MRS.
 PAGE.
 You do amaze her.

  FORD.
 Stand not amaz'd; here is no remedy.

  FALSTAFF.
 I am glad, though you have ta'en a special stand
    to strike at me, that your arrow hath glanc'd.

  PAGE.
 Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
    What cannot be eschew'd must be embrac'd.
 When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chas'd.

  MRS.
 Well, I will muse no further.
 Master Fenton,
    Heaven give you many, many merry days!
    Good husband, let us every one go home,  
    And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire;
    Sir John and all.

  FORD.
 Sir John,
    To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word;
    For he, to-night, shall lie with Mistress Ford.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1596

A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  THESEUS, Duke of Athens
  EGEUS, father to Hermia
  LYSANDER, in love with Hermia
  DEMETRIUS, in love with Hermia
  PHILOSTRATE, Master of the Revels to Theseus
  QUINCE, a carpenter
  SNUG, a joiner
  BOTTOM, a weaver
  FLUTE, a bellows-mender
  SNOUT, a tinker
  STARVELING, a tailor

  HIPPOLYTA, Queen of the Amazons, bethrothed to Theseus
  HERMIA, daughter to Egeus, in love with Lysander
  HELENA, in love with Demetrius

  OBERON, King of the Fairies
  TITANIA, Queen of the Fairies
  PUCK, or ROBIN GOODFELLOW
  PEASEBLOSSOM, fairy  
  COBWEB, fairy
  MOTH, fairy
  MUSTARDSEED, fairy

  PROLOGUE, PYRAMUS, THISBY, WALL, MOONSHINE, LION are presented by:
    QUINCE, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, STARVELING, AND SNUG

  Other Fairies attending their King and Queen
  Attendants on Theseus and Hippolyta




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



SCENE:
Athens and a wood near it


ACT I.
 SCENE I.

Athens.
 The palace of THESEUS

Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, and ATTENDANTS

  THESEUS.
 Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
    Draws on apace; four happy days bring in
    Another moon; but, O, methinks, how slow
    This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires,
    Like to a step-dame or a dowager,
    Long withering out a young man's revenue.

  HIPPOLYTA.
 Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
    Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
    And then the moon, like to a silver bow
    New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night
    Of our solemnities.

  THESEUS.
 Go, Philostrate,
    Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments;
    Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth;
    Turn melancholy forth to funerals;
    The pale companion is not for our pomp.
 Full of vexation come I, with complaint
    Against my child, my daughter Hermia.

    Stand forth, Demetrius.

    Stand forth, Lysander.
 And, my gracious Duke,
    This man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child.
 And, my gracious Duke,
    Be it so she will not here before your Grace
    Consent to marry with Demetrius,
    I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:
    As she is mine I may dispose of her;
    Which shall be either to this gentleman
    Or to her death, according to our law
    Immediately provided in that case.

  THESEUS.
 What say you, Hermia? Be advis'd, fair maid.

    Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.

  THESEUS.
 In himself he is;
    But, in this kind, wanting your father's voice,
    The other must be held the worthier.

  HERMIA.
 I would my father look'd but with my eyes.

  THESEUS.
 Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.

  HERMIA.
 I do entreat your Grace to pardon me.

    I know not by what power I am made bold,
    Nor how it may concern my modesty
    In such a presence here to plead my thoughts;
    But I beseech your Grace that I may know
    The worst that may befall me in this case,
    If I refuse to wed Demetrius.

    Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
    Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
    Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice,
    You can endure the livery of a nun,
    For aye to be shady cloister mew'd,  
    To live a barren sister all your life,
    Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.

    Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood
    To undergo such maiden pilgrimage;
    But earthlier happy is the rose distill'd
    Than that which withering on the virgin thorn
    Grows, lives, and dies, in single blessedness.

  HERMIA.
 So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
    Ere I will yield my virgin patent up
    Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke
    My soul consents not to give sovereignty.

  THESEUS.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Relent, sweet Hermia; and, Lysander, yield  
    Thy crazed title to my certain right.

  LYSANDER.

    Why should not I then prosecute my right?
    Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head,
    Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,
    And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
    Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
    Upon this spotted and inconstant man.
 But, Demetrius, come;
    And come, Egeus; you shall go with me;
    I have some private schooling for you both.

    Come, my Hippolyta; what cheer, my love?
    Demetrius, and Egeus, go along;
    I must employ you in some business
    Against our nuptial, and confer with you
    Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.

                              Exeunt all but LYSANDER and HERMIA
  LYSANDER.
 How now, my love! Why is your cheek so pale?
    How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
  HERMIA.

  LYSANDER.
 Ay me! for aught that I could ever read,
    Could ever hear by tale or history,
    The course of true love never did run smooth;
    But either it was different in blood-
  HERMIA.
 Or else misgraffed in respect of years-
  HERMIA.
 O hell! to choose love by another's eyes.
 Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
    War, death, or sickness, did lay siege to it,
    Making it momentary as a sound,
    Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
    Brief as the lightning in the collied night
    That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,
    And ere a man hath power to say 'Behold!'
    The jaws of darkness do devour it up;
    So quick bright things come to confusion.

  HERMIA.

    Then let us teach our trial patience,
    Because it is a customary cross,
    As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
    Wishes and tears, poor Fancy's followers.
 A good persuasion; therefore, hear me, Hermia.

    I have a widow aunt, a dowager
    Of great revenue, and she hath no child-
    From Athens is her house remote seven leagues-
    And she respects me as her only son.

    There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;
    And to that place the sharp Athenian law
    Cannot pursue us.

  HERMIA.
 My good Lysander!
    I swear to thee by Cupid's strongest bow,  
    By his best arrow, with the golden head,
    By the simplicity of Venus' doves,
    By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
    And by that fire which burn'd the Carthage Queen,
    When the false Troyan under sail was seen,
    By all the vows that ever men have broke,
    In number more than ever women spoke,
    In that same place thou hast appointed me,
    To-morrow truly will I meet with thee.
 Look, here comes Helena.


                         Enter HELENA

  HERMIA.
 God speed fair Helena! Whither away?
  HELENA.
 Call you me fair? That fair again unsay.

    Demetrius loves your fair.
 O happy fair!
    Your eyes are lode-stars and your tongue's sweet air
    More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear,
    When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
 I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.
 O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!
  HERMIA.
 I give him curses, yet he gives me love.

  HELENA.
 O that my prayers could such affection move!
  HERMIA.
 The more I hate, the more he follows me.

  HELENA.

  HELENA.
 Take comfort: he no more shall see my face;
    Lysander and myself will fly this place.

    Before the time I did Lysander see,
    Seem'd Athens as a paradise to me.

  HERMIA.

    Farewell, sweet playfellow; pray thou for us,
    And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!
    Keep word, Lysander; we must starve our sight
    From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.

  LYSANDER.
 I will, my Hermia.
 [Exit HERMIA] Helena, adieu;
    As you on him, Demetrius dote on you.
                   Exit
  HELENA.

    And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,
    So I, admiring of his qualities.

    Things base and vile, holding no quantity,
    Love can transpose to form and dignity.

    Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind;
    And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind.

    Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste;
    Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste;
    And therefore is Love said to be a child,
    Because in choice he is so oft beguil'd.

    As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
    So the boy Love is perjur'd everywhere;
    For ere Demetrius look'd on Hermia's eyne,
    He hail'd down oaths that he was only mine;
    And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
    So he dissolv'd, and show'rs of oaths did melt.

    But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
    To have his sight thither and back again.
               Exit




SCENE II.

Athens.
 Is all our company here?
  BOTTOM.
 You were best to call them generally, man by man, according
    to the scrip.

  QUINCE.
 Here is the scroll of every man's name which is thought
    fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the Duke
    and the Duchess on his wedding-day at night.
 First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on; then
    read the names of the actors; and so grow to a point.

  QUINCE.
 Marry, our play is 'The most Lamentable Comedy and most
    Cruel Death of Pyramus and Thisby.
 A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry.
 Now,
    good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll.
 Masters,
    spread yourselves.

  QUINCE.
 Answer, as I call you.
 Ready.

  QUINCE.
 You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.
  
  BOTTOM.
 To the rest- yet my chief humour is
    for a tyrant.


                 'The raging rocks
                 And shivering shocks
                 Shall break the locks
                   Of prison gates;

                 And Phibbus' car
                 Shall shine from far,
                 And make and mar
                   The foolish Fates.
  
  QUINCE.
 Here, Peter Quince.

  QUINCE.
 Flute, you must take Thisby on you.
 It is the lady that Pyramus must love.

  FLUTE.
 Nay, faith, let not me play a woman; I have a beard coming.

  QUINCE.

  BOTTOM.
 An I may hide my face, let me play Thisby too.

    I'll speak in a monstrous little voice: 'Thisne, Thisne!'
    [Then speaking small] 'Ah Pyramus, my lover dear! Thy
    Thisby dear, and lady dear!'
  QUINCE.
 No, no, you must play Pyramus; and, Flute, you Thisby.

  BOTTOM.
 Well, proceed.
 Robin Starveling, the tailor.
 Here, Peter Quince.

  QUINCE.
 Here, Peter Quince.

  QUINCE.
 You, Pyramus' father; myself, Thisby's father; Snug, the  
    joiner, you, the lion's part.
 And, I hope, here is a play fitted.
 Have you the lion's part written? Pray you, if it be, give it
    me, for I am slow of study.
 You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.
 I will roar that I will do any
    man's heart good to hear me; I will roar that I will make the
    Duke say 'Let him roar again, let him roar again.
 An you should do it too terribly, you would fright the
    Duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek; and that were
    enough to hang us all.

  ALL.
 That would hang us, every mother's son.

  BOTTOM.

  QUINCE.
 You can play no part but Pyramus; for Pyramus is a
    sweet-fac'd man; a proper man, as one shall see in a summer's
    day; a most lovely gentleman-like man; therefore you must needs
    play Pyramus.
 What beard were I best to play  
    it in?
  QUINCE.
 Why, what you will.

  BOTTOM.
 I will discharge it in either your straw-colour beard, your
    orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your
    French-crown-colour beard, your perfect yellow.
 Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then
    you will play bare-fac'd.
 But, masters, here are your parts; and
    I am to entreat you, request you, and desire you, to con them by
    to-morrow night; and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without
    the town, by moonlight; there will we rehearse; for if we meet in
    the city, we shall be dogg'd with company, and our devices known.
 I pray you, fail me not.

  BOTTOM.
 At the Duke's oak we meet.

  BOTTOM.
               Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
 How now, spirit! whither wander you?
  FAIRY.

              The cowslips tall her pensioners be;
              In their gold coats spots you see;
              Those be rubies, fairy favours,
              In those freckles live their savours.

    Farewell, thou lob of spirits; I'll be gone.
  
    Our Queen and all her elves come here anon.
 The King doth keep his revels here to-night;
    Take heed the Queen come not within his sight;
    For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,
    Because that she as her attendant hath
    A lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king.

    She never had so sweet a changeling;
    And jealous Oberon would have the child
    Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild;
    But she perforce withholds the loved boy,
    Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.

  FAIRY.
 Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
    Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
    Call'd Robin Goodfellow.

    Are not you he?
  PUCK.
 Thou speakest aright:
    I am that merry wanderer of the night.

    I jest to Oberon, and make him smile
    When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
    Neighing in likeness of a filly foal;
    And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl
    In very likeness of a roasted crab,
    And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob,
    And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.

  FAIRY.
 And here my mistress.
 What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence;
    I have forsworn his bed and company.
 Tarry, rash wanton; am not I thy lord?
  TITANIA.
 These are the forgeries of jealousy;
    And never, since the middle summer's spring,
    Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
    By paved fountain, or by rushy brook,
    Or in the beached margent of the sea,
    To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
    But with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport.

  OBERON.

    Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
    I do but beg a little changeling boy
    To be my henchman.

  TITANIA.
 Set your heart at rest;
    The fairy land buys not the child of me.

    His mother was a vot'ress of my order;
    And, in the spiced Indian air, by night,
    Full often hath she gossip'd by my side;
    And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands,
    Marking th' embarked traders on the flood;
    When we have laugh'd to see the sails conceive,
    And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
    Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait  
    Following- her womb then rich with my young squire-
    Would imitate, and sail upon the land,
    To fetch me trifles, and return again,
    As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
 How long within this wood intend you stay?
  TITANIA.

  OBERON.
 Not for thy fairy kingdom.

                                     Exit TITANIA with her train
  OBERON.
 Well, go thy way; thou shalt not from this grove
    Till I torment thee for this injury.

    My gentle Puck, come hither.
 Thou rememb'rest
    Since once I sat upon a promontory,  
    And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back
    Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
    That the rude sea grew civil at her song,
    And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
    To hear the sea-maid's music.
 I remember.
 That very time I saw, but thou couldst not,
    Flying between the cold moon and the earth
    Cupid, all arm'd; a certain aim he took
    At a fair vestal, throned by the west,
    And loos'd his love-shaft smartly from his bow,
    As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts;
    But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft
    Quench'd in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon;
    And the imperial vot'ress passed on,
    In maiden meditation, fancy-free.

    Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell.

    It fell upon a little western flower,
    Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound,
    And maidens call it Love-in-idleness.
  
    Fetch me that flow'r, the herb I showed thee once.

    The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid
    Will make or man or woman madly dote
    Upon the next live creature that it sees.

    Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again
    Ere the leviathan can swim a league.

  PUCK.
 I'll put a girdle round about the earth
    In forty minutes.
                                  Exit PUCK
  OBERON.
 Having once this juice,
    I'll watch Titania when she is asleep,
    And drop the liquor of it in her eyes;
    The next thing then she waking looks upon,
    Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,
    On meddling monkey, or on busy ape,
    She shall pursue it with the soul of love.

    But who comes here? I am invisible;
    And I will overhear their conference.
 I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.

    Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
    The one I'll slay, the other slayeth me.

    Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
 You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant;
    But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
    Is true as steel.
 Leave you your power to draw,
    And I shall have no power to follow you.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?
    Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth
    Tell you I do not nor I cannot love you?
  HELENA.
 And even for that do I love you the more.
  
    Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me,
    Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave,
    Unworthy as I am, to follow you.

    What worser place can I beg in your love,
    And yet a place of high respect with me,
    Than to be used as you use your dog?
  DEMETRIUS.
 Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit;
    For I am sick when I do look on thee.

  HELENA.
  
    Then how can it be said I am alone
    When all the world is here to look on me?
  DEMETRIUS.

  HELENA.

  DEMETRIUS.

  HELENA.
 Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
    You do me mischief.

    We cannot fight for love as men may do;
    We should be woo'd, and were not made to woo.

                                                  Exit DEMETRIUS
    I'll follow thee, and make a heaven of hell,  
    To die upon the hand I love so well.
             Exit HELENA
  OBERON.
 Fare thee well, nymph; ere he do leave this grove,
    Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.


                            Re-enter PUCK

    Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.

  PUCK.

  OBERON.
 I pray thee give it me.

    Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove:  
    A sweet Athenian lady is in love
    With a disdainful youth; anoint his eyes;
    But do it when the next thing he espies
    May be the lady.
 Thou shalt know the man
    By the Athenian garments he hath on.

    Effect it with some care, that he may prove
    More fond on her than she upon her love.

  PUCK.
      Exeunt




SCENE II.

Another part of the wood

Enter TITANIA, with her train

  TITANIA.


                          The FAIRIES Sing

  FIRST FAIRY.
 You spotted snakes with double tongue,
               Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;
               Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong,
               Come not near our fairy Queen.

  CHORUS.
      Philomel with melody
               Sing in our sweet lullaby.

               Never harm
               Nor spell nor charm
               Come our lovely lady nigh.

               So good night, with lullaby.

                 Beetles black, approach not near;
                 Worm nor snail do no offence.

  CHORUS.
      Philomel with melody, etc.
       [TITANIA Sleeps]
  FIRST FAIRY.
 Hence away; now all is well.

    Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
    Pard, or boar with bristled hair,  
    In thy eye that shall appear
    When thou wak'st, it is thy dear.

    Wake when some vile thing is near.
                      Exit

                     Enter LYSANDER and HERMIA

  LYSANDER.
 Fair love, you faint with wand'ring in the wood;
    And, to speak troth, I have forgot our way;
    We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
    And tarry for the comfort of the day.

  LYSANDER.
 O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
    Love takes the meaning in love's conference.

    Then by your side no bed-room me deny,
    For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.

  HERMIA.

    Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,
    If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied!
    But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy
    Lie further off, in human modesty;
    Such separation as may well be said
    Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid,
    So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend.

    Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!
  LYSANDER.
      Through the forest have I gone,
             But Athenian found I none
             On whose eyes I might approve
             This flower's force in stirring love.

             Night and silence- Who is here?
             Weeds of Athens he doth wear:
             This is he, my master said,
             Despised the Athenian maid;
             And here the maiden, sleeping sound,
             On the dank and dirty ground.

             Pretty soul! she durst not lie
             Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.

             Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
             All the power this charm doth owe:
             When thou wak'st let love forbid
             Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.

             So awake when I am gone;
             For I must now to Oberon.
                      Exit
  
               Enter DEMETRIUS and HELENA, running

  HELENA.
 Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.
 I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.

  HELENA.
 O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Stay on thy peril; I alone will go.

    How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears;
    If so, my eyes are oft'ner wash'd than hers.

    No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,
    For beasts that meet me run away for fear;
    Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
    Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus.
  
    Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.

  LYSANDER.
 [Waking] And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.

    Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
    That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.

    Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
    Is that vile name to perish on my sword!
  HELENA.
 Do not say so, Lysander; say not so.
 Content with Hermia! No: I do repent
    The tedious minutes I with her have spent.

    Not Hermia but Helena I love:
    Who will not change a raven for a dove?
    The will of man is by his reason sway'd,
    And reason says you are the worthier maid.

    But fare you well; perforce I must confess
    I thought you lord of more true gentleness.

    O, that a lady of one man refus'd
    Should of another therefore be abus'd!                  Exit
  LYSANDER.
 She sees not Hermia.
 Hermia, sleep thou there;
    And never mayst thou come Lysander near!
    For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
    The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,
    Or as the heresies that men do leave
    Are hated most of those they did deceive,
    So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,  
    Of all be hated, but the most of me!
    And, all my powers, address your love and might
    To honour Helen, and to be her knight!                  Exit
  HERMIA.
 [Starting] Help me, Lysander, help me; do thy best
    To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast.

    Methought a serpent eat my heart away,
    And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.

    Lysander! What, remov'd? Lysander! lord!
    What, out of hearing gone? No sound, no word?
    Alack, where are you? Speak, an if you hear;
    Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.

    No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.
              Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT III.
 Pat, pat; and here's a marvellous convenient place for our
    rehearsal.
 Peter Quince!
  QUINCE.
 There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisby that
    will never please.
 First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill
    himself; which the ladies cannot abide.
 How answer you that?
  SNOUT.
 By'r lakin, a parlous fear.
 Not a whit; I have a device to make all well.
 This will put them out of fear.

  QUINCE.
 Well, we will have such a prologue; and it shall be written
    in eight and six.
 No, make it two more; let it be written in eight and eight.
 Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?
  STARVELING.

  BOTTOM.
 Masters, you ought to consider with yourself to bring in-
    God shield us!- a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing; for
    there is not a more fearful wild-fowl than your lion living; and
    we ought to look to't.

  SNOUT.
 Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen
    through the lion's neck; and he himself must speak through,
    saying thus, or to the same defect: 'Ladies,' or 'Fair ladies, I
    would wish you' or 'I would request you' or 'I would entreat you
    not to fear, not to tremble.
 My life for yours! If you think I
    come hither as a lion, it were pity of my life.
 No, I am no such
    thing; I am a man as other men are.
' And there, indeed, let him
    name his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.
 Well, it shall be so.

  SNOUT.
 A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanack; find out
    moonshine, find out moonshine.

  QUINCE.

  BOTTOM.
 Why, then may you leave a casement of the great chamber
    window, where we play, open; and the moon may shine in at the
    casement.
 Then there is another thing: we must have a wall in
    the great chamber; for Pyramus and Thisby, says the story, did
    talk through the chink of a wall.
 What say you, Bottom?
  BOTTOM.
  
  QUINCE.
 If that may be, then all is well.
 Come, sit down, every
    mother's son, and rehearse your parts.


                          Enter PUCK behind

  PUCK.

  QUINCE.
 Thisby, stand forth.

  BOTTOM.
 Thisby, the flowers of odious savours sweet-
  QUINCE.
 'Odious'- odorous!
  BOTTOM.
 -odours savours sweet;
    So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisby dear.

    But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile,
    And by and by I will to thee appear.
                    Exit
  PUCK.
 A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here!           Exit
  FLUTE.
 Ay, marry, must you; for you must understand he goes but to
    see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.

  QUINCE.
 'Ninus' tomb,' man! Why, you must not speak that yet; that
    you answer to Pyramus.
 You speak all your part at once, cues, and
    all.
'
  FLUTE.


            Re-enter PUCK, and BOTTOM with an ass's head

  BOTTOM.

  QUINCE.
 O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted.
 Pray, masters! fly,
    masters! Help!
                                  Exeunt all but BOTTOM and PUCK
  PUCK.
 I'll follow you; I'll lead you about a round,
    Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier;  
    Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,
    A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire;
    And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
    Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.

Exit
  BOTTOM.
 O Bottom, thou art chang'd! What do I see on thee?
  BOTTOM.
 Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! Thou art translated.
 But I will not stir from this place, do  
    what they can; I will walk up and down here, and will sing, that
    they shall hear I am not afraid.
 What angel wakes me from my flow'ry bed?
  BOTTOM.
 [Sings]
          The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
            The plain-song cuckoo grey,
          Whose note full many a man doth mark,
            And dares not answer nay-
    for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird?
    Who would give a bird the he, though he cry 'cuckoo' never so?
  TITANIA.
 I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.

    And yet, to say the truth, reason and love keep little company
    together now-a-days.
 The more the pity that some honest
    neighbours will not make them friends.
 Nay, I can gleek upon
    occasion.

  TITANIA.
 Not so, neither; but if I had wit enough to get out of this
    wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.

  TITANIA.
 Out of this wood do not desire to go;
    Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.

    I am a spirit of no common rate;
    The summer still doth tend upon my state;
    And I do love thee; therefore, go with me.

    I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee;
    And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,
    And sing, while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep;
    And I will purge thy mortal grossness so
    That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.

    Peaseblossom! Cobweb! Moth! and Mustardseed!  

       Enter PEASEBLOSSOM, COBWEB, MOTH, and MUSTARDSEED

  PEASEBLOSSOM.
 Ready.
 And I.

  MUSTARDSEED.

  ALL.
 Be kind and courteous to this gentleman;
    Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
    Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
    With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
    The honey bags steal from the humble-bees,
    And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs,
    And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes,
    To have my love to bed and to arise;
    And pluck the wings from painted butterflies,
    To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.

  PEASEBLOSSOM.
 Hail!
  MOTH.
 Hail!
  MUSTARDSEED.
 I cry your worships mercy, heartily; I beseech your
    worship's name.

  COBWEB.
 If I cut my finger, I shall make bold with you.
 Your
    name, honest gentleman?
  PEASEBLOSSOM.
 Peaseblossom.

  BOTTOM.
 I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother, and
    to Master Peascod, your father.
 Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall
    desire you of more acquaintance too.
 Your name, I beseech you,
    sir?
  MUSTARDSEED.
 Mustardseed.
 Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well.
 That
    same cowardly giant-like ox-beef hath devour'd many a gentleman
    of your house.
 I promise you your kindred hath made my eyes water
    ere now.
 I desire you of more acquaintance, good Master
    Mustardseed.
  
  TITANIA.
 Come, wait upon him; lead him to my bower.

    Tie up my love's tongue, bring him silently.
          Exeunt




SCENE II.
 I wonder if Titania be awak'd;
    Then, what it was that next came in her eye,
    Which she must dote on in extremity.
 My mistress with a monster is in love.

    Near to her close and consecrated bower,
    While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
    A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
    That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
    Were met together to rehearse a play
    Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day.

    The shallowest thickskin of that barren sort,
    Who Pyramus presented, in their sport
    Forsook his scene and ent'red in a brake;  
    When I did him at this advantage take,
    An ass's nole I fixed on his head.

    Anon his Thisby must be answered,
    And forth my mimic comes.

    Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong,
    Made senseless things begin to do them wrong,
    For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch;
    Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch.

  OBERON.
  
    But hast thou yet latch'd the Athenian's eyes
    With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do?
  PUCK.
 I took him sleeping- that is finish'd too-
    And the Athenian woman by his side;
    That, when he wak'd, of force she must be ey'd.
 Stand close; this is the same Athenian.

  PUCK.
 This is the woman, but not this the man.

  DEMETRIUS.
 O, why rebuke you him that loves you so?
    Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.

  HERMIA.
 Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
    For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.

    The sun was not so true unto the day
    As he to me.

    It cannot be but thou hast murd'red him;
    So should a murderer look- so dead, so grim.

  DEMETRIUS.

  HERMIA.
 What's this to my Lysander? Where is he?
    Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
  DEMETRIUS.
 I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
 Out, dog! out, cur! Thou driv'st me past the bounds
    Of maiden's patience.
 Hast thou slain him, then?
    Henceforth be never numb'red among men!
    O, once tell true; tell true, even for my sake!
    Durst thou have look'd upon him being awake,
    And hast thou kill'd him sleeping? O brave touch!
    Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
    An adder did it; for with doubler tongue  
    Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.

  DEMETRIUS.

  HERMIA.
 I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.

  DEMETRIUS.
 An if I could, what should I get therefore?
  HERMIA.

    And from thy hated presence part I so;
    See me no more whether he be dead or no.
                Exit
  DEMETRIUS.
 There is no following her in this fierce vein;
    Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.

    So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow
    For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe;
    Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
    If for his tender here I make some stay.
         [Lies down]
  OBERON.
 What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite,
    And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight.

    Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
    Some true love turn'd, and not a false turn'd true.
 Then fate o'er-rules, that, one man holding troth,  
    A million fail, confounding oath on oath.

  OBERON.
 I go, I go; look how I go,
    Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.
               Exit
  OBERON.

                When his love he doth espy,
                Let her shine as gloriously
                As the Venus of the sky.

                When thou wak'st, if she be by,
                Beg of her for remedy.
         Captain of our fairy band,
                Helena is here at hand,
                And the youth mistook by me
                Pleading for a lover's fee;
                Shall we their fond pageant see?
                Lord, what fools these mortals be!
  OBERON.
       Stand aside.

  PUCK.
         Then will two at once woo one.

                That must needs be sport alone;
                And those things do best please me
                That befall prepost'rously.


                   Enter LYSANDER and HELENA

  LYSANDER.
 Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
    Scorn and derision never come in tears.

    Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
    In their nativity all truth appears.
 You do advance your cunning more and more.

    When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray!
    These vows are Hermia's.
 Will you give her o'er?
    Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh:
    Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
    Will even weigh; and both as light as tales.

  LYSANDER.

  HELENA.
 Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.

  LYSANDER.
 Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.

  DEMETRIUS.
 [Awaking] O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
    To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
    Crystal is muddy.
 O, how ripe in show
    Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
    That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,
    Fann'd with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
    When thou hold'st up thy hand.
 O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent
    To set against me for your merriment.
  
    If you were civil and knew courtesy,
    You would not do me thus much injury.

    Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
    But you must join in souls to mock me too?
    If you were men, as men you are in show,
    You would not use a gentle lady so:
    To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts,
    When I am sure you hate me with your hearts.

    You both are rivals, and love Hermia;
    And now both rivals, to mock Helena.

    A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
    To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes
    With your derision! None of noble sort
    Would so offend a virgin, and extort
    A poor soul's patience, all to make you sport.

  LYSANDER.
 You are unkind, Demetrius; be not so;
    For you love Hermia.
 This you know I know;
    And here, with all good will, with all my heart,
    In Hermia's love I yield you up my part;
    And yours of Helena to me bequeath,  
    Whom I do love and will do till my death.

  HELENA.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Lysander, keep thy Hermia; I will none.

    My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourn'd,
    And now to Helen is it home return'd,
    There to remain.

  LYSANDER.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
    Lest, to thy peril, thou aby it dear.

    Look where thy love comes; yonder is thy dear.
 Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
    The ear more quick of apprehension makes;
    Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
    It pays the hearing double recompense.

    Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
    Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.
 You speak not as you think; it cannot be.

  HELENA.
 Lo, she is one of this confederacy!
    Now I perceive they have conjoin'd all three
    To fashion this false sport in spite of me.

    Injurious Hermia! most ungrateful maid!
    Have you conspir'd, have you with these contriv'd,
    To bait me with this foul derision?
    Is all the counsel that we two have shar'd,
    The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent,
    When we have chid the hasty-footed time
    For parting us- O, is all forgot?
    All school-days' friendship, childhood innocence?  
    We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,
    Have with our needles created both one flower,
    Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
    Both warbling of one song, both in one key;
    As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds,
    Had been incorporate.
 So we grew together,
    Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
    But yet an union in partition,
    Two lovely berries moulded on one stern;
    So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart;
    Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
    Due but to one, and crowned with one crest.

    And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
    To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
    It is not friendly, 'tis not maidenly;
    Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
    Though I alone do feel the injury.
 I am amazed at your passionate words;
    I scorn you not; it seems that you scorn me.
 I understand not what you mean by this.

  HELENA.
 Ay, do- persever, counterfeit sad looks,
    Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
    Wink each at other; hold the sweet jest up;
    This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
 Stay, gentle Helena; hear my excuse;
    My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena!
  HELENA.
 Sweet, do not scorn her so.
 Thou canst compel no more than she entreat;
    Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers
    Helen, I love thee, by my life I do;
    I swear by that which I will lose for thee
    To prove him false that says I love thee not.

  DEMETRIUS.
 I say I love thee more than he can do.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Lysander, whereto tends all this?
  LYSANDER.
 You are a tame man; go!  
  LYSANDER.
 Hang off, thou cat, thou burr; vile thing, let loose,
    Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.

  HERMIA.
 Thy love! Out, tawny Tartar, out!
    Out, loathed med'cine! O hated potion, hence!
  HERMIA.
 Do you not jest?
  HELENA.

  LYSANDER.
 Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.

  DEMETRIUS.
 I would I had your bond; for I perceive
    A weak bond holds you; I'll not trust your word.

  LYSANDER.
 Ay, by my life!
    And never did desire to see thee more.
 O me! you juggler! you cankerblossom!
    You thief of love! What! Have you come by night,
    And stol'n my love's heart from him?
  HELENA.
 Fine, i' faith!
    Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
    No touch of bashfulness? What! Will you tear
    Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
    Fie, fie! you counterfeit, you puppet you!
  HERMIA.
 'Puppet!' why so? Ay, that way goes the game.

    Now I perceive that she hath made compare
    Between our statures; she hath urg'd her height;
    And with her personage, her tall personage,
    Her height, forsooth, she hath prevail'd with him.

    And are you grown so high in his esteem
    Because I am so dwarfish and so low?  
    How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak.
 You perhaps may think,
    Because she is something lower than myself,
    That I can match her.

  HERMIA.
 'Lower' hark, again.

  HELENA.
 Let me go.
 A foolish heart that I leave here behind.

  HERMIA.
 With Demetrius.

  HELENA.
 O, when she is angry, she is keen and shrewd;
    She was a vixen when she went to school;
    And, though she be but little, she is fierce.
 'Little' again! Nothing but 'low' and 'little'!
    Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
    Let me come to her.

  LYSANDER.
 Get you gone, you dwarf;
    You minimus, of hind'ring knot-grass made;
    You bead, you acorn.
 You are too officious
    In her behalf that scorns your services.
  
    Let her alone; speak not of Helena;
    Take not her part; for if thou dost intend
    Never so little show of love to her,
    Thou shalt aby it.

  LYSANDER.
 Now she holds me not.

    Now follow, if thou dar'st, to try whose right,
    Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.
 Follow! Nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.

                                   Exeunt LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS
  HERMIA.
 You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.

    Nay, go not back.

  HELENA.
 I am amaz'd, and know not what to say.
 Still thou mistak'st,
    Or else committ'st thy knaveries wilfully.

  PUCK.
 Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.

    Did not you tell me I should know the man  
    By the Athenian garments he had on?
    And so far blameless proves my enterprise
    That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes;
    And so far am I glad it so did sort,
    As this their jangling I esteem a sport.

  OBERON.

    Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
    The starry welkin cover thou anon
    With drooping fog as black as Acheron,
    And lead these testy rivals so astray
    As one come not within another's way.

    Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue,
    Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong;
    And sometime rail thou like Demetrius;
    And from each other look thou lead them thus,
    Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
    With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.

    Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye;
    Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
    To take from thence all error with his might  
    And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.

    When they next wake, all this derision
    Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision;
    And back to Athens shall the lovers wend
    With league whose date till death shall never end.
 My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
    For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast;
    And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger,
    At whose approach ghosts, wand'ring here and there,
    Troop home to churchyards.
 But we are spirits of another sort:  
    I with the Morning's love have oft made sport;
    And, like a forester, the groves may tread
    Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red,
    Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,
    Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams.

    But, notwithstanding, haste, make no delay;
    We may effect this business yet ere day.
         Exit OBERON
  PUCK.
      Up and down, up and down,
             I will lead them up and down.

             I am fear'd in field and town.

             Goblin, lead them up and down.


                      Enter LYSANDER

  LYSANDER.
 Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.

  PUCK.
 Here, villain, drawn and ready.

  PUCK.
 Follow me, then,
    To plainer ground.
 Lysander, speak again.
 He is defil'd
    That draws a sword on thee.
 Yea, art thou there?
  PUCK.
 Follow my voice; we'll try no manhood here.
       Exeunt

                      Re-enter LYSANDER

  LYSANDER.

    For if but once thou show me thy grey light,
    I'll find Demetrius, and revenge this spite.
        [Sleeps]

                 Re-enter PUCK and DEMETRIUS

  PUCK.
 Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com'st thou not?
  DEMETRIUS.
 Abide me, if thou dar'st; for well I wot
    Thou run'st before me, shifting every place,
    And dar'st not stand, nor look me in the face.

    Where art thou now?
  PUCK.
 Nay, then, thou mock'st me.
 Thou shalt buy this dear,
    If ever I thy face by daylight see;
    Now, go thy way.
 Faintness constraineth me
    To measure out my length on this cold bed.

    By day's approach look to be visited.

                                          [Lies down and sleeps]
  
                       Enter HELENA

  HELENA.
 O weary night, O long and tedious night,
    Abate thy hours! Shine comforts from the east,
    That I may back to Athens by daylight,
    From these that my poor company detest.

    And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,
    Steal me awhile from mine own company.

              Here she comes, curst and sad.

              Cupid is a knavish lad,
              Thus to make poor females mad.


                     Enter HERMIA

  HERMIA.

                        [Squeezing the juice on LYSANDER'S eyes]
                 When thou wak'st,
                 Thou tak'st
                 True delight
                 In the sight
          Of thy former lady's eye;
          And the country proverb known,
          That every man should take his own,
          In your waking shall be shown:
                 Jack shall have Jill;
                 Nought shall go ill;
    The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE I.

The wood.

  BOTTOM.

  BOTTOM.

  BOTTOM.
 Do not fret
    yourself too much in the action, mounsieur; and, good mounsieur,
    have a care the honey-bag break not; I would be loath to have you  
    overflown with a honey-bag, signior.
 Where's Mounsieur
    Mustardseed?
  MUSTARDSEED.

  BOTTOM.
 Give me your neaf, Mounsieur Mustardseed.
 Pray you, leave
    your curtsy, good mounsieur.

  MUSTARDSEED.
 What's your will?
  BOTTOM.
 Nothing, good mounsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb to
    scratch.

  TITANIA.
 Let's have the tongs
    and the bones.

  TITANIA.

  BOTTOM.
 Truly, a peck of provender; I could munch your good dry
    oats.
 Good
    hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.
 I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
    The squirrel's hoard, and fetch thee new nuts.
 I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas.
 But, I  
    pray you, let none of your people stir me; I have an exposition
    of sleep come upon me.
       Exeunt FAIRIES
    So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
    Gently entwist; the female ivy so
    Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
 Seest thou this sweet
      sight?
    Her dotage now I do begin to pity;
    For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
    Seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool,
    I did upbraid her and fall out with her.

    For she his hairy temples then had rounded
    With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;
    And that same dew which sometime on the buds  
    Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls
    Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes,
    Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.

    When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
    And she in mild terms begg'd my patience,
    I then did ask of her her changeling child;
    Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
    To bear him to my bower in fairy land.

    And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp
    From off the head of this Athenian swain,
    That he awaking when the other do
    May all to Athens back again repair,
    And think no more of this night's accidents
    But as the fierce vexation of a dream.

                                             [Touching her eyes]
           Be as thou wast wont to be;
           See as thou was wont to see.
  
           Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower
           Hath such force and blessed power.

    Now, my Titania; wake you, my sweet queen.
 There lies your love.

  TITANIA.
 How came these things to pass?
    O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!
  OBERON.
 Silence awhile.

    Titania, music call; and strike more dead
    Than common sleep of all these five the sense.

  TITANIA.

  OBERON.
 Come, my Queen, take hands with me,
                                                         [Music]
    And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.

    Now thou and I are new in amity,
    And will to-morrow midnight solemnly
    Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly,
    And bless it to all fair prosperity.
  
    There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
    Wedded, with Theseus, an in jollity.
       Fairy King, attend and mark;
              I do hear the morning lark.

  OBERON.

              We the globe can compass soon,
              Swifter than the wand'ring moon.

  TITANIA.
    Come, my lord; and in our flight,
              Tell me how it came this night
              That I sleeping here was found
              With these mortals on the ground.
  
    Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.
    Exit an ATTENDANT
    We will, fair Queen, up to the mountain's top,
    And mark the musical confusion
    Of hounds and echo in conjunction.
 I was with Hercules and Cadmus once
    When in a wood of Crete they bay'd the bear
    With hounds of Sparta; never did I hear
    Such gallant chiding, for, besides the groves,
    The skies, the fountains, every region near
    Seem'd all one mutual cry.
 I never heard
    So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.

  THESEUS.
 My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
    So flew'd, so sanded; and their heads are hung
    With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
    Crook-knee'd and dew-lapp'd like Thessalian bulls;
    Slow in pursuit, but match'd in mouth like bells,
    Each under each.
  
    Judge when you hear.
 But, soft, what nymphs are these?
  EGEUS.

  THESEUS.

                           [Horns and shout within.
 The sleepers
                                     awake and kneel to THESEUS]
    Good-morrow, friends.
 Saint Valentine is past;
    Begin these wood-birds but to couple now?
  LYSANDER.

  THESEUS.

    They would have stol'n away, they would, Demetrius,
    Thereby to have defeated you and me:
    You of your wife, and me of my consent,
    Of my consent that she should be your wife.

  DEMETRIUS.
 My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
    Of this their purpose hither to this wood;
    And I in fury hither followed them,
    Fair Helena in fancy following me.
 To her, my lord,
    Was I betroth'd ere I saw Hermia.

  THESEUS.
 Fair lovers, you are fortunately met;
    Of this discourse we more will hear anon.

    Egeus, I will overbear your will;
    For in the temple, by and by, with us
    These couples shall eternally be knit.

    Come, Hippolyta.
 These things seem small and undistinguishable,
    Like far-off mountains turned into clouds.
 Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
    When every thing seems double.

  HELENA.
 So methinks;
    And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
    Mine own, and not mine own.
 And Hippolyta.

  LYSANDER.

    I have had a dream, past the wit of man to say what dream it was.

    Man is but an ass if he go about to expound this dream.
 Methought
    I was- there is no man can tell what.
 Methought I was, and
    methought I had, but man is but a patch'd fool, if he will offer
    to say what methought I had.
 The eye of man hath not heard, the
    ear of man hath not seen, man's hand is not able to taste, his
    tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream was.
 I
    will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream.
 It shall
    be call'd 'Bottom's Dream,' because it hath no bottom; and I will
    sing it in the latter end of a play, before the Duke.
                                              Exit




SCENE II.

Athens.
 Have you sent to Bottom's house? Is he come home yet?
  STARVELING.
 Out of doubt he is transported.
 It is not possible.

  FLUTE.
 No; he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in
    Athens.

  QUINCE.
 Yea, and the best person too; and he is a very paramour for
    a sweet voice.

  FLUTE.
 You must say 'paragon.
' A paramour is- God bless us!- A
    thing of naught.


                           Enter SNUG

  SNUG.
 Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple; and there is two
    or three lords and ladies more married.
 If our sport had gone  
    forward, we had all been made men.

  FLUTE.
 He would have deserved it: sixpence a day in Pyramus,
    or nothing.
 Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?
  QUINCE.
 Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!
  BOTTOM.
 Masters, I am to discourse wonders; but ask me not what;
    for if I tell you, I am not true Athenian.
 I will tell you
    everything, right as it fell out.
 Let us hear, sweet Bottom.

  BOTTOM.
 All that I will tell you is, that the
    Duke hath dined.
 Get your apparel together; good strings to your
    beards, new ribbons to your pumps; meet presently at the palace;
    every man look o'er his part; for the short and the long is, our
    play is preferr'd.
 In any case, let Thisby have clean linen; and  
    let not him that plays the lion pare his nails, for they shall
    hang out for the lion's claws.
 And, most dear actors, eat no
    onions nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath; and I do not
    doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy.
 No more words.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT V.
 The palace of THESEUS

Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, LORDS, and ATTENDANTS

  HIPPOLYTA.
 'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.

  THESEUS.
 More strange than true.
 I never may believe
    These antique fables, nor these fairy toys.

    One sees more devils than vast hell can hold;
    That is the madman.
 The lover, all as frantic,
    Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt.

    The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
    Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
    And as imagination bodies forth
    The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
    Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing  
    A local habitation and a name.

    Such tricks hath strong imagination
    That, if it would but apprehend some joy,
    It comprehends some bringer of that joy;
    Or in the night, imagining some fear,
    How easy is a bush suppos'd a bear?
  HIPPOLYTA.
 Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.

    Joy, gentle friends, joy and fresh days of love
    Accompany your hearts!
  LYSANDER.
 More than to us
    Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!
  THESEUS.
 Here, mighty Theseus.

  THESEUS.
 Say, what abridgment have you for this evening?
    What masque? what music? How shall we beguile
    The lazy time, if not with some delight?
  PHILOSTRATE.
 There is a brief how many sports are ripe;
    Make choice of which your Highness will see first.
 'The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
    By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.
'
    That is an old device, and it was play'd  
    When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.

    'A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus
    And his love Thisby; very tragical mirth.
'
    Merry and tragical! tedious and brief!
    That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow.

    How shall we find the concord of this discord?
  PHILOSTRATE.
 A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
    Which is as brief as I have known a play;
    But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
    Which makes it tedious; for in all the play
    There is not one word apt, one player fitted.
  
  THESEUS.
 What are they that do play it?
  PHILOSTRATE.
 And we will hear it.

  PHILOSTRATE.
 No, my noble lord,
    It is not for you.
 I have heard it over,
    And it is nothing, nothing in the world;
    Unless you can find sport in their intents,
    Extremely stretch'd and conn'd with cruel pain,
    To do you service.
 I will hear that play;
    For never anything can be amiss
    When simpleness and duty tender it.

                                                Exit PHILOSTRATE
  HIPPOLYTA.
 I love not to see wretchedness o'er-charged,
    And duty in his service perishing.
  
  HIPPOLYTA.

  THESEUS.
 The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.

    Our sport shall be to take what they mistake;
    And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
    Takes it in might, not merit.
 SO please your Grace, the Prologue is address'd.

  THESEUS.
 Let him approach.
 If we offend, it is with our good will.

    That you should think, we come not to offend,
    But with good will.
 To show our simple skill,
    That is the true beginning of our end.

    Consider then, we come but in despite.

    We do not come, as minding to content you,
    Our true intent is.
 All for your delight
    We are not here.
 This fellow doth not stand upon points.
  
  HIPPOLYTA.
 Indeed he hath play'd on this prologue like a child on a
    recorder- a sound, but not in government.

  THESEUS.
 Who is next?

          Enter, with a trumpet before them, as in dumb show,
            PYRAMUS and THISBY, WALL, MOONSHINE, and LION

  PROLOGUE.
 Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show;
    But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.

    This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present
    Wall, that vile Wall which did these lovers sunder;
    And through Walls chink, poor souls, they are content
    To whisper.
 At the which let no man wonder.

    This man, with lanthorn, dog, and bush of thorn,
    Presenteth Moonshine; for, if you will know,
    By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
    To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo.
  
    This grisly beast, which Lion hight by name,
    The trusty Thisby, coming first by night,
    Did scare away, or rather did affright;
    And as she fled, her mantle she did fall;
    Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.

    Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,
    And finds his trusty Thisby's mantle slain;
    Whereat with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
    He bravely broach'd his boiling bloody breast;
    And Thisby, tarrying in mulberry shade,
    His dagger drew, and died.
 For all the rest,
    Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain,
    At large discourse while here they do remain.

                               Exeunt PROLOGUE, PYRAMUS, THISBY,
                                             LION, and MOONSHINE
  THESEUS.
 I wonder if the lion be to speak.

  DEMETRIUS.
 No wonder, my lord: one lion may, when many asses do.

  WALL.
 Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?
  DEMETRIUS.
 It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard
    discourse, my lord.
 Pyramus draws near the wall; silence.

  PYRAMUS.

                                     [WALL holds up his fingers]
    Thanks, courteous wall.
 Jove shield thee well for this!
    But what see what see I? No Thisby do I see.
 Deceiving me is Thisby's
    cue.

    You shall see it will fall pat as I told you; yonder she comes.


                          Enter THISBY

  THISBY.
 O wall, full often hast thou beard my moans,
    For parting my fair Pyramus and me!
    My cherry lips have often kiss'd thy stones,
    Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.

  PYRAMUS.
 I see a voice; now will I to the chink,
    To spy an I can hear my Thisby's face.
  
    Thisby!
  THISBY.
 My love! thou art my love, I think.
 And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.
 Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.

  THISBY.
 As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.

  PYRAMUS.
 O, kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.
 I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.

  PYRAMUS.
 Tide life, tide death, I come without delay.

                                       Exeunt PYRAMUS and THISBY
  WALL.
           Exit WALL
  THESEUS.

  DEMETRIUS.
 This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.
  
  HIPPOLYTA.
 It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.

  THESEUS.
 If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves,
    they may pass for excellent men.
 Here come two noble beasts in, a
    man and a lion.
 You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear
    The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor,
    May now, perchance, both quake and tremble here,
    When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.

    Then know that I as Snug the joiner am
    A lion fell, nor else no lion's dam;
    For, if I should as lion come in strife
    Into this place, 'twere pity on my life.

  THESEUS.
 A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.
 The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw.
 This lion is a very fox for his valour.

  DEMETRIUS.

  THESEUS.
 His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valour; for
    the goose carries not the fox.
 It is well.

  THESEUS.
 He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the
    circumference.

  MOONSHINE.
 This lanthorn doth the horned moon present;
    Myself the Man i' th' Moon do seem to be.

  THESEUS.
 This is the greatest error of all the rest; the man should
    be put into the lantern.
 How is it else the man i' th' moon?
  DEMETRIUS.
 He dares not come there for the candle; for, you see, it
    is already in snuff.

  HIPPOLYTA.
 Would he would change!
  THESEUS.
 It appears, by his small light of discretion, that he is
    in the wane; but yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay
    the time.

  LYSANDER.
 Proceed, Moon.
 All that I have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn is  
    the moon; I, the Man i' th' Moon; this thorn-bush, my thorn-bush;
    and this dog, my dog.
 Why, all these should be in the lantern; for all these
    are in the moon.
 But silence; here comes Thisby.


                        Re-enter THISBY

  THISBY.
 This is old Ninny's tomb.
 Where is my love?
  LION.
 [Roaring] O-                           [THISBY runs off]
  DEMETRIUS.
 Well roar'd, Lion.

  THESEUS.

  HIPPOLYTA.
 Well shone, Moon.
 Truly, the moon shines with a good
    grace.
            [The LION tears THISBY'S Mantle, and exit]
  THESEUS.
 Well mous'd, Lion.

  LYSANDER.
 And so the lion vanish'd.

             But stay, O spite!
             But mark, poor knight,
           What dreadful dole is here!
             Eyes, do you see?
             How can it he?
           O dainty duck! O dear!
             Thy mantle good,
             What! stain'd with blood?
           Approach, ye Furies fell.
 This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would go
    near to make a man look sad.

  HIPPOLYTA.

  PYRAMUS.

             Come, tears, confound;
             Out, sword, and wound
           The pap of Pyramus;
             Ay, that left pap,
             Where heart doth hop.
               [Stabs himself]
           Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
             [Exit MOONSHINE]
           Now die, die, die, die, die.
 No die, but an ace, for him; for he is but one.
 Less than an ace, man; for he is dead; he is nothing.
 With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and yet
    prove an ass.

  HIPPOLYTA.
 How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisby comes back
    and finds her lover?  

                       Re-enter THISBY

  THESEUS.
 She will find him by starlight.

  DEMETRIUS.
 She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.
 And thus she moans, videlicet:-
  THISBY.
 Quite dumb?
               Dead, dead? A tomb
             Must cover thy sweet eyes.

               O Sisters Three,
               Come, come to me,
             With hands as pale as milk;
               Lay them in gore,
               Since you have shore
             With shears his thread of silk.

               Tongue, not a word.
      [Stabs herself]
               And farewell, friends;
               Thus Thisby ends;
             Adieu, adieu, adieu.
                         [Dies]
  THESEUS.
 Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.
 Ay, and Wall too.

  BOTTOM.
 Will it please you to see the Epilogue, or  
    to hear a Bergomask dance between two of our company?
  THESEUS.
 No epilogue, I pray you; for your play needs no excuse.

    Never excuse; for when the players are all dead there need none
    to be blamed.
 And so it is, truly; and very notably discharg'd.
     [A dance]
    The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.

    I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn,
    As much as we this night have overwatch'd.
 Sweet friends, to bed.

    A fortnight hold we this solemnity,
    In nightly revels and new jollity.
                    Exeunt

                     Enter PUCK with a broom

  PUCK.
      Now the hungry lion roars,
             And the wolf behowls the moon;  
             Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
             All with weary task fordone.

             And we fairies, that do run
             By the triple Hecate's team
             From the presence of the sun,
             Following darkness like a dream,
             Now are frolic.
 Not a mouse
             Shall disturb this hallowed house.

             I am sent with broom before,
             To sweep the dust behind the door.


         Enter OBERON and TITANIA, with all their train  

  OBERON.
    Through the house give glimmering light,
             By the dead and drowsy fire;
             Every elf and fairy sprite
             Hop as light as bird from brier;
             And this ditty, after me,
             Sing and dance it trippingly.

  TITANIA.


           [OBERON leading, the FAIRIES sing and dance]

  OBERON.

             To the best bride-bed will we,
             Which by us shall blessed be;
             And the issue there create
             Ever shall be fortunate.
  
             So shall all the couples three
             Ever true in loving be;
             And the blots of Nature's hand
             Shall not in their issue stand;
             Never mole, hare-lip, nor scar,
             Nor mark prodigious, such as are
             Despised in nativity,
             Shall upon their children be.

             With this field-dew consecrate,
             Every fairy take his gait,
             And each several chamber bless,
             Through this palace, with sweet peace;
             And the owner of it blest
             Ever shall in safety rest.
  
             And this weak and idle theme,
             No more yielding but a dream,
             Gentles, do not reprehend.

             And, as I am an honest Puck,
             If we have unearned luck
             Now to scape the serpent's tongue,
             We will make amends ere long;
             Else the Puck a liar call.

             So, good night unto you all.

             Give me your hands, if we be friends,
             And Robin shall restore amends.
                Exit

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

  Claudio, a young lord of Florence.

  Benedick, a Young lord of Padua.

  Leonato, Governor of Messina.

  Antonio, an old man, his brother.

  Balthasar, attendant on Don Pedro.

  Borachio, follower of Don John.

  Friar Francis.

  Dogberry, a Constable.

  Verges, a Headborough.

  A Sexton.

  A Boy.

  Margaret, waiting gentlewoman attending on Hero.


  Messengers, Watch, Attendants, etc.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.



ACT I.


Enter Leonato (Governor of Messina), Hero (his Daughter),
and Beatrice (his Niece), with a Messenger.
 I learn in this letter that Don Pedro of Arragon comes this
    night to Messina.

  Mess.
 He is very near by this.
 He was not three leagues off when I
    left him.

  Leon.
 How many gentlemen have you lost in this action?
  Mess.
 But few of any sort, and none of name.

  Leon.
 A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full
    numbers.
 Much deserv'd on his part, and equally rememb'red by Don
    Pedro.
 He hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing
    in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion.
 He hath indeed
    better bett'red expectation than you must expect of me to tell
    you how.
 He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much glad of it.
 I have already delivered him letters, and there appears much  
    joy in him; even so much that joy could not show itself modest
    enough without a badge of bitterness.

  Leon.
 Did he break out into tears?
  Mess.

  Leon.

  Leon.
 What is he that you ask for, niece?
  Hero.

  Mess.

  Beat.
 He set up his bills here in Messina and challeng'd Cupid at
    the flight, and my uncle's fool, reading the challenge,
    subscrib'd for Cupid and challeng'd him at the burbolt.

  Leon.

  Mess.
 You had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it.
 He is a
    very valiant trencherman; he hath an excellent stomach.
 And a good soldier too, lady.
 And a good soldier to a lady; but what is he to a lord?
  Mess.
 It is so indeed.

  Leon.
 They never meet but there's
    a skirmish of wit between them.
 Alas, he gets nothing by that! In our last conflict four of
    his five wits went halting off, and now is the whole man govern'd
    with one; so that if he have wit enough to keep himself warm, let
    him bear it for a difference between himself and his horse; for
    it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reasonable
    creature.
 Who is his companion now? He hath every month a new
    sworn brother.
  
  Mess.
 Is't possible?
  Beat.
 Very easily possible.
 I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.
 No.
 An he were, I would burn my study.
 But I pray you, who is
    his companion? Is there no young squarer now that will make a
    voyage with him to the devil?
  Mess.
 He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.

  Beat.
 God
    help the noble Claudio! If he have caught the Benedick, it will
    cost him a thousand pound ere 'a be cured.

  Mess.

  Beat.

  Leon.
 You will never run mad, niece.

  Beat.
 No, not till a hot January.

  Mess.


  Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, Balthasar, and John the Bastard.

  
  Pedro.
 Good Signior Leonato, are you come to meet your trouble? The
    fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it.
 You embrace your charge too willingly.

  Leon.
 Her mother hath many times told me so.
 Were you in doubt, sir, that you ask'd her?
  Leon.
 Signior Benedick, no; for then were you a child.

  Pedro.
 You have it full, Benedick.
 We may guess by this what you
    are, being a man.
 Truly the lady fathers herself.
 I wonder that you will still be talking, Signior Benedick.

    Nobody marks you.

  Bene.
 What, my dear Lady Disdain! are you yet living?
  Beat.
 Then is courtesy a turncoat.
 But it is certain I am loved of
    all ladies, only you excepted; and I would I could find in my
    heart that I had not a hard heart, for truly I love none.

  Beat.
 I thank God and my cold blood, I am of
    your humour for that.
 I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow
    than a man swear he loves me.

  Beat.

  Bene.
 Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.
 A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.
 I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and so good a
    continuer.
 But keep your way, a God's name! I have done.

  Beat.
 I know you of old.

  Pedro.
 That is the sum of all, Leonato.
 I dare swear he is no
    hypocrite, but prays from his heart.

  Leon.
 If you swear, my lord, you shall not be forsworn.
 [To Don
    John] Let me bid you welcome, my lord.
 Being reconciled to the
    Prince your brother, I owe you all duty.
 I thank you.
 I am not of many words, but I thank you.

                            Exeunt.

  Claud.
 Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato?
  Bene.
 I noted her not, but I look'd on her.

  Claud.
 Is she not a modest young lady?
  Bene.
 Do you question me, as an honest man should do, for my simple
    true judgment? or would you have me speak after my custom, as
    being a professed tyrant to their sex?
  Claud.
 I pray thee speak in sober judgment.

  Bene.

    Only this commendation I can afford her, that were she other
    than she is, she were unhandsome, and being no other but as she  
    is, I do not like her.

  Claud.
 Thou thinkest I am in sport.

  Bene.
 Would you buy her, that you enquire after her?
  Claud.
 Can the world buy such a jewel?
  Bene.
 Yea, and a case to put it into.
 But speak you this with a sad
    brow? or do you play the flouting Jack, to tell us Cupid is a
    good hare-finder and Vulcan a rare carpenter? Come, in what key
    shall a man take you to go in the song?
  Claud.
 In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I look'd on.

  Bene.
 I can see yet without spectacles, and I see no such matter.

    There's her cousin, an she were not possess'd with a fury,exceeds
    her as much in beauty as the first of May doth the last of
    December.
 I would scarce trust myself, though I had sworn the
    contrary, if Hero would be my wife.

  Bene.


    Look! Don Pedro is returned to seek you.
 I would your Grace would constrain me to tell.

  Pedro.
 I charge thee on thy allegiance.

  Bene.
 You hear, Count Claudio.
 I can be secret as a dumb man, I
    would have you think so; but, on my allegiance--mark you this-on
    my allegiance! he is in love.
 Mark how short his answer is: With Hero, Leonato's short
    daughter.

  Claud.
 If this were so, so were it utt'red.

  Bene.
 Like the old tale, my lord: 'It is not so, nor 'twas not so;
    but indeed, God forbid it should be so!'
  Claud.
 If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be
    otherwise.

  Claud.

  Pedro.

  Claud.
 And, by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I spoke mine.

  Claud.
 That I love her, I feel.
 That she is worthy, I know.

  Bene.
 That I neither feel how she should be loved, nor know how she
    should be worthy, is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me.

  Pedro.
 Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of
    beauty.

  Bene.
 That a woman conceived me, I thank her; that she brought me
    up, I likewise give her most humble thanks; but that I will have
    a rechate winded in my forehead, or hang my bugle in an invisible
    baldrick, all women shall pardon me.
 I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.
 Prove that ever I lose more blood with love than I will get
    again with drinking, pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker's pen
    and hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the sign of
    blind Cupid.

  Pedro.
 Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou wilt
    prove a notable argument.

  Bene.
 If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me; and
    he that hits me, let him be clapp'd on the shoulder and call'd
    Adam.

  Pedro.
 Well, as time shall try.

    'In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.
'
  Claud.
 If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.
 Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in Venice, thou
    wilt quake for this shortly.
 I look for an earthquake too then.
 I have almost matter enough in me for such an embassage; and
    so I commit you--
  Claud.
 To the tuition of God.
 Nay, mock not, mock not.
 And so I leave you.
                   Exit.

  Claud.

  Pedro.
 Teach it but how,
    And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn
    Any hard lesson that may do thee good.
 Hath Leonato any son, my lord?  
  Pedro.
 No child but Hero; she's his only heir.

    Dost thou affect her, Claudio?
  Claud.
O my lord,
    When you went onward on this ended action,
    I look'd upon her with a soldier's eye,
    That lik'd, but had a rougher task in hand
    Than to drive liking to the name of love;
    But now I am return'd and that war-thoughts
    Have left their places vacant, in their rooms
    Come thronging soft and delicate desires,
    All prompting me how fair young Hero is,
    Saying I lik'd her ere I went to wars.

  Pedro.
 Thou wilt be like a lover presently
    And tire the hearer with a book of words.

    If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it,
    And I will break with her and with her father,
    And thou shalt have her.
 How sweetly you do minister to love,
    That know love's grief by his complexion!  
    But lest my liking might too sudden seem,
    I would have salv'd it with a longer treatise.

    Look, what will serve is fit.
 'Tis once, thou lovest,
    And I will fit thee with the remedy.

    I know we shall have revelling to-night.

    Then after to her father will I break,
    And the conclusion is, she shall be thine.

    In practice let us put it presently.
                 Exeunt.





Scene II.

A room in Leonato's house.


Enter [at one door] Leonato and [at another door, Antonio] an old man,
brother to Leonato.
 How now, brother? Where is my cousin your son? Hath he
    provided this music?
  Ant.
 Are they good?
  Ant.
 As the event stamps them; but they have a good cover, they
    show well outward.
 The Prince and Count Claudio, walking in a
    thick-pleached alley in mine orchard, were thus much overheard by
    a man of mine: the Prince discovered to Claudio that he loved my
    niece your daughter and meant to acknowledge it this night in a
    dance, and if he found her accordant, he meant to take the
    present time by the top and instantly break with you of it.
 Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?
  Ant.
 I will send for him, and question him
    yourself.

  Leon.
 No, no.
 Go you and
    tell her of it.
]

         [Enter Antonio's Son with a Musician, and others.
]

    [To the Son] Cousin, you know what you have to do.

    --[To the Musician] O, I cry you mercy, friend.
 Go you with me,
    and I will use your skill.
--Good cousin, have a care this busy
    time.
                                                Exeunt.





Scene III.

Another room in Leonato's house.
]

Enter Sir John the Bastard and Conrade, his companion.


  Con.
 There is no measure in the occasion that breeds; therefore
    the sadness is without limit.

  Con.
 You should hear reason.

  John.
 And when I have heard it, what blessings brings it?
  Con.
 If not a present remedy, at least a patient sufferance.

  John.

  Con.
 Yea, but you must not make the full show of this till you may
    do it without controlment.
 It is needful that you frame the
    season for your own harvest.
 I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace,
    and it better fits my blood to be disdain'd of all than to
    fashion a carriage to rob love from any.
 In this, though I cannot
    be said to be a flattering honest man, it must not be denied but
    I am a plain-dealing villain.
 If I had my mouth, I would bite; if I had my liberty, I
    would do my liking.
 In the meantime let me be that I am, and seek
    not to alter me.
 Can you make no use of your discontent?
  John.
 I make all use of it, for I use it only.


                       Enter Borachio.
 Will it serve for any model to build mischief on?
    What is he for a fool that betroths himself to unquietness?
  Bora.
 Who? the most exquisite Claudio?
  Bora.
 Even he.
 A proper squire! And who? and who? which way looks he?
  Bora.
 Marry, on Hero, the daughter and heir of Leonato.

  John.
 Being entertain'd for a perfumer, as I was smoking a musty
    room, comes me the Prince and Claudio, hand in hand in sad
    conference.

  John.
 Come, come, let us thither.
 That young start-up hath all the glory of my
    overthrow.

  John.
 Their cheer is the greater that  
    I am subdued.
 Would the cook were o' my mind! Shall we go prove
    what's to be done?
  Bora.
 We'll wait upon your lordship.

                                                         Exeunt.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 Scene I.

A hall in Leonato's house.


Enter Leonato, [Antonio] his Brother, Hero his Daughter,
and Beatrice his Niece, and a Kinsman; [also Margaret and Ursula].


  Leon.
 Was not Count John here at supper?
  Ant.
 I saw him not.
 He is of a very melancholy disposition.

  Beat.
 The one is too like an image and says
    nothing, and the other too like my lady's eldest son, evermore
    tattling.

  Leon.
 With a good leg and a good foot, uncle, and money enough in
    his purse, such a man would win any woman in the world--if 'a
    could get her good will.
 By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband if
    thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.
 Too curst is more than curst.
 So, by being too curst, God will send you no horns.

  Beat.
 Just, if he send me no husband; for the which blessing I am
    at him upon my knees every morning and evening.
 I had rather lie in
    the woollen!
  Leon.

  Beat.
 What should I do with him? dress him in my apparel and make
    him my waiting gentlewoman? He that hath a beard is more than a
    youth, and he that hath no beard is less than a man; and he that
    is more than a youth is not for me; and he that is less than a
    man, I am not for him.

  Leon.
 No; but to the gate, and there will the devil meet me like an
    old cuckold with horns on his head, and say 'Get you to heaven,
    Beatrice, get you to heaven.
 Here's no place for you maids.

    He shows me where the bachelors sit, and there live we as merry
    as the day is long.

  Ant.
 Yes faith.
 It is my cousin's duty to make cursy and say,
    'Father, as it please you.
' But yet for all that, cousin, let him
    be a handsome fellow, or else make another cursy, and say,
    'Father, as it please me.
 Well, niece, I hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.
 Not till God make men of some other metal than earth.
 Would
    it not grieve a woman to be overmaster'd with a piece of valiant
    dust? to make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl?
    No, uncle, I'll none.

  Leon.
 Daughter, remember what I told you.
 If the Prince do solicit
    you in that kind, you know your answer.
 The fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be not wooed
    in good time.
 If the Prince be too important, tell him there is
    measure in everything, and so dance out the answer.
 For, hear me,  
    Hero: wooing, wedding, and repenting is as a Scotch jig, a
    measure, and a cinque-pace: the first suit is hot and hasty like
    a Scotch jig--and full as fantastical; the wedding, mannerly
    modest, as a measure, full of state and ancientry; and then comes
    Repentance and with his bad legs falls into the cinque-pace
    faster and faster, till he sink into his grave.
 Cousin, you apprehend passing shrewdly.

  Beat.

  Leon.
 The revellers are ent'ring, brother.

                                                 [Exit Antonio.
 After them enter]
       Don John [and Borachio (without masks), who stand aside
                 and look on during the dance].


  Pedro.
 So you walk softly and look sweetly and say nothing,
    I am yours for the walk; and especially when I walk away.

  Pedro.

  Pedro.
 And when please you to say so?
  Hero.
 My visor is Philemon's roof; within the house is Jove.
 Why then, your visor should be thatch'd.
]
  Balth.

  Balth.
 Which is one?
  Marg.
 I say my prayers aloud.

  Balth.
 The hearers may cry Amen.

  Marg.

  Marg.
 No more words.
 The clerk is answered.
 You are Signior Antonio.
 At a word, I am not.

  Urs.
 To tell you true, I counterfeit him.

  Urs.
 You could never do him so ill-well unless you were the very
    man.
 You are he, you are he!
  Ant.
 At a word, I am not.
 Come, come, do you think I do not know you by your excellent
    wit? Can virtue hide itself? Go to, mum you are he.
 Graces will
    appear, and there's an end.
              [ They step aside.
 Will you not tell me who told you so?
  Bene.
 No, you shall pardon me.
 Not now.
 That I was disdainful, and that I had my good wit out of the
    'Hundred Merry Tales.
' Well, this was Signior Benedick that said
    so.

  Bene.
 I am sure you know him well enough.

  Bene.

  Beat.
 Did he never make you laugh?  
  Bene.
 Why, he is the Prince's jester, a very dull fool.
 Only his
    gift is in devising impossible slanders.
 None but libertines
    delight in him; and the commendation is not in his wit, but in
    his villany; for he both pleases men and angers them, and then
    they laugh at him and beat him.
 I am sure he is in the fleet.

  Bene.
 When I know the gentleman, I'll tell him what you say.

  Beat.
 Do, do.
 He'll but break a comparison or two on me; which
    peradventure, not marked or not laugh'd at, strikes him into
    melancholy; and then there's a partridge wing saved, for the fool
    will eat no supper that night.

                                                        [Music.
 In every good thing.

  Beat.
 Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at the next
    turning.

        Dance.

  Bora.

  John.
 Are you not Signior Benedick?
  Claud.
 You know me well.
 Signior, you are very near my brother in his love.
 He is
    enamour'd on Hero.
 I pray you dissuade him from her; she is no
    equal for his birth.

  Bora.

  John.
 Come, let us to the banquet.

                                          Exeunt.
 Manet Claudio.

  Claud.

                                                      [Unmasks.
]
    'Tis certain so.

    Friendship is constant in all other things
    Save in the office and affairs of love.

    Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues;
    Let every eye negotiate for itself  
    And trust no agent; for beauty is a witch
    Against whose charms faith melteth into blood.
 Farewell therefore Hero!

                  Enter Benedick [unmasked].


  Bene.
 Count Claudio?
  Claud.

  Bene.
 Whither?
  Bene.
 What
    fashion will you wear the garland of? about your neck, like an
    usurer's chain? or under your arm, like a lieutenant's scarf? You
    must wear it one way, for the Prince hath got your Hero.
 I wish him joy of her.

  Bene.
 So they sell
    bullocks.
 I pray you leave me.
  
  Bene.

  Claud.
 If it will not be, I'll leave you.
                Exit.

  Bene.
 But,
    that my Lady Beatrice should know me, and not know me! The
    Prince's fool! Ha! it may be I go under that title because I am
    merry.
 I am not so
    reputed.
 Well,
    I'll be revenged as I may.


                         Enter Don Pedro.


  Pedro.
 I told him, and I
    think I told him true, that your Grace had got the good will of
    this young lady, and I off'red him my company to a willow tree,
    either to make him a garland, as being forsaken, or to bind him
    up a rod, as being worthy to be whipt.
 To be whipt? What's his fault?
  Bene.
 The flat transgression of a schoolboy who, being overjoyed
    with finding a bird's nest, shows it his companion, and he steals
    it.

  Bene.
 Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the
    garland too; for the garland he might have worn himself, and the
    rod he might have bestowed on you, who, as I take it, have stol'n
    his bird's nest.

  Bene.
 If their singing answer your saying, by my faith you say
    honestly.
 The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you.
 The gentleman that
    danc'd with her told her she is much wrong'd by you.

  Bene.
 She told me, not
    thinking I had been myself, that I was the Prince's jester, that
    I was duller than a great thaw; huddling jest upon jest with such  
    impossible conveyance upon me that I stood like a man at a mark,
    with a whole army shooting at me.
 She speaks poniards, and every
    word stabs.
 I would not marry her though she were endowed with all that
    Adam had left him before he transgress'd.
 She would have made
    Hercules have turn'd spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make
    the fire too.
 You shall find her the
    infernal Ate in good apparel.


  Pedro.
 Look, here she comes.
 Will your Grace command me any service to the world's end? I
    will go on the slightest errand now to the Antipodes that you can
    devise to send me on; I will fetch you a toothpicker now from the  
    furthest inch of Asia; bring you the length of Prester John's
    foot; fetch you a hair off the great Cham's beard; do you any
    embassage to the Pygmies--rather than hold three words'
    conference with this harpy.
 You have no employment for me?
  Pedro.
 None, but to desire your good company.

  Bene.
 O God, sir, here's a dish I love not! I cannot endure my Lady
    Tongue.
 Come, lady, come; you have lost the heart of Signior
    Benedick.
 Marry, once before he won
    it of me with false dice; therefore your Grace may well say I
    have lost it.

  Pedro.
 You have put him down, lady; you have put him down.

  Pedro.
 Why, how now, Count? Wherefore are you sad?
  Claud.
 How then? sick?  
  Claud.
 The Count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well; but
    civil count--civil as an orange, and something of that jealous
    complexion.
 I' faith, lady, I think your blazon to be true; though I'll
    be sworn, if he be so, his conceit is false.
 His
    Grace hath made the match, and all grace say Amen to it!
  Beat.

  Claud.
 Lady, as you are mine, I am yours.

    I give away myself for you and dote upon the exchange.

  Beat.

  Pedro.
 In faith, lady, you have a merry heart.

  Beat.
 Yea, my lord; I thank it, poor fool, it keeps on the windy
    side of care.
 My cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her  
    heart.
 Good Lord, for alliance! Thus goes every one to the world but
    I, and I am sunburnt.
 Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.

  Beat.
 I would rather have one of your father's getting.
 But I beseech your
    Grace pardon me.
 I was born to speak all mirth and no matter.

  Beat.
 No, sure, my lord, my mother cried; but then there was a star
    danc'd, and under that was I born.
 Niece, will you look to those things I told you of?
  Beat.
    Exit.
 By my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.
  
  Leon.
 There's little of the melancholy element in her, my lord.
 She
    is never sad but when she sleeps, and not ever sad then; for I
    have heard my daughter say she hath often dreamt of unhappiness
    and wak'd herself with laughing.

  Pedro.
 She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.

  Leon.
 O, by no means! She mocks all her wooers out of suit.

  Pedro.

  Leon.
 O Lord, my lord! if they were but a week married, they would
    talk themselves mad.

  Pedro.
 County Claudio, when mean you to go to church?
  Claud.
 To-morrow, my lord.
 Time goes on crutches till love have all
    his rites.

  Leon.
 Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence a just
    sevennight; and a time too brief too, to have all things answer
    my mind.
 I would fain have  
    it a match, and I doubt not but to fashion it if you three will
    but minister such assistance as I shall give you direction.

  Claud.

  Pedro.

  Pedro.
 And Benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that I know.

    Thus far can I praise him: he is of a noble strain, of approved
    valour, and confirm'd honesty.
 If we can do this,
    Cupid is no longer an archer; his glory shall be ours, for we are
    the only love-gods.


  John.
 It is so.

  Bora.
 Yea, my lord; but I can cross it.
 Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be med'cinable to me.

    I am sick in displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes athwart his
    affection ranges evenly with mine.
 How canst thou cross this
    marriage?
  Bora.

  John.

  Bora.
 I think I told your lordship, a year since, how much I am in
    the favour of Margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to Hero.

  John.
 I remember.

  Bora.
 I can, at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her
    to look out at her lady's chamber window.
 What life is in that to be the death of this marriage?
  Bora.
 What proof shall I make of that?
  Bora.
 Look you for any other issue?
  John.
 They will scarcely believe
    this without trial.

  John.
 Be cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a
    thousand ducats.

  Bora.
 Be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning shall not
    shame me.

  John.
 I will presently go learn their day of marriage.

                                                         Exeunt.

Leonato's orchard.


Enter Benedick alone.


  Bene.
]

  Boy.
 Signior?
  Bene.

  Boy.
 I am here already, sir.

  Bene.
 I know that, but I would have thee hence and here again.
) I do much wonder that one man, seeing how much
    another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviours to love,
    will, after he hath laugh'd at such shallow follies in others,
    become the argument of his own scorn by falling in love; and such
    a man is Claudio.
 I have known when there was no music with him
    but the drum and the fife; and now had he rather hear the tabor
    and the pipe.
 I have known when he would have walk'd ten mile
    afoot to see a good armour; and now will he lie ten nights awake  
    carving the fashion of a new doublet.
 May I be so converted and see with
    these eyes? I cannot tell; I think not.
 I will not be sworn but
    love may transform me to an oyster; but I'll take my oath on it,
    till he have made an oyster of me he shall never make me such a
    fool.
 Rich she shall
    be, that's certain; wise, or I'll none; virtuous, or I'll never
    cheapen her; fair, or I'll never look on her; mild, or come not
    near me; noble, or not I for an angel; of good discourse, an
    excellent musician, and her hair shall be of what colour it
    please God.
 Ha, the Prince and Monsieur Love! I will hide me in
    the arbour.
]

              Enter Don Pedro, Leonato, Claudio.

  
  Pedro.
 Come, shall we hear this music?
  Claud.
 See you where Benedick hath hid himself?
  Claud.
 O, very well, my lord.
 The music ended,
    We'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.


                   Enter Balthasar with Music.
 Come, Balthasar, we'll hear that song again.
 It is the witness still of excellency
    To put a strange face on his own perfection.

    I pray thee sing, and let me woo no more.

  Balth.
 Nay, pray thee come;  
    Or if thou wilt hold longer argument,
    Do it in notes.

  Balth.
 Note this before my notes:
    There's not a note of mine that's worth the noting.

  Pedro.
 Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks!
    Note notes, forsooth, and nothing!                  [Music.
]
  Bene.
 [aside] Now divine air! Now is his soul ravish'd! Is it not
    strange that sheep's guts should hale souls out of men's bodies?
    Well, a horn for my money, when all's done.

                                              [Balthasar sings.

  Balth.
 And an ill singer, my lord.
 Ha, no, no, faith! Thou sing'st well enough for a shift.
 I had as live have heard the night raven, come what
    plague could have come after it.

  Pedro.
 Yea, marry.
 Dost thou hear, Balthasar? I pray thee get us
    some excellent music; for to-morrow night we would have it at the
    Lady Hero's chamber window.

  Balth.
 The best I can, my lord.

  Pedro.

    Come hither, Leonato.
 What was it you told me of to-day? that
    your niece Beatrice was in love with Signior Benedick?
  Claud.

    --I did never think that lady would have loved any man.

  Leon.

  Bene.
 [aside] Is't possible? Sits the wind in that corner?
  Leon.
 By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell what to think of it, but
    that she loves him with an enraged affection.
 May be she doth but counterfeit.
 Faith, like enough.
 O God, counterfeit? There was never counterfeit of passion
    came so near the life of passion as she discovers it.

  Pedro.
 Why, what effects of passion shows she?
  Claud.
 [aside] Bait the hook well! This fish will bite.
 She did indeed.

  Pedro.
 How, how, I pray you? You amaze me.
 I would have thought her
    spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection.

  Leon.
 I would have sworn it had, my lord--especially against
    Benedick.

  Bene.
 Knavery cannot, sure, hide himself in such
    reverence.

  Claud.
 Hold it up.

  Pedro.
 Hath she made her affection known to Benedick?
  Leon.
 No, and swears she never will.
 'Tis true indeed.
 So your daughter says.
 'Shall I,' says
    she, 'that have so oft encount'red him with scorn, write to him
    that I love him?'"
  Leon.
 My daughter tells us
    all.

  Claud.
 That.
 'I measure him,' says she, 'by my own
    spirit; for I should flout him if he writ to me.
 She doth indeed; my daughter says so.
 And the ecstasy hath so
    much overborne her that my daughter is sometime afeard she will
    do a desperate outrage to herself.
 It is very true.

  Pedro.
 It were good that Benedick knew of it by some other, if she
    will not discover it.

  Claud.
 To what end? He would make but a sport of it and torment the
    poor lady worse.

  Pedro.
 An he should, it were an alms to hang him! She's an
    excellent sweet lady, and (out of all suspicion) she is virtuous.
 And she is exceeding wise.
 In everything but in loving Benedick.

  Leon.
 I am sorry
    for her, as I have just cause, being her uncle and her guardian.

  Pedro.

  Leon.
 Hero thinks surely she will die; for she says she will die
    if he love her not, and she will die ere she make her love known,
    and she will die, if he woo her, rather than she will bate one
    breath of her accustomed crossness.

  Pedro.
 If she should make tender of her love, 'tis
    very possible he'll scorn it; for the man (as you know all) hath
    a contemptible spirit.

  Claud.
 He is a very proper man.
 He hath indeed a good outward happiness.

  Claud.
 Before God! and in my mind, very wise.
 He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.

  Pedro.
 As Hector, I assure you; and in the managing of quarrels you
    may say he is wise, for either he avoids them with great
    discretion, or undertakes them with a most Christianlike fear.

  Leon.
 If he do fear God, 'a must necessarily keep peace.
 If he
    break the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and
    trembling.

  Pedro.
 And so will he do; for the man doth fear God, howsoever it
    seems not in him by some large jests he will make.
 Well, I am
    sorry for your niece.
 Never tell him, my lord.

  Leon.

  Pedro.
 Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter.
 Let it
    cool the while.

  Leon.
 My lord, will you .
walk? Dinner is ready.

                                               [They walk away.

  Pedro.
 The sport will be, when they
    hold one an opinion of another's dotage, and no such matter.
 Let us send her to call him in to dinner.

                       Exeunt [Don Pedro, Claudio, and Leonato].
 The conference was sadly borne; they
    have the truth of this from Hero; they seem to pity the lady.
 Love me? Why, it
    must be requited.
 I hear how I am censur'd.
 They say I will bear
    myself proudly if I perceive the love come from her.
 They say too
    that she will rather die than give any sign of affection.
 I did
    never think to marry.
 I must not seem proud.
 But doth not the appetite
    alters? A man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot endure
    in his age.
 Shall quips and sentences and these paper bullets of
    the brain awe a man from the career of his humour? No, the world
    must be peopled.


    Here comes Beatrice.
 By this day, she's a fair lady! I do spy
    some marks of love in her.
 Against my will I am sent to bid You come in to dinner.
 You have no stomach, signior.
 Ha! 'Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.
'
    There's a double meaning in that.
' That's as much as to
    say, 'Any pains that I take for you is as easy as thanks.
' If I
    do not take pity of her, I am a villain; if I do not love her, I
    am a Jew.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT III.

Leonato's orchard.
 Good Margaret, run thee to the parlour.

    Whisper her ear and tell her, I and Ursley
    Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse
    Is all of her.
 Say that thou overheard'st us;
    And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
    Where honeysuckles, ripened by the sun,
    Forbid the sun to enter--like favourites,
    Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
    Against that power that bred it.
 There will she hide her
    To listen our propose.
 I'll make her come, I warrant you, presently.
    [Exit.
 Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come,
    As we do trace this alley up and down,
    Our talk must only be of Benedick.
  
    When I do name him, let it be thy part
    To praise him more than ever man did merit.

    My talk to thee must be how Benedick
    Is sick in love with Beatrice.


                   [Enter Beatrice.
]

    Now begin;
    For look where Beatrice like a lapwing runs
    Close by the ground, to hear our conference.


               [Beatrice hides in the arbour].


  Urs.

    So angle we for Beatrice, who even now
    Is couched in the woodbine coverture.
  
    Fear you not my part of the dialogue.

  Hero.

                                     [They approach the arbour.

    I know her spirits are as coy and wild
    As haggards of the rock.

  Urs.
 So says the Prince, and my new-trothed lord.

  Urs.
 They did entreat me to acquaint her of it;
    But I persuaded them, if they lov'd Benedick,
    To wish him wrestle with affection
    And never to let Beatrice know of it.
 O god of love! I know he doth deserve
    As much as may be yielded to a man:  
    But Nature never fram'd a woman's heart
    Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice.

    Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
    Misprizing what they look on; and her wit
    Values itself so highly that to her
    All matter else seems weak.
 Sure I think so;
    And therefore certainly it were not good
    She knew his love, lest she'll make sport at it.

  Hero.
 Why, you speak truth.
 I never yet saw man,
    How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featur'd,
    But she would spell him backward.
 If fair-fac'd,
    She would swear the gentleman should be her sister;
    If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antic,
    Made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed;
    If low, an agate very vilely cut;
    If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds;
    If silent, why, a block moved with none.
  
    So turns she every man the wrong side out
    And never gives to truth and virtue that
    Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.
 Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.
 No, not to be so odd, and from all fashions,
    As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable.

    But who dare tell her so? If I should speak,
    She would mock me into air; O, she would laugh me
    Out of myself, press me to death with wit!
    Therefore let Benedick, like cover'd fire,
    Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly.

    It were a better death than die with mocks,
    Which is as bad as die with tickling.

  Urs.

  Hero.
 No; rather I will go to Benedick
    And counsel him to fight against his passion.
 O, do not do your cousin such a wrong!  
    She cannot be so much without true judgment
    (Having so swift and excellent a wit
    As she is priz'd to have) as to refuse
    So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.

  Hero.
 His excellence did earn it ere he had it.
 Why, every day to-morrow! Come, go in.

    I'll show thee some attires, and have thy counsel
    Which is the best to furnish me to-morrow.

                                               [They walk away.

  Hero.
 If it prove so, then loving goes by haps;
    Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.
]

  Beat.
 What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true?
    Stand I condemn'd for pride and scorn so much?
    Contempt, farewell! and maiden pride, adieu!
    No glory lives behind the back of such.

    And, Benedick, love on; I will requite thee,
    Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand.
                    Exit.





Scene II.

A room in Leonato's house.


Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, and Leonato.

  Claud.
 I'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll vouchsafe me.
 Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your
    marriage as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear
    it.
 I will only be bold with Benedick for his company; for, from
    the crown of his head to the sole of his foot, he is all mirth.

    He hath twice or thrice cut Cupid's bowstring, and the little
    hangman dare not shoot at him.
 He hath a heart as sound as a
    bell; and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks,
    his tongue speaks.
 Gallants, I am not as I have been.
 Methinks you are sadder.

  Claud.

  Pedro.
 Hang him, truant! There's no true drop of blood in him to be
    truly touch'd with love.
  
  Pedro.

  Bene.
 Hang it!
  Claud.
 You must hang it first and draw it afterwards.

  Pedro.
 Where is but a humour or a worm.
 Yet say I he is in love.

  Pedro.
 There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be a fancy
    that he hath to strange disguises; as to be a Dutchman to-day, a
    Frenchman to-morrow; or in the shape of two countries at once, as
    a German from the waist downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from
    the hip upward, no doublet.

  Claud.
 If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing
    old signs.
 What should that bode?
  Pedro.
 No, but the barber's man hath been seen with him, and the
     old ornament of his cheek hath already stuff'd tennis balls.

  Leon.
 Indeed he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.
  
  Pedro.
 Nay, 'a rubs himself with civet.
 Can you smell him out by
    that?
  Claud.
 The greatest note of it is his melancholy.

  Claud.
 And when was he wont to wash his face?
  Pedro.
 Yea, or to paint himself? for the which I hear what they say
    of him.

  Claud.
 Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is new-crept into a
    lutestring, and now govern'd by stops.

  Pedro.
 Indeed that tells a heavy tale for him.
 Conclude, conclude,
    he is in love.

  Claud.
 That would I know too.
 I warrant, one that knows him not.

  Claud.
 She shall be buried with her face upwards.

  Bene.
 Old signior, walk
    aside with me.
 I have studied eight or nine wise words to speak
    to you, which these hobby-horses must not hear.
 'Tis even so.
 Hero and Margaret have by this played their
    parts with Beatrice, and then the two bears will not bite one
    another when they meet.


                 Enter John the Bastard.


  John.
 My lord and brother, God save you.

  Pedro.

  John.
 If your leisure serv'd, I would speak with you.
 If it please you.
 [to Claudio] Means your lordship to be married tomorrow?
  Pedro.
 You know he does.

  John.

  Claud.
 If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.

  John.
 Let that appear hereafter, and
    aim better at me by that I now will manifest.
 Why, what's the matter?
  John.
 I came hither to tell you, and, circumstances short'ned (for
    she has been too long a-talking of), the lady is disloyal.

  Claud.
 Who? Hero?
  John.

  Claud.
 I could say
    she were worse; think you of a worse title, and I will fit her to
    it.
 Go but with me to-night, you
    shall see her chamber window ent'red, even the night before her
    wedding day.

  Claud.
 I will not think it.

  John.
 If you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you
    know.
 If you will follow me, I will show you enough; and when you
    have seen more and heard more, proceed accordingly.
  
  Claud.
 If I see anything to-night why I should not marry her
    to-morrow, in the congregation where I should wed, there will I
    shame her.

  Pedro.
 And, as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join with
    thee to disgrace her.

  John.
 I will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses.

    Bear it coldly but till midnight, and let the issue show itself.

  Pedro.
 O mischief strangely thwarting!
  John.





Scene III.

A street.


  Dog.

  Dog.
 Nay, that were a punishment too good for them if they should
    have any allegiance in them, being chosen for the Prince's watch.

  Dog.
 First, who think you the most desartless man to be constable?
  1.
 Hugh Oatcake, sir, or George Seacoal; for they can write
    and read.

  Dog.
 Come hither, neighbour Seacoal.
 To be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune, but
    to write and read comes by nature.
 Watch.
 Both which, Master Constable--
  Dog.
 I knew it would be your answer.
 You are thought here to be the most  
    senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch.
 This is your charge: you shall comprehend
    all vagrom men; you are to bid any man stand, in the Prince's
    name.

  2.
 How if 'a will not stand?
  Dog.
 Why then, take no note of him, but let him go, and presently
    call the rest of the watch together and thank God you are rid of
    a knave.

  Verg.
 True, and they are to meddle with none but the Prince's
    subjects.

  2.
 Watch.
 We know what belongs to
    a watch.

  Dog.
 Why, you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman, for I
    cannot see how sleeping should offend.
 Only have a care that your
    bills be not stol'n.
 Well, you are to call at all the alehouses
    and bid those that are drunk get them to bed.
  
  2.
 Watch.
 Why then, let them alone till they are sober.

  2.
 If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your
    office, to be no true man; and for such kind of men, the less you
    meddle or make with them, why, the more your honesty.

  2.
 If we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay hands on
    him?
  Dog.
 Truly, by your office you may; but I think they that touch
    pitch will be defil'd.
 The most peaceable way for you, if you do
    take a thief, is to let him show himself what he is, and steal
    out of your company.

  Dog.
 Truly, I would not hang a dog by my will, much more a man who
    hath any honesty in him.

  Verg.
 If you hear a child cry in the night, you must call to the
    nurse and bid her still it.
 Watch.
 How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?  
  Dog.
 'Tis very true.
 This is the end of the charge: you, constable, are to present
    the Prince's own person.

  Verg.
 Nay, by'r lady, that I think 'a cannot.

  Dog.
 Five shillings to one on't with any man that knows the
    statutes, he may stay him! Marry, not without the Prince be
    willing; for indeed the watch ought to offend no man, and it is
    an offence to stay a man against his will.

  Dog.
 Keep your fellows' counsels and
    your own, and good night.

  Dog.
 One word more, honest neighbours.
 Adieu.
 Be vigitant, I beseech
    you.
                           Exeunt [Dogberry and Verges].
 What, Conrade!
  2.
 Watch.
 [aside] Peace! stir not!
  Bora.
 Conrade, I say!
  Con.
 Mass, and my elbow itch'd! I thought there would a scab
    follow.

  Bora.
 Stand thee close then under this penthouse, for it drizzles
    rain, and I will, like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.

  2.
 Watch.
 [aside] Some treason, masters.
 Yet stand close.
 Therefore know I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats.

  Con.
 Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villany
    should be so rich; for when rich villains have need of poor ones,  
    poor ones may make what price they will.

  Con.

  Bora.
 That shows thou art unconfirm'd.
 Thou knowest that the
    fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man.
 Yes, it is apparel.

  Bora.
 I mean the fashion.

  Con.

  Bora.
 Watch.
 [aside] I know that Deformed.
 I remember
    his name.
 Didst thou not hear somebody?
  Con.
 Seest thou not, I say, what a deformed thief this fashion is?
    how giddily 'a turns about all the hot-bloods between fourteen
    and five-and-thirty? sometimes fashioning them like Pharaoh's
    soldiers in the reechy painting, sometime like god Bel's priests
    in the old church window, sometime like the shaven Hercules in
    the smirch'd worm-eaten tapestry, where his codpiece seems as  
    massy as his club?
  Con.
 But art not thou thyself giddy with the
    fashion too, that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling
    me of the fashion?
  Bora.
 Not so neither.
 But know that I have to-night wooed Margaret,
    the Lady Hero's gentlewoman, by the name of Hero.
 She leans me
    out at her mistress' chamber window, bids me a thousand times
    good night--I tell this tale vilely; I should first tell thee how
    the Prince, Claudio and my master, planted and placed and
    possessed by my master Don John, saw afar off in the orchard this
    amiable encounter.

  Con.

  2.
 Watch.
 We charge you in the Prince's name stand!
  1.
 Watch.
 Call up the right Master Constable.
 We have here
    recover'd the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known
    in the commonwealth.
 Watch.
 And one Deformed is one of them.
 I know him; 'a wears a
    lock.

  Con.
 Masters, masters--
  1.
 You'll be made bring Deformed forth, I warrant you.

  Con.
 Masters--
  2.
 Never speak, we charge you.
 Let us obey you to go with
    us.

  Bora.
 A commodity in question, I warrant you.


Enter Hero, and Margaret and Ursula.
 Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice and desire her to rise.

  Hero.
 And bid her come hither.
 Troth, I think your other rebato were better.

  Hero.
 No, pray thee, good Meg, I'll wear this.

  Marg.
 My cousin's a fool, and thou art another.
 I'll wear none but
    this.

  Marg.
 O, that exceeds, they say.

  Marg.
 But for a fine, quaint, graceful, and excellent
    fashion, yours is worth ten on't.

  Hero.
 God give me joy to wear it! for my heart is exceeding heavy.

  Marg.
 'Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.

  Hero.
' An bad thinking do not wrest true speaking, I'll
    offend nobody.

    Otherwise 'tis light, and not heavy.

  Beat.
 Good morrow, sweet Hero.

  Hero.
 Why, how now? Do you speak in the sick tune?
  Beat.
 I am out of all other tune, methinks.
' That goes without a burden.
 O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.

  Beat.
 'Tis almost five o'clock, cousin; 'tis time you were ready.
 Hey-ho!
  Marg.
 For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?
  Beat.
 For the letter that begins them all, H.
 Well, an you be not turn'd Turk, there's no more sailing by
    the star.

  Beat.
 What means the fool, trow?
  Marg.
 These gloves the Count sent me, they are an excellent
    perfume.

  Beat.
 I am stuff'd, cousin; I cannot smell.

  Marg.
 A maid, and stuff'd! There's goodly catching of cold.
 O, God help me! God help me! How long have you profess'd
    apprehension?
  Marg.
 Ever since you left it.
 You should wear it in your cap.
 By my
    troth, I am sick.
 Get you some of this distill'd carduus benedictus and lay it
    to your heart.
 It is the only thing for a qualm.

  Hero.

  Beat.
'
  Marg.
 You may think perchance that I think you are
    in love.
 Nay, by'r lady, I am not such a fool to think what I
    list; nor I list not to think what I can; nor indeed I cannot
    think, if I would think my heart out of thinking, that you are in
    love, or that you will be in love, or that you can be in love.

    Yet Benedick was such another, and now is he become a man.
 He
    swore he would never marry; and yet now in despite of his heart
    he eats his meat without grudging; and how you may be converted I
    know not, but methinks you look with your eyes as other women do.

  Beat.
 The Prince, the Count, Signior Benedick, Don
    John, and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to
    church.

  Hero.
 Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good Ursula.

                                                       [Exeunt.
]




Scene V.

The hall in Leonato's house.


Enter Leonato and the Constable [Dogberry] and the Headborough [verges].
 What would you with me, honest neighbour?
  Dog.
 Brief, I pray you; for you see it is a busy time with me.

  Dog.
 Marry, this it is, sir.
 What is it, my good friends?
  Dog.

  Verg.

  Dog.
 Palabras, neighbour Verges.

  Leon.
 It pleases your worship to say so, but we are the poor Duke's  
    officers; but truly, for mine own part, if I were as tedious as a
    king, I could find in my heart to bestow it all of your worship.

  Leon.

  Leon.
 I would fain know what you have to say.

  Verg.
 Marry, sir, our watch to-night, excepting your worship's
    presence, ha' ta'en a couple of as arrant knaves as any in
    Messina.

  Dog.
 As they say, 'When
    the age is in, the wit is out.
 An two men ride of a horse, one must ride behind.
 An honest
    soul, i' faith, sir, by my troth he is, as ever broke bread; but
    God is to be worshipp'd; all men are not alike, alas, good
    neighbour!
  Leon.
 Gifts that God gives.
  
  Leon.
 I must leave you.

  Dog.
 I am now in
    great haste, as it may appear unto you.
 It shall be suffigance.
 Drink some wine ere you go.
 Fare you well.


                       [Enter a Messenger.
]

  Mess.

  Leon.
 I am ready.

                                 [Exeunt Leonato and Messenger.
]
  Dog.
 Go, good partner, go get you to Francis Seacoal; bid him bring
    his pen and inkhorn to the jail.

  Verg.

  Dog.
 We will spare for no wit, I warrant you.
 Here's that shall  
    drive some of them to a non-come.
 Only get the learned writer to
    set down our excommunication, and meet me at the jail.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT IV.
 No.
 To be married to her.
 Friar, you come to marry her.
 I do.
 If either of you know any inward impediment why you should
    not be conjoined, I charge you on your souls to utter it.

  Claud.
 Know you any, Hero?
  Hero.
 None, my lord.
 I dare make his answer--none.

  Claud.
 O, what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily do, not
    knowing what they do!  
  Bene.
 How now? interjections? Why then, some be of laughing, as,
    ah, ha, he!
  Claud.
 Stand thee by, friar.
 Father, by your leave:
    Will you with free and unconstrained soul
    Give me this maid your daughter?
  Leon.
 As freely, son, as God did give her me.

  Claud.
 Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.

    Give not this rotten orange to your friend.

    She's but the sign and semblance of her honour.

  Leon.

  Leon.
 Dear my lord, if you, in your own proof,
    Have vanquish'd the resistance of her youth
    And made defeat of her virginity--
  Claud.
 If I have known her,
    You will say she did embrace me as a husband,
    And so extenuate the forehand sin.

  Hero.
 And seem'd I ever otherwise to you?
  Claud.

  Hero.
 Is my lord well that he doth speak so wide?
  Leon.

  Leon.
 Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?
  John.

  Bene.
 This looks not like a nuptial.
 'True!' O God!
  Claud.
 All this is so; but what of this, my lord?
  Claud.
 I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.
 O, God defend me! How am I beset!  
    What kind of catechising call you this?
  Claud.
 Is it not Hero? Who can blot that name
    With any just reproach?
  Claud.
 Marry, that can Hero!
    Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue.

  Hero.
 I talk'd with no man at that hour, my lord.

  Pedro.
 Why, then are you no maiden.
 Leonato,
    I am sorry you must hear.
 Upon my honour,
    Myself, my brother, and this grieved Count
    Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night
    Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window,
    Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain,
    Confess'd the vile encounters they have had
    A thousand times in secret.
 Hath no man's dagger here a point for me?
                                                  [Hero swoons.
 Come let us go.
 These things, come thus to light,
    Smother her spirits up.
 Dead, I think.
 O Fate, take not away thy heavy hand!
    Death is the fairest cover for her shame
    That may be wish'd for.

  Beat.
 How now, cousin Hero?
  Friar.
 Have comfort, lady.

  Leon.
 Dost thou look up?
  Friar.

  Beat.
 Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?
  Beat.
 No, truly, not; although, until last night,
    I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow
  Leon.
 I have mark'd
    A thousand blushing apparitions
    To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames
    In angel whiteness beat away those blushes,
    And in her eye there hath appear'd a fire
    To burn the errors that these princes hold
    Against her maiden truth.
 Friar, it cannot be.

    Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left
    Is that she will not add to her damnation
    A sin of perjury: she not denies it.
 Lady, what man is he you are accus'd of?
  Hero.
 They know that do accuse me; I know none.

    If I know more of any man alive
    Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
    Let all my sins lack mercy! O my father,
    Prove you that any man with me convers'd
    At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
    Maintain'd the change of words with any creature,
    Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!
  Friar.
 There is some strange misprision in the princes.

  Bene.
 Two of them have the very bent of honour;
    And if their wisdoms be misled in this,
    The practice of it lives in John the bastard,
    Whose spirits toil in frame of villanies.
 If they speak but truth of her,
    These hands shall tear her.
 If they wrong her honour,
    The proudest of them shall well hear of it.

    Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine,
    Nor age so eat up my invention,
    Nor fortune made such havoc of my means,
    Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
    But they shall find awak'd in such a kind
    Both strength of limb and policy of mind,
    Ability in means, and choice of friends,
    To quit me of them throughly.

  Friar.
 Pause awhile
    And let my counsel sway you in this case.

    Your daughter here the princes left for dead,
    Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
    And publish it that she is dead indeed;
    Maintain a mourning ostentation,
    And on your family's old monument
    Hang mournful epitaphs, and do all rites
    That appertain unto a burial.
  
  Leon.
 Marry, this well carried shall on her behalf
    Change slander to remorse.
 That is some good.

    But not for that dream I on this strange course,
    But on this travail look for greater birth.

    She dying, as it must be so maintain'd,
    Upon the instant that she was accus'd,
    Shall be lamented, pitied, and excus'd
    Of every hearer; for it so falls out
    That what we have we prize not to the worth
    Whiles we enjoy it, but being lack'd and lost,
    Why, then we rack the value, then we find
    The virtue that possession would not show us
    Whiles it was ours.
 So will it fare with Claudio.

    When he shall hear she died upon his words,
    Th' idea of her life shall sweetly creep
    Into his study of imagination,
    And every lovely organ of her life
    Shall come apparell'd in more precious habit,
    More moving, delicate, and full of life,  
    Into the eye and prospect of his soul
    Than when she liv'd indeed.

    But if all aim but this be levell'd false,
    The supposition of the lady's death
    Will quench the wonder of her infamy.
 Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you;
    And though you know my inwardness and love
    Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio,
    Yet, by mine honour, I will deal in this
    As secretly and justly as your soul  
    Should with your body.

  Leon.

  Friar.
 'Tis well consented.
 Presently away;
    For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure.

    Come, lady, die to live.
 Have patience and endure.
 Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?
  Beat.

  Bene.
 I will not desire that.
 You have no reason.
 I do it freely.
 Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.
 Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right
     her!
  Bene.
 Is there any way to show such friendship?
  Beat.
 A very even way, but no such friend.
 May a man do it?
  Beat.
 It is a man's office, but not yours.

  Bene.
 It were as possible for
    me to say I loved nothing so well as you.
 I am sorry
    for my cousin.
 Do not swear, and eat it.

  Bene.
 I will swear by it that you love me, and I will make him eat
    it that says I love not you.
 Will you not eat your word?
  Bene.
 With no sauce that can be devised to it.
 Why then, God forgive me!
  Bene.
 What offence, sweet Beatrice?
  Beat.
 You have stayed me in a happy hour.
 I was about to protest I
    loved you.

  Bene.
 And do it with all thy heart.
 I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to
    protest.

  Bene.
 Come, bid me do anything for thee.
  
  Beat.

  Bene.
 Farewell.

  Bene.

  Beat.
 I am gone, though I am here.
 Nay, I
    pray you let me go.

  Bene.
 Beatrice--
  Beat.
 In faith, I will go.

  Bene.
 We'll be friends first.
 You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine
    enemy.

  Bene.
 Is Claudio thine enemy?
  Beat.
 Hear me, Beatrice!
  Beat.
 Talk with a man out at a window!-a proper saying!  
  Bene.
 Nay but Beatrice--
  Beat.
 Sweet Hero! she is wrong'd, she is sland'red, she is undone.
 I
    cannot be a man with wishing; therefore I will die a woman with
    grieving.

  Bene.

  Bene.
 Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wrong'd Hero?
  Beat.
 Yea, as sure is I have a thought or a soul.

  Bene.
 I will kiss your
    hand, and so I leave you.
 By this hand, Claudio shall render me a
    dear account.
 As you hear of me, so think of me.
]




Scene II.

A prison.


Enter the Constables [Dogberry and Verges] and the Sexton, in gowns,
[and the Watch, with Conrade and] Borachio.


  Dog.
 Is our whole dissembly appear'd?
  Verg.
 O, a stool and a cushion for the sexton.
 Which be the malefactors?
  Dog.
 Marry, that am I and my partner.
 Nay, that's certain.
 We have the exhibition to examine.
 Yea, marry, let them come before me.

  Dog.
 Pray write down Borachio.
 I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade.

  Dog.
 Write down Master Gentleman Conrade.
 Masters, do you serve
    God?
  Both.
 Yea, sir, we hope.

  Dog.
 Write down that they hope they serve God; and write God first,  
    for God defend but God should go before such villains! Masters,
    it is proved already that you are little better than false
    knaves, and it will go near to be thought so shortly.

  Dog.
 Come you hither, sirrah.
 A word in your ear.

  Bora.

  Dog.
 Well, stand aside.
 Fore God, they are both in a tale.

    Have you writ down that they are none?
  Sex.
 You must call
    forth the watch that are their accusers.
 Let the watch come forth.
 Watch.

  Dog.
 Why, this is flat perjury,
    to call a prince's brother villain.

  Bora.
 Master Constable--  
  Dog.
 Pray thee, fellow, peace.

  Sex.
 What heard you him say else?
  2.
 Watch.

  Dog.
 Flat burglary as ever was committed.

  Verg.
 Yea, by th' mass, that it is.
 Watch.
 And that Count Claudio did mean, upon his words, to
    disgrace Hero before the whole assembly, and not marry her.
 O villain! thou wilt be condemn'd into everlasting redemption
    for this.

  Sex.
 What else?
  Watchmen.

  Sex.
 And this is more, masters, than you can deny.
 Prince John is
    this morning secretly stol'n away.
 Hero was in this manner
    accus'd, in this manner refus'd, and upon the grief of this
    suddenly died.
 Come, let them be opinion'd.

  Verg.
 Let them be in the hands--
  Con.
 Come, bind them.
 Away! you are an ass, you are an ass.

  Dog.
 No, thou villain, thou art full of
    piety, as shall be prov'd upon thee by good witness.
 I am a wise
    fellow; and which is more, an officer; and which is more, a
    householder; and which is more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any
    is in Messina, and one that knows the law, go to! and a rich
    fellow enough, go to! and a fellow that hath had losses; and one
    that hath two gowns and everything handsome about him.
 O that I had been writ down an ass!
                                                         Exeunt.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.


Enter Leonato and his brother [ Antonio].


  Ant.

  Leon.
 I pray thee cease thy counsel,
    Which falls into mine ears as profitless
    As water in a sieve.

    Bring me a father that so lov'd his child,
    Whose joy of her is overwhelm'd like mine,
    And bid him speak to me of patience.

    Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
    And let it answer every strain for strain,
    As thus for thus, and such a grief for such,
    In every lineament, branch, shape, and form.

    But there is no such man; for, brother, men
    Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief
    Which they themselves not feel; but, tasting it,
    Their counsel turns to passion, which before
    Would give preceptial medicine to rage,
    Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
    Charm ache with air and agony with words.
 Therefore give me no counsel.
 I pray thee peace.

    Make those that do offend you suffer too.
 There thou speak'st reason.
 Nay, I will do so.


              Enter Don Pedro and Claudio.
 Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.

  Pedro.
 Good den, Good den.

  Claud.
 Good day to both of you.

  Leon.
 Hear you, my lords!
  Pedro.

  Leon.
 Some haste, my lord! well, fare you well, my lord.
 Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.

  Ant.
 Who wrongs him?
  Leon.
 Marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou!
    Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword;
    I fear thee not.

    In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.

  Leon.
 Know, Claudio, to thy head,
    Thou hast so wrong'd mine innocent child and me
    That I am forc'd to lay my reverence by
    And, with grey hairs and bruise of many days,
    Do challenge thee to trial of a man.

    I say thou hast belied mine innocent child;
    Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart,
    And she lied buried with her ancestors-  
    O, in a tomb where never scandal slept,
    Save this of hers, fram'd by thy villany!
  Claud.
 My villany?
  Leon.
 My lord, my lord,
    I'll prove it on his body if he dare,
    Despite his nice fence and his active practice,
    His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.

  Claud.
 Away! I will not have to do with you.

  Leon.
 Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast kill'd my child.

    If thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.

    Win me and wear me! Let him answer me.
 Come, sir boy, come follow me.

    Sir boy, I'll whip you from your foining fence!
    Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.

  Leon.
 Brother--
  Ant.
 Content yourself.
 Hold you content.
 What, man! I know them, yea,
    And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,
    Scambling, outfacing, fashion-monging boys,
    That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
    Go anticly, show outward hideousness,
    And speak off half a dozen dang'rous words,
    How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst;
    And this is all.

  Leon.
 But, brother Anthony--
  Ant.

    Do not you meddle; let me deal in this.

  Pedro.
 Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience.

    My heart is sorry for your daughter's death;
    But, on my honour, she was charg'd with nothing
    But what was true, and very full of proof.
 My lord, my lord--
  Pedro.

  Leon.


  Pedro.
 See, see! Here comes the man we went to seek.
 Now, signior, what news?
  Bene.
 Good day, my lord.

  Pedro.
 Welcome, signior.
 You are almost come to part almost a fray.

  Claud.

  Pedro.
 Leonato and his brother.
 What think'st thou? Had we fought,
    I doubt we should have been too young for them.

  Bene.
 I came to seek
    you both.

  Claud.
 Shall I draw it?
  Pedro.
 Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?
  Claud.
 I will bid thee draw, as we do the minstrel--draw to
    pleasure us.

  Pedro.
 As I am an honest man, he looks pale.
 Art thou sick or
    angry?
  Claud.
 What, courage, man! What though care kill'd a cat, thou hast
    mettle enough in thee to kill care.

  Bene.
 Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career an you charge it
    against me.

  Claud.
 Nay then, give him another staff; this last was broke cross.

  Pedro.
 By this light, he changes more and more.
 I think he be angry
    indeed.

  Claud.
 If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.

  Bene.
 Shall I speak a word in your ear?
  Claud.
 [aside to Claudio] You are a villain.

  Claud.
 Well, I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.

  Pedro.
 What, a feast, a feast?
  Claud.
 I' faith, I thank him, he hath bid me to a calve's head and
    a capon, the which if I do not carve most curiously, say my
    knife's naught.
 Sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.
 I'll tell thee how Beatrice prais'd thy wit the other day.
 I
    said thou hadst a fine wit: 'True,' said she, 'a fine little
    one.
' 'Nay,' said I, 'the gentleman is wise.
' 'Certain,'
    said she, a wise gentleman.
 There's a
    double tongue; there's two tongues.
 For the which she wept heartily and said she cared not.

  Pedro.
 Yea, that she did; but yet, for all that, an if she did not
    hate him deadly, she would love him dearly.
 The old man's
    daughter told us all.

  Claud.
 Yea, and text underneath, 'Here dwells Benedick, the married
    man'?
  Bene.
 Fare you well, boy; you know my mind.
 Your
    brother the bastard is fled from Messina.
 You have among you
    kill'd a sweet and innocent lady.
 For my Lord Lackbeard there, he
    and I shall meet; and till then peace be with him.
]
  Pedro.
 He is in earnest.

  Claud.
 Most sincerely.

  Pedro.


  Claud.
 He is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a doctor to
    such a man.

  Pedro.
 But, soft you, let me be! Pluck up, my heart, and be sad!
    Did he not say my brother was fled?
  Dog.
 Come you, sir.
 If justice cannot tame you, she shall ne'er
    weigh more reasons in her balance.
 Nay, an you be a cursing
    hypocrite once, you must be look'd to.

  Pedro.

  Claud.
 Hearken after their offence, my lord.
 Officers, what offence have these men done?
  Dog.
 Marry, sir, they have committed false report; moreover, they  
    have spoken untruths; secondarily, they are slanders; sixth and
    lastly, they have belied a lady; thirdly, they have verified
    unjust things; and to conclude, they are lying knaves.

  Pedro.
 First, I ask thee what they have done; thirdly, I ask thee
    what's their offence; sixth and lastly, why they are committed;
    and to conclude, what you lay to their charge.

  Claud.
 Rightly reasoned, and in his own division; and by my troth
    there's one meaning well suited.
 Who have you offended, masters, that you are thus bound to
    your answer? This learned constable is too cunning to be
    understood.
 What's your offence?
  Bora.
 What your wisdoms could not discover, these shallow
    fools have brought to light, who in the night overheard me
    confessing to this man, how Don John your brother incensed me to
    slander the Lady Hero; how you were brought into the orchard and
    saw me court Margaret in Hero's garments; how you disgrac'd her
    when you should marry her.
 My villany they have upon record,
    which I had rather seal with my death than repeat over to my  
    shame.
 The lady is dead upon mine and my master's false
    accusation; and briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a
    villain.
 Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?
  Claud.
 I have drunk poison whiles he utter'd it.

  Pedro.
 But did my brother set thee on to this?
  Bora.
 Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appear
    In the rare semblance that I lov'd it first.

  Dog.
 Come, bring away the plaintiffs.
 By this time our sexton hath
    reformed Signior Leonato of the matter.
 And, masters, do not
    forget to specify, when time and place shall serve, that I am an
    ass.


  Leon.
 Which is the villain? Let me see his eyes,  
    That, when I note another man like him,
    I may avoid him.
 If you would know your wronger, look on me.
 Yea, even I alone.
 No, not so, villain! thou beliest thyself.

    Here stand a pair of honourable men--
    A third is fled--that had a hand in it.

    I thank you princes for my daughter's death.

    Record it with your high and worthy deeds.

    'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.

  Claud.
 I know not how to pray your patience;
    Yet I must speak.
 Choose your revenge yourself;
    Impose me to what penance your invention
    Can lay upon my sin.

  Leon.
 I cannot bid you bid my daughter live-
    That were impossible; but I pray you both,
    Possess the people in Messina here
    How innocent she died; and if your love
    Can labour aught in sad invention,
    Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb,
    And sing it to her bones--sing it to-night.

    To-morrow morning come you to my house,
    And since you could not be my son-in-law,
    Be yet my nephew.
 My brother hath a daughter,
    Almost the copy of my child that's dead,
    And she alone is heir to both of us.

    Give her the right you should have giv'n her cousin,
    And so dies my revenge.

  Claud.
 O noble sir!
    Your over-kindness doth wring tears from me.

    I do embrace your offer; and dispose
    For henceforth of poor Claudio.
 To-morrow then I will expect your coming;  
    To-night I take my leave.
 This naughty man
    Shall fact to face be brought to Margaret,
    Who I believe was pack'd in all this wrong,
    Hir'd to it by your brother.
 No, by my soul, she was not;
    Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me;
    But always hath been just and virtuous
    In anything that I do know by her.

  Dog.
 Moreover, sir, which indeed is not under white and black, this
    plaintiff here, the offender, did call me ass.
 I beseech you let
    it be rememb'red in his punishment.
 And also the watch heard them
    talk of one Deformed.
 They say he wears a key in his ear, and a
    lock hanging by it, and borrows money in God's name, the which he
    hath us'd so long and never paid that now men grow hard-hearted
    and will lend nothing for God's sake.
 Pray you examine him upon
    that point.
 I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.

  Dog.

  Leon.
 There's for thy pains.
]  
  Dog.
 God save the foundation!
  Leon.
 Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.
 I leave an arrant knave with your worship, which I beseech
    your worship to correct yourself, for the example of others.

    God keep your worship! I wish your worship well.

                                   Exeunt [Dogberry and Verges].

  Leon.

  Ant.
 Farewell, my lords.
 We look for you to-morrow.

  Pedro.

                                 [Exeunt Don Pedro and Claudio.
]
  Leon.
 [to the Watch] Bring you these fellows on.
--We'll talk with
      Margaret,
    How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.

                                                         Exeunt.





Scene II.

Leonato's orchard.


Enter Benedick and Margaret [meeting].
 Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands
    by helping me to the speech of Beatrice.

  Marg.
 In so high a style, Margaret, that no man living shall come
    over it; for in most comely truth thou deservest it.
 To have no man come over me? Why, shall I always keep below
    stairs?
  Bene.
 Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's mouth--it catches.

  Bene.
 A most manly wit, Margaret: it will not hurt a woman.
 I give thee the bucklers.

  Marg.
 Give us the swords; we have bucklers of our own.

  Bene.
 Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.
 And therefore will come.
  
                                                  Exit Margaret.
 I have tried.
 I can find out no rhyme to 'lady' but 'baby'
    --an innocent rhyme; for 'scorn,' 'horn'--a hard rhyme; for
    'school', 'fool'--a babbling rhyme: very ominous endings! No, I
    was not born under a rhyming planet, nor cannot woo in festival
    terms.


    Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I call'd thee?  
  Beat.
 Yea, signior, and depart when you bid me.
 'Then' is spoken.
 Fare you well now.
 Only foul words; and thereupon I will kiss thee.

  Beat.
 Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul
    breath, and foul breath is noisome.
 Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense, so
    forcible is thy wit.
 But I must tell thee plainly, Claudio
    undergoes my challenge; and either I must shortly hear from him
    or I will subscribe him a coward.
 And I pray thee now tell me,
    for which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me?
  Beat.
 But for which of my good parts did you first suffer love
    for me?
  Bene.
 Suffer love!--a good epithet.
 In spite of your heart, I think.

  Bene.

  Beat.

  Bene.
 If a man do not erect in this age his own tomb
    ere he dies, he shall live no longer in monument than the bell
    rings and the widow weeps.

  Beat.
 And how long is that, think you?
  Bene.

    Therefore is it most expedient for the wise, if Don Worm (his
    conscience) find no impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet
    of his own virtues, as I am to myself.
 Very ill.
 Very ill too.
  
  Bene.
 There will I leave you too, for
    here comes one in haste.


                         Enter Ursula.
 Yonder's old coil at home.
 Will you go hear this news, signior?
  Bene.
 I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buried thy
    eyes; and moreover, I will go with thee to thy uncle's.

                                                         Exeunt.

A churchyard.


  Claud.
 Is this the monument of Leonato?
  Lord.
 [reads from a scroll]

                      Epitaph.


        Done to death by slanderous tongues
          Was the Hero that here lies.

        So the life that died with shame
        Lives in death with glorious fame.


    Hang thou there upon the tomb,
                                          [Hangs up the scroll.
]
    Praising her when I am dumb.
  
    Now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn.


                     Song.


        Pardon, goddess of the night,
        Those that slew thy virgin knight;
        For the which, with songs of woe,
        Round about her tomb they go.

        Midnight, assist our moan,
        Help us to sigh and groan
          Heavily, heavily,
        Graves, yawn and yield your dead,
        Till death be uttered
          Heavily, heavily.


  Claud.

    Thanks to you all, and leave us.

  Claud.

  Pedro.
 Come, let us hence and put on other weeds,
    And then to Leonato's we will go.

  Claud.





Scene IV
The hall in Leonato's house.


Enter Leonato, Benedick, [Beatrice,] Margaret, Ursula, Antonio,
Friar [Francis], Hero.


  Friar.
 So are the Prince and Claudio, who accus'd her
    Upon the error that you heard debated.

  Ant.

  Bene.

  Leon.
 Well, daughter, and you gentlewomen all,
    Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves,
    And when I send for you, come hither mask'd.

    The Prince and Claudio promis'd by this hour
    To visit me.

  Ant.
 Which I will do with confirm'd countenance.

  Bene.
 To do what, signior?
  Bene.
 To bind me, or undo me--one of them.

    Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior,
    Your niece regards me with an eye of favour.

  Bene.

  Leon.
 The sight whereof I think you had from me,
    From Claudio, and the Prince; but what's your will?
  Bene.
 Your answer, sir, is enigmatical;
    But, for my will, my will is, your good will
    May stand with ours, this day to be conjoin'd
    In the state of honourable marriage;
    In which, good friar, I shall desire your help.
 My heart is with your liking.

  Friar.
 And my help.


       Enter Don Pedro and Claudio and two or three other.
  

    Here comes the Prince and Claudio.

  Pedro.
 Good morrow to this fair assembly.

  Leon.

    We here attend you.
 Are you yet determin'd
    To-day to marry with my brother's daughter?
  Claud.
 I'll hold my mind, were she an Ethiope.
 Call her forth, brother.

                                                 [Exit Antonio.
]
  Pedro.
 I think he thinks upon the savage bull.

    Tush, fear not, man! We'll tip thy horns with gold,
    And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
    As once Europa did at lusty Jove
    When he would play the noble beast in love.


       Enter [Leonato's] brother [Antonio], Hero, Beatrice,
            Margaret, Ursula, [the ladies wearing masks].


  Claud.
 For this I owe you.

  Claud.
 Sweet, let me see your face.

  Leon.

  Hero.
 And when I liv'd I was your other wife;       [Unmasks.
]
    And when you lov'd you were my other husband.

  Claud.
 She died, my lord, but whiles her slander liv'd.

  Friar.

    Meantime let wonder seem familiar,
    And to the chapel let us presently.
 Which is Beatrice?
  Beat.
 [unmasks] I answer to that name.
 What is your will?
  Bene.
 Do not you love me?
  Beat.
 Why, no; no more than reason.
 Why, then your uncle, and the Prince, and Claudio
    Have been deceived; for they swore you did.

  Beat.
 Do not you love me?
  Bene.
 Troth, no; no more than reason.

  Beat.
 Why, then my cousin, Margaret, and Ursula
    Are much deceiv'd; for they did swear you did.
 They swore that you were almost sick for me.
 No, truly, but in friendly recompense.
 Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.

  Claud.

  Hero.

  Bene.

    Come, I will have thee; but, by this light, I take thee for pity.

  Bene.
 Peace! I will stop your mouth.
]
  Beat.
 I'll tell thee what, Prince: a college of wit-crackers cannot
    flout me out of my humour.
 In brief, since I do purpose to
    marry, I will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say
    against it; and therefore never flout at me for what I have said  
    against it; for man is a giddy thing, and this is my conclusion.

    For thy part, Claudio, I did think to have beaten thee; but in
    that thou art like to be my kinsman, live unbruis'd, and love my
    cousin.
 Let's have a dance ere we are
    married, that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives' heels.
 We'll have dancing afterward.

  Bene.
 Get thee a wife, get thee a wife! There is no staff more
    reverent than one tipp'd with horn.


                       Enter Messenger.
 My lord, your brother John is ta'en in flight,
    And brought with armed men back to Messina.

  Bene.
 I'll devise thee brave  
    punishments for him.
 Strike up, pipers!
                                                Dance.
 [Exeunt.
]


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1605


THE TRAGEDY OF OTHELLO, MOOR OF VENICE

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  OTHELLO, the Moor, general of the Venetian forces
  DESDEMONA, his wife
  IAGO, ensign to Othello
  EMILIA, his wife, lady-in-waiting to Desdemona
  CASSIO, lieutenant to Othello
  THE DUKE OF VENICE
  BRABANTIO, Venetian Senator, father of Desdemona
  GRATIANO, nobleman of Venice, brother of Brabantio
  LODOVICO, nobleman of Venice, kinsman of Brabantio
  RODERIGO, rejected suitor of Desdemona
  BIANCA, mistress of Cassio
  MONTANO, a Cypriot official
  A Clown in service to Othello
  Senators, Sailors, Messengers, Officers, Gentlemen, Musicians, and
    Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



SCENE: Venice and Cyprus

ACT I.

Venice.
 A street.


  RODERIGO.

  IAGO.
 'Sblood, but you will not hear me.

  IAGO.
"  
    And what was he?
    Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
    One Michael Cassio, a Florentine
    (A fellow almost damn'd in a fair wife)
    That never set a squadron in the field,
    Nor the division of a battle knows
    More than a spinster; unless the bookish theoric,
    Wherein the toged consuls can propose
    As masterly as he.
 Mere prattle without practice
    Is all his soldiership.
 But he, sir, had the election;
    And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
    At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds
    Christian and heathen, must be belee'd and calm'd
    By debitor and creditor.
 This counter-caster,
    He, in good time, must his lieutenant be,
    And I- God bless the mark!- his Moorship's ancient.
 By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.

  IAGO.
 'Tis the curse of service,
    Preferment goes by letter and affection,
    And not by old gradation, where each second  
    Stood heir to the first.
           I would not follow him then.
 O, sir, content you.
 You shall mark
    Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave,
    That doting on his own obsequious bondage
    Wears out his time, much like his master's ass,
    For nought but provender, and when he's old, cashier'd.

    Whip me such honest knaves.
 Others there are
    Who, trimm'd in forms and visages of duty,
    Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
    And throwing but shows of service on their lords
    Do well thrive by them; and when they have lined their coats
    Do themselves homage.
 These fellows have some soul,
    And such a one do I profess myself.

    For, sir,  
    It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
    Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago.

    In following him, I follow but myself;
    Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
    But seeming so, for my peculiar end.

  RODERIGO.
 What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe,
    If he can carry't thus!
  IAGO.
                     Call up her father,
    Rouse him, make after him, poison his delight,
    Proclaim him in the streets, incense her kinsmen,
    And, though he in a fertile climate dwell,
    Plague him with flies.
 Though that his joy be joy,
    Yet throw such changes of vexation on't
    As it may lose some color.

  RODERIGO.
 Here is her father's house; I'll call aloud.
  
  IAGO.
 Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell
    As when, by night and negligence, the fire
    Is spied in populous cities.
 Awake! What, ho, Brabantio! Thieves! Thieves! Thieves!
    Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!
    Thieves! Thieves!

                Brabantio appears above, at a window.
 What is the reason of this terrible summons?
    What is the matter there?
  RODERIGO.
 Signior, is all your family within?
  IAGO.
 Are your doors lock'd?
  BRABANTIO.
 'Zounds, sir, you're robb'd! For shame, put on your gown;
    Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul;
    Even now, now, very now, an old black ram
    Is tupping your white ewe.
 Arise, arise!
    Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,  
    Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you.

    Arise, I say!
  BRABANTIO.
 What, have you lost your wits?
  RODERIGO.

  BRABANTIO.
                     The worser welcome.

  RODERIGO.
               But thou must needs be sure
    My spirit and my place have in them power
    To make this bitter to thee.

  BRABANTIO.
  
  RODERIGO.

  IAGO.
 'Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God,
    if the devil bid you.

  BRABANTIO.
 What profane wretch art thou?
  IAGO.
 I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the
    Moor are now making the beast with two backs.

  BRABANTIO.
                          You are- a senator.

  RODERIGO.
 But, I beseech you,
    If't be your pleasure and most wise consent,
    As partly I find it is, that your fair daughter,
    At this odd-even and dull watch o' the night,
    Transported with no worse nor better guard
    But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,
    To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor-  
    If this be known to you, and your allowance,
    We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs;
    But if you know not this, my manners tell me
    We have your wrong rebuke.
 Do not believe
    That, from the sense of all civility,
    I thus would play and trifle with your reverence.

    Your daughter, if you have not given her leave,
    I say again, hath made a gross revolt,
    Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
    In an extravagant and wheeling stranger
    Of here and everywhere.

    Light, I say, light!                                  Exit above.

  IAGO.
                  Farewell, for I must leave you.
 So farewell.


            Enter, below, Brabantio, in his nightgown, and
                        Servants with torches.
 It is too true an evil: gone she is,  
    And what's to come of my despised time
    Is nought but bitterness.
 Now, Roderigo,
    Where didst thou see her? O unhappy girl!
    With the Moor, say'st thou? Who would be a father!
    How didst thou know 'twas she? O, she deceives me
    Past thought! What said she to you? Get more tapers.

    Raise all my kindred.
 Are they married, think you?
  RODERIGO.
 Truly, I think they are.

  BRABANTIO.
 O heaven! How got she out? O treason of the blood!
    Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds
    By what you see them act.
 Is there not charms
    By which the property of youth and maidhood
    May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
    Of some such thing?
  RODERIGO.
             Yes, sir, I have indeed.
 Do you know
    Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?
  RODERIGO.
 I think I can discover him, if you please
    To get good guard and go along with me.
 Get weapons, ho!
    And raise some special officers of night.





SCENE II.


Enter Othello, Iago, and Attendants with torches.


  IAGO.
 Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
    Yet do I hold it very stuff o' the conscience
    To do no contrived murther.
 I lack iniquity
    Sometimes to do me service.
 Nine or ten times
    I had thought to have yerk'd him here under the ribs.

  IAGO.
                          Nay, but he prated
    And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms
    Against your honor
    That, with the little godliness I have,
    I did full hard forbear him.
 He will divorce you,
    Or put upon you what restraint and grievance
    The law, with all his might to enforce it on,  
    Will give him cable.

  OTHELLO.
               Let him do his spite.
 'Tis yet to know-
    Which, when I know that boasting is an honor,
    I shall promulgate- I fetch my life and being
    From men of royal siege, and my demerits
    May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune
    As this that I have reach'd.
 For know, Iago,
    But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
    I would not my unhoused free condition
    Put into circumscription and confine
    For the sea's worth.
 But, look! What lights come yond?
  IAGO.
 Those are the raised father and his friends.
               Not I; I must be found.

    My parts, my title, and my perfect soul
    Shall manifest me rightly.
 Is it they?
  IAGO.
 By Janus, I think no.


  OTHELLO.
 The servants of the Duke? And my lieutenant?
    The goodness of the night upon you, friends!
    What is the news?
  CASSIO.

  OTHELLO.
               What is the matter, think you?
  CASSIO.
 You have been hotly call'd for,
    When, being not at your lodging to be found,
    The Senate hath sent about three several quests
    To search you out.

  OTHELLO.
             'Tis well I am found by you.
                                            Exit.
            Ancient, what makes he here?
  IAGO.
 I do not understand.

  IAGO.
                        He's married.


  IAGO.
                                     Have with you.

  CASSIO.
 Here comes another troop to seek for you.


  OTHELLO.
                  Holla! Stand there!  
  RODERIGO.
 Signior, it is the Moor.

  BRABANTIO.
                         Down with him, thief!
                                             They draw on both sides.

  IAGO.

  OTHELLO.
 Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.

    Good signior, you shall more command with years
    Than with your weapons.

  BRABANTIO.
 O thou foul thief, where hast thou stow'd my daughter?
    Damn'd as thou art, thou hast enchanted her,
    For I'll refer me to all things of sense,
    If she in chains of magic were not bound,
    Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,
    So opposite to marriage that she shunn'd
    The wealthy, curled darlings of our nation,
    Would ever have, to incur a general mock,
    Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
    Of such a thing as thou- to fear, not to delight.

    Judge me the world, if 'tis not gross in sense
    That thou hast practiced on her with foul charms,
    Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals  
    That weaken motion.

    I therefore apprehend and do attach thee
    For an abuser of the world, a practicer
    Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.

    Lay hold upon him.

  OTHELLO.
                   Hold your hands,
    Both you of my inclining and the rest.

    Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it
    Without a prompter.
 Where will you that I go
    To answer this your charge?
  BRABANTIO.
                    To prison, till fit time
    Of law and course of direct session
    Call thee to answer.
               What if I do obey?
    How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,
    Whose messengers are here about my side,
    Upon some present business of the state
    To bring me to him?  
  FIRST OFFICER.
 The Duke himself,
    Or any of my brothers of the state,
    Cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own;
    For if such actions may have passage free,
    Bond slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.





SCENE III.

A council chamber.
 The Duke and Senators sitting at a table;
Officers attending.
            Indeed they are disproportion'd;
    My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.
 And mine, a hundred and forty.
 [Within.
] What, ho! What, ho! What, ho!
  FIRST OFFICER.


                            Enter Sailor.

  
  DUKE.
 The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes,
    So was I bid report here to the state
    By Signior Angelo.
 How say you by this change?
  FIRST SENATOR.
 When we consider
    The importancy of Cyprus to the Turk,
    And let ourselves again but understand
    That as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
    So may he with more facile question bear it,
    For that it stands not in such warlike brace,
    But altogether lacks the abilities
    That Rhodes is dress'd in.
 If we make thought of this,
    We must not think the Turk is so unskillful
    To leave that latest which concerns him first,
    Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain,
    To wake and wage a danger profitless.

  DUKE.
 Here is more news.
 Ay, so I thought.
 How many, as you guess?
  MESSENGER.
 Signior Montano,
    Your trusty and most valiant servitor,
    With his free duty recommends you thus,
    And prays you to believe him.
 He's now in Florence.

  DUKE.
 Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.

    [To Brabantio.
] I did not see you; welcome, gentle signior;
    We lack'd your counsel and your help tonight.

  BRABANTIO.
 So did I yours.
 Good your Grace, pardon me:
    Neither my place nor aught I heard of business
    Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general care
    Take hold on me; for my particular grief
    Is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature
    That it engluts and swallows other sorrows,
    And it is still itself.
                     Why, what's the matter?
  BRABANTIO.
 My daughter! O, my daughter!
  ALL.
                                    Dead?
  BRABANTIO.
                                    Ay, to me.

  DUKE.
 Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding
    Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself
    And you of her, the bloody book of law
    You shall yourself read in the bitter letter
    After your own sense, yea, though our proper son
    Stood in your action.

  BRABANTIO.

  ALL.
 [To Othello.
] What in your own part can you say to this?
  BRABANTIO.

  OTHELLO.
 Yet, by your gracious patience,
    I will a round unvarnish'd tale deliver
    Of my whole course of love: what drugs, what charms,
    What conjuration, and what mighty magic-
    For such proceeding I am charged withal-
    I won his daughter.

  BRABANTIO.
            A maiden never bold,
    Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion
    Blush'd at herself; and she- in spite of nature,
    Of years, of country, credit, everything-
    To fall in love with what she fear'd to look on!
    It is judgement maim'd and most imperfect,  
    That will confess perfection so could err
    Against all rules of nature, and must be driven
    To find out practices of cunning hell
    Why this should be.

  DUKE.
 But, Othello, speak.

    Did you by indirect and forced courses
    Subdue and poison this young maid's affections?
    Or came it by request, and such fair question
    As soul to soul affordeth?
  OTHELLO.

    If you do find me foul in her report,  
    The trust, the office I do hold of you,
    Not only take away, but let your sentence
    Even fall upon my life.

  DUKE.
                     Fetch Desdemona hither.

  OTHELLO.
 Ancient, conduct them; you best know the place.

                                          Exeunt Iago and Attendants.

    And till she come, as truly as to heaven
    I do confess the vices of my blood,
    So justly to your grave ears I'll present
    How I did thrive in this fair lady's love
    And she in mine.
 Say it, Othello.

  OTHELLO.
 Her father loved me, oft invited me,
    Still question'd me the story of my life
    From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes,
    That I have pass'd.

    I ran it through, even from my boyish days
    To the very moment that he bade me tell it:
    Wherein I spake of most disastrous chances,
    Of moving accidents by flood and field,  
    Of hair-breadth 'scapes i' the imminent deadly breach,
    Of being taken by the insolent foe
    And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence
    And portance in my travels' history;
    Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,
    Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch heaven,
    It was my hint to speak- such was the process-
    And of the Cannibals that each other eat,
    The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
    Do grow beneath their shoulders.
 This to hear
    Would Desdemona seriously incline;
    But still the house affairs would draw her thence,
    Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,
    She'ld come again, and with a greedy ear
    Devour up my discourse; which I observing,
    Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
    To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
    That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
    Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
    But not intentively.
 I did consent,  
    And often did beguile her of her tears
    When I did speak of some distressful stroke
    That my youth suffer'd.
 My story being done,
    She gave me for my pains a world of sighs;
    She swore, in faith, 'twas strange, 'twas passing strange;
    'Twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful.

    She wish'd she had not heard it, yet she wish'd
    That heaven had made her such a man; she thank'd me,
    And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,
    I should but teach him how to tell my story,
    And that would woo her.

    This only is the witchcraft I have used.


  DUKE.
                      My noble father,
    I do perceive here a divided duty.
 But here's my husband,
    And so much duty as my mother show'd
    To you, preferring you before her father,
    So much I challenge that I may profess
    Due to the Moor, my lord.
                  God be with you! I have done.
  
    Please it your Grace, on to the state affairs;
    I had rather to adopt a child than get it.

    Come hither, Moor.

    I here do give thee that with all my heart
    Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart
    I would keep from thee.
 Let me speak like yourself, and lay a sentence
    Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers
    Into your favor.

    When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
    By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.

    What cannot be preserved when Fortune takes,
    Patience her injury a mockery makes.

    The robb'd that smiles steals something from the thief;
    He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.

    But words are words; I never yet did hear
    That the bruised heart was pierced through the ear.

  DUKE.
 The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus.
 The tyrant custom, most grave senators,
    Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war  
    My thrice-driven bed of down.

  DUKE.
                          If you please,
    Be't at her father's.

  BRABANTIO.

  OTHELLO.
      Nor I.
 I would not there reside
    To put my father in impatient thoughts
    By being in his eye.

  DUKE.
 What would you, Desdemona?  
  DESDEMONA.
 That I did love the Moor to live with him,
    My downright violence and storm of fortunes
    May trumpet to the world.
 My heart's subdued
    Even to the very quality of my lord.

    I saw Othello's visage in his mind,
    And to his honors and his valiant parts
    Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.

    So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,
    A moth of peace, and he go to the war,
    The rites for which I love him are bereft me,
    And I a heavy interim shall support
    By his dear absence.
 Let me go with him.

    Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not
    To please the palate of my appetite,
    Nor to comply with heat- the young affects
    In me defunct- and proper satisfaction;
    But to be free and bounteous to her mind.

    And heaven defend your good souls, that you think
    I will your serious and great business scant  
    For she is with me.
 The affair cries haste,
    And speed must answer't: you must hence tonight.

  DESDEMONA.
 Tonight, my lord?
  DUKE.

  OTHELLO.
                                 With all my heart.

  DUKE.

    Othello, leave some officer behind,
    And he shall our commission bring to you,
    With such things else of quality and respect
    As doth import you.
              So please your Grace, my ancient;
    A man he is of honesty and trust.

  DUKE.

    Good night to everyone.

  FIRST SENATOR.

  BRABANTIO.

                                 Exeunt Duke, Senators, and Officers.

  OTHELLO.
 My life upon her faith! Honest Iago,
    My Desdemona must I leave to thee.

    I prithee, let thy wife attend on her,
    And bring them after in the best advantage.

    Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour
    Of love, of worldly matters and direction,
    To spend with thee.

                                        Exeunt Othello and Desdemona.

  RODERIGO.

  RODERIGO.
 I will incontinently drown myself.
 If thou dost, I shall never love thee after.
 It is silliness to live when to live is torment, and then
    have we a prescription to die when death is our physician.

  IAGO.
 Ere I
    would say I would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen, I
    would change my humanity with a baboon.

  IAGO.
 If the balance of our lives had not one scale of
    reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of
    our natures would conduct us to most preposterous conclusions.

    But we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings,
    our unbitted lusts; whereof I take this, that you call love, to
    be a sect or scion.

  RODERIGO.
 It cannot be.
 It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the
    will.
 Come, be a man! Drown thyself? Drown cats and blind
    puppies.
 Put money in thy purse; follow thou
    the wars; defeat thy favor with an usurped beard.
 The
    food that to him now is as luscious as locusts, shall be to him  
    shortly as acerb as the coloquintida.
 She must change for youth;
    when she is sated with his body, she will find the error of her
    choice.
 If sanctimony
    and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and a supersubtle
    Venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the tribe of hell,
    thou shalt enjoy her- therefore make money.
 A pox of drowning
    thyself! It is clean out of the way.
 Seek thou rather to be
    hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned and go without
    her.
 Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the issue?
  IAGO.
 Thou art sure of me- go, make money.
 My cause is
    hearted; thine hath no less reason.
 Let us be conjunctive in our
    revenge against him.
 We will
    have more of this tomorrow.
 Adieu.
 Where shall we meet i' the morning?  
  IAGO.
 At my lodging.

  RODERIGO.

  IAGO.
 Do you hear, Roderigo?
  RODERIGO.
             Exit.

  IAGO.
 Thus do I ever make my fool my purse;
    For I mine own gain'd knowledge should profane
    If I would time expend with such a snipe
    But for my sport and profit.
 I hate the Moor,
    And it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets
    He has done my office.
 I know not if't be true,
    But I for mere suspicion in that kind
    Will do as if for surety.

    Cassio's a proper man.
 Let me see now-
    To get his place, and to plume up my will
    In double knavery- How, how?- Let's see-
    After some time, to abuse Othello's ear
    That he is too familiar with his wife.

    The Moor is of a free and open nature,
    That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,
    And will as tenderly be led by the nose
    As asses are.

    I have't.
 Hell and night
    Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.

     Exit.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
>>



ACT II.
 SCENE I.
 An open place near the quay.


  MONTANO.
 Nothing at all.

  MONTANO.

    If it hath ruffian'd so upon the sea,
    What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
    Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 A segregation of the Turkish fleet.
  
  MONTANO.


  THIRD GENTLEMAN.
 News, lads! Our wars are done.

    The desperate tempest hath so bang'd the Turks,
    That their designment halts.
 A noble ship of Venice
    Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance
    On most part of their fleet.
 How? Is this true?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN.
            The ship is here put in,
    A Veronesa.

  MONTANO.

  THIRD GENTLEMAN.

  MONTANO.
 Let's to the seaside, ho!
    As well to see the vessel that's come in
    As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
    Even till we make the main and the aerial blue
    An indistinct regard.

  THIRD GENTLEMAN.
 Come, let's do so,
    For every minute is expectancy
    Of more arrivance.


  CASSIO.
 Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle,
    That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens
    Give him defense against the elements,
    For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.

  MONTANO.
 I she well shipp'd?  
  CASSIO.
 His bark is stoutly timber'd, and his pilot
    Of very expert and approved allowance;
    Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,
    Stand in bold cure.


                        What noise?
  FOURTH GENTLEMAN.
 The town is empty; on the brow o' the sea
    Stand ranks of people, and they cry, "A sail!"
  CASSIO.
 My hopes do shape him for the governor.

                                                          Guns heard.
                                    Exit.
 But, good lieutenant, is your general wived?
  CASSIO.
 She that I spake of, our great captain's captain,
    Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
    Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts  
    A se'nnight's speed.
 Great Jove, Othello guard,
    And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
    That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
    Make love's quick pants in Desdemona's arms,
    Give renew'd fire to our extincted spirits,
    And bring all Cyprus comfort.


       Enter Desdemona, Emilia Iago, Roderigo, and Attendants.


                                  O, behold,
    The riches of the ship is come on shore!
    Ye men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.

    What tidings can you tell me of my lord?
  CASSIO.

  DESDEMONA.
 O, but I fear- How lost you company?  
  CASSIO.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 They give their greeting to the citadel;
    This likewise is a friend.
                      See for the news.

                                                      Exit Gentleman.

    Good ancient, you are welcome.
 [To Emilia.

  IAGO.

  DESDEMONA.
            Alas, she has no speech.
 In faith, too much;
    I find it still when I have list to sleep.
  
  EMILIA.
 You have little cause to say so.

  IAGO.
 Come on, come on.
 You are pictures out of doors,
    Bells in your parlors, wildcats in your kitchens,
    Saints in your injuries, devils being offended,
    Players in your housewifery, and housewives in your beds.

  DESDEMONA.
 O, fie upon thee, slanderer!
  IAGO.
 You shall not write my praise.
                                  No, let me not.

  DESDEMONA.
 O gentle lady, do not put me to't,
    For I am nothing if not critical.

  DESDEMONA.
 Ay, madam.

  DESDEMONA.
 I am about it, but indeed my invention  
    Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze;
    It plucks out brains and all.

    If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,
    The one's for use, the other useth it.

  DESDEMONA.
 Well praised! How if she be black and witty?
  IAGO.
 If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
    She'll find a white that shall her blackness fit.

  DESDEMONA.
 Worse and worse.

  EMILIA.
 She never yet was foolish that was fair,
    For even her folly help'd her to an heir.

  DESDEMONA.
 These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i' the
    alehouse.

  DESDEMONA.
 But what
    praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed, one that
    in the authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very  
    malice itself?
  IAGO.
 She that was ever fair and never proud,
    Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,
    Never lack'd gold and yet went never gay,
    Fled from her wish and yet said, "Now I may";
    She that, being anger'd, her revenge being nigh,
    Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly;
    She that in wisdom never was so frail
    To change the cod's head for the salmon's tail;
    She that could think and ne'er disclose her mind,
    See suitors following and not look behind;
    She was a wight, if ever such wight were-
  DESDEMONA.
 To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.

  DESDEMONA.
 O most lame and impotent conclusion! Do not learn of him,
    Emilia, though he be thy husband.
 He speaks home, madam.
 You may relish him more in the
    soldier than in the scholar.

  IAGO.
 [Aside.
] He takes her by the palm; ay, well said, whisper.
 Ay, smile upon her, do; I will gyve thee in thine own
    courtship.
 If such tricks as these
    strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had been better you had
    not kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again you are
    most apt to play the sir in.
 Very good.
 Well kissed! an excellent
    courtesy! 'tis so, indeed.
]
    The Moor! I know his trumpet.

  CASSIO.
 'Tis truly so.

  DESDEMONA.
 Let's meet him and receive him.
 Lo, where he comes!

                    Enter Othello and Attendants.
 O my fair warrior!
  DESDEMONA.
                  My dear Othello!
  OTHELLO.
 It gives me wonder great as my content
    To see you here before me.
 O my soul's joy!
    If after every tempest come such calms,  
    May the winds blow till they have waken'd death!
    And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas
    Olympus-high, and duck again as low
    As hell's from heaven! If it were now to die,
    'Twere now to be most happy; for I fear
    My soul hath her content so absolute
    That not another comfort like to this
    Succeeds in unknown fate.
                  The heavens forbid
    But that our loves and comforts should increase,
    Even as our days do grow!
  OTHELLO.
                    Amen to that, sweet powers!
    I cannot speak enough of this content;
    It stops me here; it is too much of joy.

    And this, and this, the greatest discords be          Kisses her.

    That e'er our hearts shall make!
  IAGO.
                     [Aside.

  OTHELLO.

    How does my old acquaintance of this isle?
    Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus;
    I have found great love amongst them.
 O my sweet,
    I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
    In mine own comforts.
 Come, Desdemona,
    Once more well met at Cyprus.

                                    Exeunt all but Iago and Roderigo.
 Do thou meet me presently at the harbor.
 If thou
    be'st valiant- as they say base men being in love have then a
    nobility in their natures more than is native to them- list me.

    The lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard.
 First, I
    must tell thee this: Desdemona is directly in love with him.
 With him? Why, 'tis not possible.
 Mark me
    with what violence she first loved the Moor, but for bragging and  
    telling her fantastical lies.
 And will she love him still for
    prating? Let not thy discreet heart think it.
 Her eye must be
    fed; and what delight shall she have to look on the devil? When
    the blood is made dull with the act of sport, there should be,
    again to inflame it and to give satiety a fresh appetite,
    loveliness in favor, sympathy in years, manners, and beauties-
    all which the Moor is defective in.

  RODERIGO.

  IAGO.
 If
    she had been blest, she would never have loved the Moor.
 Blest
    pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand?
    Didst not mark that?
  RODERIGO.

  IAGO.
 Villainous thoughts,
    Roderigo! When these mutualities so marshal the way, hard at hand
    comes the master and main exercise, the incorporate conclusion.
 I have brought you from
    Venice.
 Watch you tonight; for the command, I'll lay't upon you.

    Cassio knows you not.
 I'll not be far from you.
  
  RODERIGO.
 Well.

  IAGO.
 Sir, he is rash and very sudden in choler, and haply may
    strike at you.
 Provoke him, that he may; for even out of that
    will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny, whose qualification shall
    come into no true taste again but by the displanting of Cassio.

    So shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by the means
    I shall then have to prefer them, and the impediment most
    profitably removed, without the which there were no expectation
    of our prosperity.

  RODERIGO.
 I will do this, if I can bring it to any opportunity.

  IAGO.
 I warrant thee.
 Meet me by and by at the citadel.
 I must
    fetch his necessaries ashore.
 Farewell.
                                              Exit.
 That Cassio loves her, I do well believe it;
    That she loves him, 'tis apt and of great credit.

    The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,
    Is of a constant, loving, noble nature,
    And I dare think he'll prove to Desdemona
    A most dear husband.
 Now, I do love her too,
    Not out of absolute lust, though peradventure  
    I stand accountant for as great a sin,
    But partly led to diet my revenge,
    For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
    Hath leap'd into my seat; the thought whereof
    Doth like a poisonous mineral gnaw my inwards,
    And nothing can or shall content my soul
    Till I am even'd with him, wife for wife.
 'Tis here, but yet confused:
    Knavery's plain face is never seen till used.





SCENE II.

A street.


  HERALD.
 So much
    was his pleasure should be proclaimed.
 Heaven bless the isle of Cyprus
    and our noble general Othello!                            Exeunt.

A hall in the castle.


Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio, and Attendants.

    Let's teach ourselves that honorable stop,
    Not to outsport discretion.

  CASSIO.
 Iago hath direction what to do;
    But notwithstanding with my personal eye
    Will I look to't.

  OTHELLO.
            Iago is most honest.
 Tomorrow with your earliest
    Let me have speech with you.
 Come, my dear love,
    The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
    That profit's yet to come 'tween me and you.

    Good night.


                             Enter Iago.
 Welcome, Iago; we must to the watch.
  
  IAGO.
 Not this hour, lieutenant; 'tis not yet ten o' the clock.
 He hath not yet made wanton the night
    with her, and she is sport for Jove.

  CASSIO.

  IAGO.

  CASSIO.

  IAGO.
 What an eye she has! Methinks it sounds a parley to
    provocation.

  CASSIO.
 An inviting eye; and yet methinks right modest.

  IAGO.
 And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?
  CASSIO.

  IAGO.
 Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a
    stope of wine, and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants
    that would fain have a measure to the health of black Othello.
 I have very poor and unhappy brains
    for drinking.
 I could well wish courtesy would invent some other
    custom of entertainment.

  IAGO.
 O, they are our friends! But one cup; I'll drink for you.
 I am
    unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with
    any more.

  IAGO.
 What, man! 'Tis a night of revels, the gallants desire it.

  CASSIO.
 Where are they?
  IAGO.

  CASSIO.
 I'll do't, but it dislikes me.
                        Exit.

  IAGO.
 If I can fasten but one cup upon him,
    With that which he hath drunk tonight already,
    He'll be as full of quarrel and offense
    As my young mistress' dog.

    Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits,
    That hold their honors in a wary distance,
    The very elements of this warlike isle,
    Have I tonight fluster'd with flowing cups,
    And they watch too.
 Now, 'mongst this flock of drunkards,
    Am I to put our Cassio in some action  
    That may offend the isle.
 But here they come.

    If consequence do but approve my dream,
    My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.
 Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I am a
    soldier.

  IAGO.

                 A soldier's a man;
                 O, man's life's but a span;
               Why then let a soldier drink.
 'Fore God, an excellent song.
  
  IAGO.
 Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?
  IAGO.
 Why, he drinks you with facility your Dane dead drunk; he
    sweats not to overthrow your Almain; he gives your Hollander a
    vomit ere the next pottle can be filled.

  IAGO.
]   "King Stephen was and-a worthy peer,
                 His breeches cost him but a crown;
               He held them sixpence all too dear,
                 With that he call'd the tailor lown.

               'Tis pride that pulls the country down;
                 Then take thine auld cloak about thee.
"  

    Some wine, ho!
  CASSIO.
 Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.

  IAGO.
 No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does
    those things.
 Well, God's above all, and there be souls must be
    saved, and there be souls must not be saved.

  IAGO.
 For mine own part- no offense to the general, nor any man
    of quality- I hope to be saved.
 And so do I too, lieutenant.
 Let's have no more of this; let's to
    our affairs.
 God forgive us our sins! Gentlemen, let's look to
    our business.
 Do not think, gentlemen, I am drunk: this is my
    ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left.
 I am not
    drunk now; I can stand well enough, and I speak well enough.

  ALL.
 Why, very well then; you must not think then that I am
    drunk.
                                                      Exit.
 To the platform, masters; come, let's set the watch.

  IAGO.
 And do but see his vice;
    'Tis to his virtue a just equinox,
    The one as long as the other.
 'Tis pity of him.

    I fear the trust Othello puts him in
    On some odd time of his infirmity
    Will shake this island.

  MONTANO.
                  But is he often thus?
  IAGO.
                        It were well
    The general were put in mind of it.

    Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
    Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio
    And looks not on his evils.
 Is not this true?

                           Enter Roderigo.
  

  IAGO.
] How now, Roderigo!
    I pray you, after the lieutenant; go.
              Exit Roderigo.

  MONTANO.
 And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor
    Should hazard such a place as his own second
    With one of an ingraft infirmity.
 What's the matter, lieutenant?
  CASSIO.

  RODERIGO.
 Beat me!  
  CASSIO.
 Nay, good lieutenant; I pray you, sir, hold your hand.

  CASSIO.

  MONTANO.

  CASSIO.
 Drunk?                                          They fight.
 [Aside to Roderigo.

                                                       Exit Roderigo.

    Who's that that rings the bell?- Diablo, ho!
    The town will rise.


  OTHELLO.
  
  OTHELLO.
 Hold, for your lives!
  IAGO.
 Hold, ho! Lieutenant- sir- Montano- gentlemen-
    Have you forgot all place of sense and duty?
    Hold! the general speaks to you! Hold, hold, for shame!
  OTHELLO.
 Why, how now, ho! from whence ariseth this?
    Are we turn'd Turks, and to ourselves do that
    Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
    For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl.

    He that stirs next to carve for his own rage
    Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.

    Silence that dreadful bell; it frights the isle
    From her propriety.
 What is the matter, masters?
    Honest Iago, that look'st dead with grieving,
    Speak: who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.

  IAGO.
 I do not know.
 Friends all but now, even now,
    In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom
    Devesting them for bed; and then, but now
    (As if some planet had unwitted men),
    Swords out, and tilting one at other's breast,
    In opposition bloody.
 I cannot speak  
    Any beginning to this peevish odds;
    And would in action glorious I had lost
    Those legs that brought me to a part of it!
  OTHELLO.

  OTHELLO.
 Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil;
    The gravity and stillness of your youth
    The world hath noted, and your name is great
    In mouths of wisest censure.

  MONTANO.
 Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger.

    Your officer, Iago, can inform you-
    While I spare speech, which something now offends me-
    Of all that I do know.
                    Now, by heaven,
    My blood begins my safer guides to rule,
    And passion, having my best judgement collied,
    Assays to lead the way.
 If I once stir,
    Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
    Shall sink in my rebuke.
 Iago, who began't?
  MONTANO.
 If partially affined, or leagued in office,
    Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
    Thou art no soldier.

  IAGO.
 Thus it is, general.
 Sir, this gentleman
    Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause.
 He, swift of foot,
    Outran my purpose; and I return'd the rather
    For that I heard the clink and fall of swords,
    And Cassio high in oath, which till tonight
    I ne'er might say before.

    Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,  
    As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
    Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received
    From him that fled some strange indignity,
    Which patience could not pass.
 Cassio, I love thee,
    But never more be officer of mine.


                    Re-enter Desdemona, attended.


    Look, if my gentle love be not raised up!
    I'll make thee an example.
                   What's the matter?
  OTHELLO.
 All's well now, sweeting; come away to bed.

    Lead him off.
                             Exit Montano, attended.
  
    To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
 Ay, past all surgery.
 Marry, heaven forbid!
  CASSIO.
 Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost my
    reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what
    remains is bestial.
 My reputation, Iago, my reputation!
  IAGO.
 Reputation
    is an idle and most false imposition; oft got without merit and
    lost without deserving.
 You have lost no reputation at all,
    unless you repute yourself such a loser.
 Sue
    to him again, and he's yours.
 Drunk? and speak parrot? and squabble? swagger? swear?  
    and discourse fustian with one's own shadow? O thou invisible
    spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call
    thee devil!
  IAGO.
 What was he that you followed with your sword?
    What had he done to you?
  CASSIO.
 I know not.

  IAGO.
 Is't possible?
  CASSIO.
 Why, but you are now well enough.
 How came you thus
     recovered?
  CASSIO.
 It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the
    devil wrath: one unperfectness shows me another, to make me
    frankly despise myself.

  IAGO.
 Come, you are too severe a moraler.
 To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and
    presently a beast! O strange! Every inordinate cup is unblest,
    and the ingredient is a devil.
 Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be
    well used.
 Exclaim no more against it.
 And, good lieutenant, I
    think you think I love you.
 I have well approved it, sir.
 I drunk!
  IAGO.
 I'll
    tell you what you shall do.
 I may say so in this respect, for that he hath devoted
    and given up himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement
    of her parts and graces.
 Confess yourself freely to her;
    importune her help to put you in your place again.
 She is of so
    free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds it a
    vice in her goodness not to do more than she is requested.
 This
    broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to splinter;
    and, my fortunes against any lay worth naming, this crack of your  
    love shall grow stronger than it was before.

  CASSIO.
 You advise me well.

  IAGO.
 I am desperate of my
    fortunes if they check me here.

  IAGO.
 You are in the right.

  CASSIO.
 Good night, honest Iago.
                              Exit.
 And what's he then that says I play the villain?
    When this advice is free I give and honest,
    Probal to thinking, and indeed the course
    To win the Moor again? For 'tis most easy
    The inclining Desdemona to subdue
    In any honest suit.
 And then for her
    To win the Moor, were't to renounce his baptism,
    All seals and symbols of redeemed sin,
    His soul is so enfetter'd to her love,
    That she may make, unmake, do what she list,  
    Even as her appetite shall play the god
    With his weak function.
 How am I then a villain
    To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,
    Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!
    When devils will the blackest sins put on,
    They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
    As I do now.

    So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
    And out of her own goodness make the net
    That shall enmesh them all.


                                How now, Roderigo!  
  RODERIGO.
 My money is almost spent; I
    have been tonight exceedingly well cudgeled; and I think the
    issue will be, I shall have so much experience for my pains; and
    so, with no money at all and a little more wit, return again to
    Venice.

    Does't not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
    And thou by that small hurt hast cashier'd Cassio.

    Though other things grow fair against the sun,
    Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe.
 By the mass, 'tis morning;
    Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.

    Retire thee; go where thou art billeted.
 Thou shalt know more hereafter.

    Nay, get thee gone.
 [Exit Roderigo.
] Two things are to be done:
    My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress-  
    I'll set her on;
    Myself the while to draw the Moor apart,
    And bring him jump when he may Cassio find
    Soliciting his wife.
 Ay, that's the way;
    Dull not device by coldness and delay.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT III.

Before the castle.


Enter Cassio and some Musicians.
 Masters, play here, I will content your pains; Something
    that's brief; and bid "Good morrow, general.
"
    Music.


                             Enter Clown.
 O, thereby hangs a tail.
 Marry, sir, by many a wind instrument that I know.
  
  FIRST MUSICIAN.

  CLOWN.
 If you have any music that may not be heard, to't again;
    but, as they say, to hear music the general does not greatly
    care.

  FIRST MUSICIAN.

  CLOWN.

    Go, vanish into air, away!                      Exeunt Musicians.
 Dost thou hear, my honest friend?
  CLOWN.
 No, I hear not your honest friend; I hear you.

  CASSIO.
                             Exit Clown.


                              In happy time, Iago.
  
  IAGO.
 You have not been abed, then?
  CASSIO.
 I have made bold, Iago,
    To send in to your wife.
 My suit to her
    Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona
    Procure me some access.

  IAGO.
                     I'll send her to you presently;
    And I'll devise a mean to draw the Moor
    Out of the way, that your converse and business
    May be more free.
 [Exit Iago.
 Good morrow, good lieutenant.

    The general and his wife are talking of it,
    And she speaks for you stoutly.
                  Yet, I beseech you,
    If you think fit, or that it may be done,
    Give me advantage of some brief discourse
    With Desdemona alone.

  EMILIA.
                 Pray you, come in.

  CASSIO.
                       I am much bound to you.

A room in the castle.


Enter Othello, Iago, and Gentlemen.


  OTHELLO.
 These letters give, Iago, to the pilot,
    And by him do my duties to the Senate.

    That done, I will be walking on the works;
    Repair there to me.

  IAGO.
 This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see't?
  GENTLEMEN.
 We'll wait upon your lordship.
                   Exeunt.





SCENE III.

  DESDEMONA.
 O, that's an honest fellow.
 Do not doubt, Cassio,
    But I will have my lord and you again
    As friendly as you were.

  CASSIO.

  DESDEMONA.

  CASSIO.
                       Ay, but, lady,
    That policy may either last so long,
    Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,  
    Or breed itself so out of circumstances,
    That I being absent and my place supplied,
    My general will forget my love and service.

  DESDEMONA.
 Do not doubt that.
 Before Emilia here
    I give thee warrant of thy place, assure thee,
    If I do vow a friendship, I'll perform it
    To the last article.
 My lord shall never rest;
    I'll watch him tame and talk him out of patience;
    His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift;
    I'll intermingle everything he does
    With Cassio's suit.
 Therefore be merry, Cassio,
    For thy solicitor shall rather die
    Than give thy cause away.


                Enter Othello and Iago, at a distance.


  EMILIA.
 Madam, here comes my lord.

  CASSIO.
 Madam, I'll take my leave.
 Nay, stay and hear me speak.
 Madam, not now.
                   Exit Cassio.

  IAGO.

  OTHELLO.
 Nothing, my lord; or if- I know not what.
 Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
  IAGO.
 Cassio, my lord! No, sure, I cannot think it,
    That he would steal away so guilty-like,
    Seeing you coming.

  OTHELLO.
             I do believe 'twas he.

  DESDEMONA.
 How now, my lord!
    I have been talking with a suitor here,
    A man that languishes in your displeasure.
 Why, your lieutenant, Cassio.
 Good my lord,
    If I have any grace or power to move you,
    His present reconciliation take;
    For if he be not one that truly loves you,
    That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,
    I have no judgement in an honest face.
  
    I prithee, call him back.

  OTHELLO.
                    Went he hence now?
  DESDEMONA.
 Ay, sooth; so humbled
    That he hath left part of his grief with me
    To suffer with him.
 Good love, call him back.

  OTHELLO.

  DESDEMONA.
 But shall't be shortly?
  OTHELLO.
                           The sooner, sweet, for you.

  DESDEMONA.

  DESDEMONA.
                         I shall not dine at home;
    I meet the captains at the citadel.

  DESDEMONA.
 Why then tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn,
    On Tuesday noon, or night, on Wednesday morn.

    I prithee, name the time, but let it not
    Exceed three days.
 In faith, he's penitent;
    And yet his trespass, in our common reason-
    Save that, they say, the wars must make example
    Out of their best- is not almost a fault  
    To incur a private check.
 Prithee, no more.

  DESDEMONA.
                     I will deny thee nothing,
    Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,  
    To leave me but a little to myself.

  DESDEMONA.
 Shall I deny you? No.
 Farewell, my lord.
 Farewell, my Desdemona; I'll come to thee straight.

  DESDEMONA.

                                         Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia.
 Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul,
    But I do love thee! and when I love thee not,
    Chaos is come again.

  IAGO.
 My noble lord-
  OTHELLO.
             What dost thou say, Iago?
  IAGO.
 He did, from first to last.
 Why dost thou ask?
  IAGO.
 But for a satisfaction of my thought;
    No further harm.

  IAGO.
 Indeed? ay, indeed.
 Discern'st thou aught in that?
    Is he not honest?
  IAGO.
 Honest? Ay, honest.

  IAGO.

  OTHELLO.
 What dost thou think?
  IAGO.
 Think, my lord? By heaven, he echoes me,
    As if there were some monster in his thought
    Too hideous to be shown.
 Thou dost mean something.

    I heard thee say even now, thou like'st not that,
    When Cassio left my wife.
 What didst not like?
    And when I told thee he was of my counsel
    In my whole course of wooing, thou criedst, "Indeed!"
    And didst contract and purse thy brow together,
    As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
    Some horrible conceit.

  OTHELLO.
                            I think thou dost;  
    And for I know thou'rt full of love and honesty
    And weigh'st thy words before thou givest them breath,
    Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more;
    For such things in a false disloyal knave
    Are tricks of custom; but in a man that's just
    They're close dilations, working from the heart,
    That passion cannot rule.

  IAGO.
 I think so too.

  IAGO.
 Why then I think Cassio's an honest man.

  OTHELLO.
 Nay, yet there's more in this.

    I prithee, speak to me as to thy thinkings,
    As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts
    The worst of words.

  IAGO.

    Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false;
    As where's that palace whereinto foul things
    Sometimes intrude not? Who has a breast so pure,
    But some uncleanly apprehensions
    Keep leets and law-days, and in session sit
    With meditations lawful?
  OTHELLO.

    It were not for your quiet nor your good,
    Nor for my manhood, honesty, or wisdom,  
    To let you know my thoughts.

  OTHELLO.
                       What dost thou mean?
  IAGO.
 Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
    Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
 By heaven, I'll know thy thoughts.

  IAGO.
 You cannot, if my heart were in your hand;
    Nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody.
 Ha!
  IAGO.
        O, beware, my lord, of jealousy!
    It is the green-eyed monster, which doth mock
    The meat it feeds on.
 O misery!  
  IAGO.
 Poor and content is rich, and rich enough;
    But riches fineless is as poor as winter
    To him that ever fears he shall be poor.

    Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend
    From jealousy!
  OTHELLO.
         Why, why is this?
    Think'st thou I'ld make a life of jealousy,
    To follow still the changes of the moon
    With fresh suspicions? No! To be once in doubt
    Is once to be resolved.

    Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
    The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt;
    For she had eyes and chose me.
 I am glad of it, for now I shall have reason
    To show the love and duty that I bear you
    With franker spirit.
 Therefore, as I am bound,
    Receive it from me.
 I speak not yet of proof.

    I would not have your free and noble nature
    Out of self-bounty be abused.
 Dost thou say so?
  IAGO.

  OTHELLO.
               And so she did.

  IAGO.
                                  Why, go to then.
  
    She that so young could give out such a seeming,
    To seel her father's eyes up close as oak-
    He thought 'twas witchcraft- but I am much to blame;
    I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
    For too much loving you.
 I see this hath a little dash'd your spirits.

  OTHELLO.
 Not a jot, not a jot.

    I hope you will consider what is spoke
    Comes from my love.
 But I do see you're moved;
    I am to pray you not to strain my speech
    To grosser issues nor to larger reach
    Than to suspicion.
 I will not.

  IAGO.
                Should you do so, my lord,
    My speech should fall into such vile success
    Which my thoughts aim not at.
 Cassio's my worthy friend-
    My lord, I see you're moved.

  OTHELLO.
                       No, not much moved.
  
    I do not think but Desdemona's honest.
 Long live she so! and long live you to think so!
  OTHELLO.
 Ay, there's the point, as- to be bold with you-
    Not to affect many proposed matches
    Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
    Whereto we see in all things nature tends-
    Foh, one may smell in such a will most rank,
    Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural.

    But pardon me.
 I do not in position
    Distinctly speak of her; though I may fear,
    Her will, recoiling to her better judgement,
    May fall to match you with her country forms,
    And happily repent.

    If more thou dost perceive, let me know more;
    Set on thy wife to observe.
 Leave me, Iago.

  IAGO.
] My lord, I take my leave.

  OTHELLO.
 [Returning.

    Though it be fit that Cassio have his place,
    For sure he fills it up with great ability,
    Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile,
    You shall by that perceive him and his means.

    Note if your lady strain his entertainment
    With any strong or vehement importunity;
    Much will be seen in that.
 In the meantime,
    Let me be thought too busy in my fears-
    As worthy cause I have to fear I am-
    And hold her free, I do beseech your honor.

  OTHELLO.
 Fear not my government.

  IAGO.
                              Exit.

  OTHELLO.
 Haply, for I am black  
    And have not those soft parts of conversation
    That chamberers have, or for I am declined
    Into the vale of years- yet that's not much-
    She's gone.
 I am abused, and my relief
    Must be to loathe her.
 O curse of marriage,
    That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
    And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad,
    And live upon the vapor of a dungeon,
    Than keep a corner in the thing I love
    For others' uses.
 Yet, 'tis the plague of great ones:
    Prerogatived are they less than the base;
    'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death.

    Even then this forked plague is fated to us
    When we do quicken.
 Desdemona comes:

                    Re-enter Desdemona and Emilia.


    If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself!
    I'll not believe't.
            How now, my dear Othello!  
    Your dinner, and the generous islanders
    By you invited, do attend your presence.
 I am to blame.

  DESDEMONA.
              Why do you speak so faintly?
    Are you not well?
  OTHELLO.
 Faith, that's with watching; 'twill away again.

  OTHELLO.
           Your napkin is too little;
            He puts the handkerchief from him, and she drops it.

    Let it alone.

  DESDEMONA.
 I am very sorry that you are not well.

                                        Exeunt Othello and Desdemona.

  EMILIA.
 I am glad I have found this napkin;
    This was her first remembrance from the Moor.
 How now, what do you here alone?
  EMILIA.
 Do not you chide; I have a thing for you.

  IAGO.
 A thing for me? It is a common thing-
  EMILIA.
 Ha!
  IAGO.
 To have a foolish wife.

  EMILIA.

  IAGO.
 Hast stol'n it from her?
  EMILIA.

    Look, here it is.

  IAGO.
               A good wench; give it me.
 [Snatching it.
 If't be not for some purpose of import,
    Give't me again.
 Poor lady, she'll run mad
    When she shall lack it.

  IAGO.

    Go, leave me.
                                        Exit Emilia.
 Trifles light as air
    Are to the jealous confirmations strong
    As proofs of holy writ; this may do something.

    The Moor already changes with my poison:
    Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,
    Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
    But with a little act upon the blood
    Burn like the mines of sulphur.
  
    Look, where he comes!

                          Re-enter Othello.


                          Not poppy, nor mandragora,
    Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,
    Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
    Which thou owedst yesterday.
                       Ha, ha, false to me?
  IAGO.
 Why, how now, general! No more of that.

  OTHELLO.

    I swear 'tis better to be much abused
    Than but to know't a little.

  IAGO.
 What sense had I of her stol'n hours of lust?
    I saw't not, thought it not, it harm'd not me;
    I slept the next night well, was free and merry;
    I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips.
  
  IAGO.

  OTHELLO.
 O, now forever
    Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content!
    Farewell the plumed troop and the big wars
    That make ambition virtue! O, farewell,
    Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,
    The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife,
    The royal banner, and all quality,
    Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war!
    And O you mortal engines, whose rude throats
    The immortal Jove's dread clamors counterfeit,
    Farewell! Othello's occupation's gone!
  IAGO.
 Is't possible, my lord?
  OTHELLO.
 Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore;
    Be sure of it.
                         Is't come to this?
  OTHELLO.
 Make me to see't; or at the least so prove it,
    That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
    To hang a doubt on; or woe upon thy life!
  IAGO.
 My noble lord-
  OTHELLO.
 If thou dost slander her and torture me,
    Never pray more; abandon all remorse;
    On horror's head horrors accumulate;
    Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed;
    For nothing canst thou to damnation add
    Greater than that.
                O grace! O heaven defend me!
    Are you a man? have you a soul or sense?
    God be wi' you; take mine office.

  OTHELLO.
                       By the world,
    I think my wife be honest, and think she is not;
    I think that thou art just, and think thou art not.

    I'll have some proof.
 Her name, that was as fresh
    As Dian's visage, is now begrimed and black
    As mine own face.
 If there be cords or knives,
    Poison or fire, or suffocating streams,
    I'll not endure it.
 Would I were satisfied!
  IAGO.
 I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion;
    I do repent me that I put it to you.

    You would be satisfied?
  OTHELLO.

  IAGO.
 And may.
 But, how? how satisfied, my lord?
    Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on?
    Behold her topp'd?
  OTHELLO.
 It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
    To bring them to that prospect.
 Damn them then,  
    If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
    More than their own! What then? how then?
    What shall I say? Where's satisfaction?
    It is impossible you should see this
    Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
    As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
    As ignorance made drunk.

  OTHELLO.
 Give me a living reason she's disloyal.

  IAGO.
 I do not like the office;
    But sith I am enter'd in this cause so far,
    Prick'd to't by foolish honesty and love,
    I will go on.
  
    In sleep I heard him say, "Sweet Desdemona,
    Let us be wary, let us hide our loves";
    And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
    Cry, "O sweet creature!" and then kiss me hard,
    As if he pluck'd up kisses by the roots,
    That grew upon my lips; then laid his leg
    Over my thigh, and sigh'd and kiss'd; and then
    Cried, "Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!"
  OTHELLO.
 O monstrous! monstrous!
  IAGO.

  OTHELLO.

    'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.

  IAGO.
 And this may help to thicken other proofs
    That do demonstrate thinly.
                      I'll tear her all to pieces.
 Nay, but be wise; yet we see nothing done;
    She may be honest yet.
 Tell me but this;
    Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
    Spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand?
  OTHELLO.
 I gave her such a one; 'twas my first gift.
  
  IAGO.

  OTHELLO.
                          If it be that-
  IAGO.
 If it be that, or any that was hers,
    It speaks against her with the other proofs.
 O, that the slave had forty thousand lives!
    One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.
 Look here, Iago,
    All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven.
                          Yet be content.

  OTHELLO.
 Patience, I say; your mind perhaps may change.

  OTHELLO.
 Never, Iago.
 Like to the Pontic Sea,
    Whose icy current and compulsive course  
    Ne'er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on
    To the Propontic and the Hellespont,
    Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace,
    Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love,
    Till that a capable and wide revenge
    Swallow them up.
 Now, by yond marble heaven,
    In the due reverence of a sacred vow                      Kneels.

    I here engage my words.

  IAGO.
                     Do not rise yet.
                  Kneels.

    Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
    You elements that clip us round about,
    Witness that here Iago doth give up
    The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
    To wrong'd Othello's service! Let him command,
    And to obey shall be in me remorse,
    What bloody business ever.

  OTHELLO.

  IAGO.
 My friend is dead, 'tis done at your request;
    But let her live.

  OTHELLO.
 Now art thou my lieutenant.
                                Exeunt.





SCENE IV.

Before the castle.


Enter Desdemona, Emilia, and Clown.


  DESDEMONA.
 Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?
  CLOWN.
 I dare not say he lies anywhere.

  DESDEMONA.
 He's a soldier; and for one to say a soldier lies, is
    stabbing.
 To tell you where he lodges, is to tell you where I lie.

  DESDEMONA.

  DESDEMONA.
 Can you inquire him out and be edified by report?
  CLOWN.

  DESDEMONA.
 Seek him, bid him come hither.
 Tell him I have moved my
    lord on his behalf and hope all will be well.

  CLOWN.
 To do this is within the compass of man's wit, and therefore  
    I will attempt the doing it.
                                Exit.

  DESDEMONA.
 I know not, madam.

  DESDEMONA.
 Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
    Full of crusadoes; and, but my noble Moor
    Is true of mind and made of no such baseness
    As jealous creatures are, it were enough
    To put him to ill thinking.

  EMILIA.
 Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
    Drew all such humors from him.

  EMILIA.
                          Look, where he comes.

  DESDEMONA.


                      How is't with you, my lord?
  OTHELLO.
 Well, my good lady.
 [Aside.
] O, hardness to dissemble!
    How do you, Desdemona?  
  DESDEMONA.

  OTHELLO.
 Give me your hand.
 This hand is moist, my lady.

  DESDEMONA.
 It yet has felt no age nor known no sorrow.

  OTHELLO.
 'Tis a good hand,
    A frank one.

  DESDEMONA.
 You may, indeed, say so;
    For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.
 A liberal hand.
 The hearts of old gave hands;
    But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.

  DESDEMONA.
 Come now, your promise.

  OTHELLO.
 What promise, chuck?
  DESDEMONA.
 I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me;
    Lend me thy handkerchief.

  DESDEMONA.
 Here, my lord.
 That which I gave you.
 I have it not about me.

  OTHELLO.
 Not?
  DESDEMONA.

  OTHELLO.
 That's a fault.
 She told her, while she kept it,
    'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father
    Entirely to her love, but if she lost it
    Or made a gift of it, my father's eye
    Should hold her loathed and his spirits should hunt
    After new fancies.
 She dying gave it me,
    And bid me, when my fate would have me wive,
    To give it her.
                     Is't possible?
  OTHELLO.
  
    A sibyl, that had number'd in the world
    The sun to course two hundred compasses,
    In her prophetic fury sew'd the work;
    The worms were hallow'd that did breed the silk,
    And it was dyed in mummy which the skillful
    Conserved of maiden's hearts.

  DESDEMONA.
 Most veritable; therefore look to't well.

  DESDEMONA.
 Then would to God that I had never seen't!
  OTHELLO.
 Why do you speak so startingly and rash?
  OTHELLO.
 Heaven bless us!
  OTHELLO.
 Say you?
  DESDEMONA.
 It is not lost; but what an if it were?
  OTHELLO.
 How?
  DESDEMONA.
 Fetch't, let me see it.

  OTHELLO.
 Fetch me the handkerchief, my mind misgives.

  DESDEMONA.

  OTHELLO.
                 I pray, talk me of Cassio.

  OTHELLO.
 The handkerchief!
  DESDEMONA.

  OTHELLO.
 Away!                                                Exit.

  EMILIA.
 I ne'er saw this before.

  EMILIA.
 'Tis not a year or two shows us a man.


                        Enter Cassio and Iago.


  IAGO.
 There is no other way; 'tis she must do't.

    And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.

  DESDEMONA.
 I would not be delay'd.

    If my offense be of such mortal kind
    That nor my service past nor present sorrows
    Nor purposed merit in futurity
    Can ransom me into his love again,
    But to know so must be my benefit;
    So shall I clothe me in a forced content
    And shut myself up in some other course
    To Fortune's alms.

    What I can do I will; and more I will
    Than for myself I dare.
 Let that suffice you.
                 He went hence but now,
    And certainly in strange unquietness.
 Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon,
    When it hath blown his ranks into the air
    And, like the devil, from his very arm
    Puff'd his own brother.
 And can he be angry?
    Something of moment then.
 I will go meet him.

    There's matter in't indeed if he be angry.
 I prithee, do so.
                             Exit Iago.

  EMILIA.
 Alas the day, I never gave him cause!
  EMILIA.
 But jealous souls will not be answer'd so;  
    They are not ever jealous for the cause,
    But jealous for they are jealous.
 'Tis a monster
    Begot upon itself, born on itself.

  DESDEMONA.
 Heaven keep that monster from Othello's mind!
  EMILIA.
 Lady, amen.

  DESDEMONA.
 I will go seek him.

    If I do find him fit, I'll move your suit,
    And seek to effect it to my uttermost.

                                         Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia.


                            Enter Bianca.
 Save you, friend Cassio!
  CASSIO.
 And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.

    I have this while with leaden thoughts been press'd;
    But I shall in a more continuate time
    Strike off this score of absence.
 Sweet Bianca,
                                  Gives her Desdemona's handkerchief.

    Take me this work out.

  BIANCA.
                  O Cassio, whence came this?
    This is some token from a newer friend.

    To the felt absence now I feel a cause.
                          Go to, woman!
    Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth,
    From whence you have them.
 You are jealous now
    That this is from some mistress, some remembrance.

    No, by my faith, Bianca.

  BIANCA.
                    Why, whose is it?
  CASSIO.
 I know not, sweet.
 I found it in my chamber.

    I like the work well.

    Take it, and do't; and leave me for this time.

  BIANCA.
 Leave you! wherefore?
  CASSIO.

  BIANCA.

  BIANCA.

  CASSIO.
 'Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
    For I attend here, but I'll see you soon.

  BIANCA.
 'Tis very good; I must be circumstanced.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE I.


  IAGO.
                                    What,
    To kiss in private?
  OTHELLO.
              An unauthorized kiss.
 Or to be naked with her friend in bed
    An hour or more, not meaning any harm?
  OTHELLO.
 Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm!
    It is hypocrisy against the devil.

    They that mean virtuously and yet do so,
    The devil their virtue tempts and they tempt heaven.

  IAGO.
 Why, then, 'tis hers, my lord, and being hers,
    She may, I think, bestow't on any man.
 She is protectress of her honor too.
  
    May she give that?
  IAGO.

    But for the handkerchief-
  OTHELLO.

    Thou said'st- O, it comes o'er my memory,
    As doth the raven o'er the infected house,
    Boding to all- he had my handkerchief.
 Ay, what of that?
  OTHELLO.
                That's not so good now.

  IAGO.
 He hath, my lord; but be you well assured,
    No more than he'll unswear.
  
  OTHELLO.
                      What hath he said?
  IAGO.
 What? what?
  IAGO.
 Lie-
  OTHELLO.

  OTHELLO.
 Lie with her! lie on her! We say lie on her, when they
    belie her.
 Lie with her! 'Zounds, that's fulsome! Handkerchief-
    confessions- handkerchief! To confess and be hanged for his labor-
    first, to be hanged, and then to confess.
 I tremble at it.

    Nature would not invest herself in such shadowing passion without
    some instruction.
 It is not words that shakes me thus.
 Pish!
    Noses, ears, and lips.
 Is't possible? Confess? Handkerchief? O
    devil!
                                                   Falls in a trance.

  IAGO.
 What, ho! My lord!
    My lord, I say! Othello!  

                            Enter Cassio.


                             How now, Cassio!
  CASSIO.
 What's the matter?
  IAGO.
 My lord is fall'n into an epilepsy.

    This is his second fit; he had one yesterday.

  CASSIO.
 Rub him about the temples.
                              No, forbear;
    The lethargy must have his quiet course.

    If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by
    Breaks out to savage madness.
 Look, he stirs.
 When he is gone,
    I would on great occasion speak with you.
            Exit Cassio.
                       I mock you? No, by heaven.
 A horned man's a monster and a beast.
                       Good sir, be a man;
    Think every bearded fellow that's but yoked
    May draw with you.
 There's millions now alive
    That nightly lie in those unproper beds
    Which they dare swear peculiar.
 O, thou art wise; 'tis certain.

    Whilst you were here o'erwhelmed with your grief-
    A passion most unsuiting such a man-
    Cassio came hither.
 I shifted him away,
    And laid good 'scuse upon your ecstasy;
    Bade him anon return and here speak with me  
    The which he promised.
 Do but encave yourself
    And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns,
    That dwell in every region of his face;
    For I will make him tell the tale anew,
    Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
    He hath and is again to cope your wife.

    I say, but mark his gesture.
 Marry, patience,
    Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen,
    And nothing of a man.
                Dost thou hear, Iago?
    I will be found most cunning in my patience;
    But (dost thou hear?) most bloody.
                                That's not amiss;
    But yet keep time in all.
 Will you withdraw?
                                                     Othello retires.
 It is a creature
    That dotes on Cassio, as 'tis the strumpet's plague
    To beguile many and be beguiled by one.


    As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad;
    And his unbookish jealousy must construe
    Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behavior
    Quite in the wrong.
 The worser that you give me the addition
    Whose want even kills me.

  IAGO.
 Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on't.

    Now, if this suit lay in Bianco's power,
    How quickly should you speed!
  CASSIO.
                         Alas, poor caitiff!
  OTHELLO.

  CASSIO.
 Alas, poor rogue! I think, i'faith, she loves me.

  OTHELLO.
 Now he denies it faintly and laughs it out.

  IAGO.
 Do you hear, Cassio?  
  OTHELLO.
                   Now he importunes him
    To tell it o'er.
 Go to; well said, well said.

  IAGO.

    Do you intend it?
  CASSIO.
 Ha, ha, ha!
  OTHELLO.
 Ha, ha, ha!
  OTHELLO.
 They laugh that win.

  IAGO.
 Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.
 Prithee, say true.

  IAGO.
 I am a very villain else.

  CASSIO.
 Crying, "O dear Cassio!" as it were; his gesture imports
    it.

  CASSIO.
 So hangs and lolls and weeps upon me; so hales and pulls
    me.
 Ha, ha, ha!
  OTHELLO.
 Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber.
 O, I see
    that nose of yours, but not that dog I shall throw it to.

  IAGO.
 Before me! look where she comes.

  CASSIO.


                            Enter Bianca.
 I must take out the work? A likely piece of work that
    you should find it in your chamber and not know who left it
    there! This is some minx's token, and I must take out the work?
    There, give it your hobbyhorse.

  CASSIO.
 An you'll come to supper tonight, you may; an you will not,
    come when you are next prepared for.
                        Exit.

  CASSIO.
 Faith, I must; she'll rail i' the street else.

  IAGO.
 Faith, I intend so.

  IAGO.

  CASSIO.
                              Exit Cassio.
 Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?
  OTHELLO.
 O Iago!
  IAGO.
 And did you see the handkerchief?
  OTHELLO.
 Was that mine?
  IAGO.
 And to see how he prizes the foolish
    woman your wife! She gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.
  
  OTHELLO.
 I would have him nine years akilling.

  OTHELLO.
 Ay, let her rot, and perish, and be damned tonight, for
    she shall not live.
 No, my heart is turned to stone; I strike it,
    and it hurts my hand.
 Hang her! I do but say what she is.
 So delicate with her
    needle, an admirable musician.
 O, she will sing the savageness
    out of a bear.
 Of so high and plenteous wit and invention-
  IAGO.

  OTHELLO.
 O, a thousand, a thousand times.
 Ay, too gentle.

  OTHELLO.
 Nay, that's certain.
 But yet the pity of it, Iago!
    O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!
  IAGO.

  OTHELLO.
 I will chop her into messes.
 Cuckold me!  
  IAGO.
 With mine officer!
  IAGO.
 That's fouler.

  OTHELLO.
 Get me some poison, Iago, this night.
 This
    night, Iago.

  OTHELLO.
 Good, good, the justice of it pleases, very good.
 You shall hear more
    by midnight.
 Excellent good.
 [A trumpet within.
] What trumpet is that
    same?
  IAGO.
 And, see your wife is with him.


              Enter Lodovico, Desdemona, and Attendants.
 God save the worthy general!
  OTHELLO.
                               With all my heart, sir.

  DESDEMONA.
 And what's the news, good cousin Lodovico?
  IAGO.
 How does Lieutenant Cassio?
  IAGO.

  DESDEMONA.
 Cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord
    An unkind breech; but you shall make all well.

  OTHELLO.
 My lord?
  OTHELLO.
 [Reads.
] "This fail you not to do, as you will-"
  LODOVICO.
 He did not call; he's busy in the paper.
 A most unhappy one.
 I would do much
    To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.
 My lord?  
  OTHELLO.
 Are you wise?
  DESDEMONA.
 What, is he angry?
  LODOVICO.
                     May be the letter moved him;
    For, as I think, they do command him home,
    Deputing Cassio in his government.

  DESDEMONA.
 By my troth, I am glad on't.

  OTHELLO.
                                      My lord?
  OTHELLO.

  DESDEMONA.
                         Why, sweet Othello?
  OTHELLO.

  LODOVICO.
 My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
    Though I should swear I saw't.
 'Tis very much.

    Out of my sight!
  DESDEMONA.
 [Going.
] I will not stay to offend you.
 Truly, an obedient lady.

    I do beseech your lordship, call her back.

  OTHELLO.
 Mistress!
  DESDEMONA.
 My lord?
  OTHELLO.
 Sir, I obey the mandate,
    And will return to Venice.
 Hence, avaunt!
                                                      Exit Desdemona.

    Cassio shall have my place.
 Goats and monkeys!
     Exit.
  
  LODOVICO.
                             He is much changed.

  LODOVICO.
 Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?
  IAGO.
 I may not breathe my censure
    What he might be: if what he might he is not,
    I would to heaven he were!
  LODOVICO.
                    What, strike his wife!
  IAGO.
 Faith, that was not so well; yet would I knew
    That stroke would prove the worst!
  LODOVICO.
                        Alas, alas!
    It is not honesty in me to speak
    What I have seen and known.
 Do but go after,
    And mark how he continues.

  LODOVICO.


Enter Othello and Emilia.


  OTHELLO.
 Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.

  EMILIA.
 But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
    Each syllable that breath made up between them.

  OTHELLO.
 What, did they never whisper?
  EMILIA.

  OTHELLO.
 Never.

  OTHELLO.
 To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
  EMILIA.
 Never, my lord.
 That's strange.

  EMILIA.
 I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,
    Lay down my soul at stake.
 If you think other,
    Remove your thought; it doth abuse your bosom.

  OTHELLO.
              Bid her come hither; go.

    And yet she'll kneel and pray; I have seen her do't.
 My lord, what is your will?
  OTHELLO.
                               Pray, chuck, come hither.

  DESDEMONA.
                          Let me see your eyes;
    Look in my face.

  DESDEMONA.
 [To Emilia.
  
    Your mystery, your mystery; nay, dispatch.

  DESDEMONA.

  OTHELLO.
 Why, what art thou?
  DESDEMONA.
 Your wife, my lord, your true and loyal wife.

  OTHELLO.
 Come, swear it, damn thyself;
    Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
    Should fear to seize thee.
 Therefore be double-damn'd;
    Swear thou art honest.

  DESDEMONA.

  OTHELLO.
 Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.

  DESDEMONA.
 O Desdemona! Away! away! away!
  DESDEMONA.
 Alas the heavy day! Why do you weep?
    Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
    If haply you my father do suspect
    An instrument of this your calling back,
    Lay not your blame on me.
 If you have lost him,
    Why, I have lost him too.
  
  OTHELLO.
                    Had it pleased heaven
    To try me with affliction, had they rain'd
    All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head,
    Steep'd me in poverty to the very lips,
    Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,
    I should have found in some place of my soul
    A drop of patience; but, alas, to make me
    A fixed figure for the time of scorn
    To point his slow unmoving finger at!
    Yet could I bear that too, well, very well;
    But there, where I have garner'd up my heart,
    Where either I must live or bear no life;
    The fountain from the which my current runs,
    Or else dries up; to be discarded thence!
    Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads
    To knot and gender in! Turn thy complexion there,
    Patience, thou young and rose-lipp'd cherubin,
    Ay, there, look grim as hell!
  DESDEMONA.
 I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.

  OTHELLO.
 O, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,  
    That quicken even with blowing.
 O thou weed,
    Who art so lovely fair and smell'st so sweet
    That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne'er been born!
  DESDEMONA.
 Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
    Made to write "whore" upon? What committed?
    Committed? O thou public commoner!
    I should make very forges of my cheeks,
    That would to cinders burn up modesty,
    Did I but speak thy deeds.
 What committed!
    Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
    The bawdy wind, that kisses all it meets,
    Is hush'd within the hollow mine of earth,
    And will not hear it.
 What committed?
    Impudent strumpet!
  DESDEMONA.

  OTHELLO.
 Are not you a strumpet?
  DESDEMONA.

  OTHELLO.
                         I cry you mercy then;
    I took you for that cunning whore of Venice
    That married with Othello.
 [Raises his voice.
] You, mistress,
    That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
    And keep the gate of hell!

                           Re-enter Emilia.


                               You, you, ay, you!
    We have done our course; there's money for your pains.

    I pray you, turn the key, and keep our counsel.
             Exit.

  EMILIA.
 Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
    How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?
  DESDEMONA.

  EMILIA.
 Good madam, what's the matter with my lord?  
  DESDEMONA.
 Why, with my lord, madam.
 Who is thy lord?
  EMILIA.
 I have none.
 Do not talk to me, Emilia;
    I cannot weep, nor answer have I none
    But what should go by water.
 Remember,
    And call thy husband hither.

  DESDEMONA.
 'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.

    How have I been behaved, that he might stick
    The small'st opinion on my least misuse?

                      Re-enter Emilia with Iago.


  IAGO.
 What is your pleasure, madam? How is't with you?
  DESDEMONA.
 Those that do teach young babes
    Do it with gentle means and easy tasks.
  
    He might have chid me so, for in good faith,
    I am a child to chiding.

  IAGO.
                      What's the matter, lady?
  EMILIA.
                            What name, fair lady?
  DESDEMONA.
 Such as she says my lord did say I was.

  EMILIA.
 He call'd her whore; a beggar in his drink
    Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.
 Why did he so?
  DESDEMONA.
 I do not know; I am sure I am none such.

  IAGO.
 Do not weep, do not weep.

  EMILIA.
 I will be hang'd, if some eternal villain,
    Some busy and insinuating rogue,
    Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
    Have not devised this slander; I'll be hang'd else.
 Fie, there is no such man; it is impossible.

  DESDEMONA.
 A halter pardon him! And hell gnaw his bones!
    Why should he call her whore? Who keeps her company?
    What place? What time? What form? What likelihood?
    The Moor's abused by some most villainous knave,
    Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.
 You are a fool; go to.

  DESDEMONA.
 Here I kneel:
    If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love
    Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,
    Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense,
    Delighted them in any other form,
    Or that I do not yet, and ever did,
    And ever will, though he do shake me off
    To beggarly divorcement, love him dearly,
    Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much,
    And his unkindness may defeat my life,
    But never taint my love.
 I cannot say "whore.
 I pray you, be content; 'tis but his humor:
    The business of the state does him offense,  
    And he does chide with you.

  DESDEMONA.
 If 'twere no other-
  IAGO.

    Hark, how these instruments summon to supper!
    The messengers of Venice stay the meat.

    Go in, and weep not; all things shall be well.

                                         Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia.


    How now, Roderigo!
  RODERIGO.
 I do not find that thou dealest justly with me.

  IAGO.
 What in the contrary?
  RODERIGO.
 Every day thou daffest me with some device, Iago; and
    rather, as it seems to me now, keepest from me all conveniency
    than suppliest me with the least advantage of hope.
 Will you hear me, Roderigo?
  RODERIGO.
 Faith, I have heard too much, for your words and  
    performances are no kin together.

  RODERIGO.
 The jewels you have had from me to deliver to Desdemona
    would half have corrupted a votarist.
 You have told me she hath
    received them and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden
    respect and acquaintance; but I find none.

  IAGO.
 Very well! go to! I cannot go to, man; nor 'tis not very
    well.
 By this hand, I say 'tis very scurvy, and begin to find
    myself fopped in it.

  IAGO.
 Very well.

  RODERIGO.
 I tell you 'tis not very well.
 I will make myself known
    to Desdemona.

  IAGO.

  RODERIGO.
 Why, now I see there's mettle in thee; and even from this  
    instant do build on thee a better opinion than ever before.
 Give
    me thy hand, Roderigo.

  RODERIGO.
 But, Roderigo, if thou hast that
    in thee indeed, which I have greater reason to believe now than
    ever, I mean purpose, courage, and valor, this night show it; if
    thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take me from
    this world with treachery and devise engines for my life.

  RODERIGO.

  IAGO.
  
  RODERIGO.
 How do you mean, removing of him?
  IAGO.
 Why, by making him uncapable of Othello's place; knocking out
    his brains.
 And that you would have me to do?
  IAGO.
 He knows
    not yet of his honorable fortune.
 If you will watch his going
    thence, which his will fashion to fall out between twelve and
    one, you may take him at your pleasure; I will be near to second
    your attempt, and he shall fall between us.
 It is now high supper-time, and the night grows to
    waste.
 About it.

  IAGO.
                           Exeunt.

Another room in the castle.


  LODOVICO.
 I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.

  LODOVICO.

  OTHELLO.
                               Will you walk, sir?
    O- Desdemona-
  DESDEMONA.
 My lord?
  OTHELLO.
 Dismiss your attendant there; look it be done.
 I will, my lord.

                            Exeunt Othello, Lodovico, and Attendants.

  EMILIA.
 How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.
 He says he will return incontinent.

    He hath commanded me to go to bed,
    And bade me to dismiss you.

  EMILIA.

    We must not now displease him.

  EMILIA.
 So would not I.
 My love doth so approve him,
    That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns-
    Prithee, unpin me- have grace and favor in them.
 I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.
 All's one.
 Good faith, how foolish are our minds!
    If I do die before thee, prithee shroud me
    In one of those same sheets.
                        Come, come, you talk.

  DESDEMONA.
 My mother had a maid call'd Barbary;
    She was in love, and he she loved proved mad
    And did forsake her.
 She had a song of "willow";
    An old thing 'twas, but it express'd her fortune,
    And she died singing it.
 Prithee, dispatch.

  EMILIA.

    This Lodovico is a proper man.

  DESDEMONA.

  EMILIA.

  DESDEMONA.
 [Sings.
]

        "The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,
          Sing all a green willow;
        Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,
          Sing willow, willow, willow.

        The fresh streams ran by her, and murmur'd her moans,
          Sing willow, willow, willow;
        Her salt tears fell from her, and soften'd the stones-"

    Lay be these-

    [Sings.
]   "Sing all a green willow must be my garland.

               Let nobody blame him; his scorn I approve-"

    Nay, that's not next.
 It's the wind.
 [Sings.
]

        "I call'd my love false love; but what said he then?
          Sing willow, willow, willow.
                   'Tis neither here nor there.

  DESDEMONA.
               There be some such, no question.
  
  DESDEMONA.
 Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
  EMILIA.
                  No, by this heavenly light!
  EMILIA.
 Nor I neither by this heavenly light; I might do't as well
    i' the dark.
 The world's a huge thing; it is a great price
    For a small vice.
          In troth, I think thou wouldst not.
 In troth, I think I should, and undo't when I had done.

  DESDEMONA.
  
  DESDEMONA.
 I do not think there is any such woman.

  EMILIA.
 Yes, a dozen, and as many to the vantage as would store the
      world they played for.

    But I do think it is their husbands' faults
    If wives do fall; say that they slack their duties
    And pour our treasures into foreign laps,
    Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
    Throwing restraint upon us, or say they strike us,
    Or scant our former having in despite,
    Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace,
    Yet have we some revenge.
 Let husbands know
    Their wives have sense like them; they see and smell
    And have their palates both for sweet and sour,
    As husbands have.
 What is it that they do
    When they change us for others? Is it sport?
    I think it is.
 And have not we affections,
    Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
    Then let them use us well; else let them know,  
    The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.

  DESDEMONA.
 Good night, good night.
 Heaven me such uses send,
    Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!                Exeunt.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 A street.


Enter Iago and Roderigo:

  IAGO.

  RODERIGO.

  IAGO.
 Here, at thy hand, be bold, and take thy stand.
 I have no great devotion to the deed;
    And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.
 Forth, my sword; he dies.
 I have rubb'd this young quat almost to the sense,
    And he grows angry.
 Live Roderigo,
    He calls me to a restitution large
    Of gold and jewels that I bobb'd from him,  
    As gifts to Desdemona;
    It must not be.
 If Cassio do remain,
    He hath a daily beauty in his life
    That makes me ugly; and besides, the Moor
    May unfold me to him; there stand I in much peril.

    No, he must die.
 Be't so.
 I hear him coming.
 I know his gait; 'tis he.
 Villain, thou diest!
                                              Makes a pass at Cassio.
                     O, I am slain!
            Iago from behind wounds Cassio in the leg, and exit.

  CASSIO.
 Help, ho! Murther! Murther!
    Falls.
 The voice of Cassio; Iago keeps his word.

  RODERIGO.
                        It is even so.
 'Tis he.
 Strumpet, I come!
    Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are blotted;
    Thy bed lust-stain'd shall with lust's blood be spotted.


  CASSIO.
 What, ho! No watch? No passage? Murther! Murther!
  GRATIANO.

  CASSIO.
 O, help!
  LODOVICO.
 Hark!
  RODERIGO.
 Two or three groan; it is a heavy night.

    These may be counterfeits; let's think't unsafe
    To come in to the cry without more help.

  RODERIGO.
 Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.

  LODOVICO.
 Hark!

                     Re-enter Iago, with a light.


  GRATIANO.
 Here's one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.

  IAGO.
 Who's there? Whose noise is this that cries on murther?
  LODOVICO.

  IAGO.
 Here, here! for heaven's sake, help me!
  IAGO.

  IAGO.
 O me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?  
  CASSIO.
 I think that one of them is hereabout,
    And cannot make away.

  IAGO.
                   O treacherous villains!
    [To Lodovico and Gratiano.
] What are you there?
    Come in and give some help.
 That's one of them.

  IAGO.
                       O murtherous slave! O villain!
                                                      Stabs Roderigo.

  RODERIGO.
 Kill men i' the dark! Where be these bloody thieves?
    How silent is this town! Ho! Murther! Murther!
    What may you be? Are you of good or evil?
  LODOVICO.
 As you shall prove us, praise us.
 Signior Lodovico?
  LODOVICO.
 I cry you mercy.

  GRATIANO.
 My leg is cut in two.
  
  IAGO.
                         Marry, heaven forbid!
    Light, gentlemen; I'll bind it with my shirt.


                            Enter Bianca.
 O my dear Cassio, my sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio,
     Cassio!
  IAGO.
 No.

  GRATIANO.

  IAGO.
 Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
  IAGO.

    Patience awhile, good Cassio.

  GRATIANO.
 Did you know him?
  GRATIANO.
                             Know him! ay.
 How do you, Cassio? O, a chair, a chair!
  GRATIANO.
 He, he, 'tis he.
 [A chair brought in.

    Some good man bear him carefully from hence;
    I'll fetch the general's surgeon.
] For you, mistress,
    Save you your labor.
 He that lies slain here, Cassio,
    Was my dear friend; what malice was between you?
  CASSIO.
 None in the world; nor do I know the man.

  IAGO.
 [To Bianca.

                                   Cassio and Roderigo are borne off.
  
    Stay you, good gentlemen.

    Behold her well; I pray you, look upon her.


                            Enter Emilia.
 Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
    By Roderigo, and fellows that are 'scaped;
    He's almost slain, and Roderigo dead.

  EMILIA.
 Alas, good gentleman! alas, good Cassio!
  IAGO.
 This is the fruit of whoring.
 Prithee, Emilia,
    Go know of Cassio where he supp'd tonight.

    What, do you shake at that?
  BIANCA.
 He supp'd at my house; but I therefore shake not.

  IAGO.
 Fie, fie upon thee, strumpet!  
  BIANCA.
 I am no strumpet, but of life as honest
    As you that thus abuse me.

  EMILIA.
 Kind gentlemen, let's go see poor Cassio dress'd.

    Emilia, run you to the citadel,
    And tell my lord and lady what hath happ'd!
    Will you go on? [Aside.
] This is the night
    That either makes me or fordoes me quite.
                 Exeunt.





SCENE II.

A bedchamber in the castle.

    If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
    I can again thy former light restore,
    Should I repent me; but once put out thy light,
    Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature,
    I know not where is that Promethean heat
    That can thy light relume.
 When I have pluck'd the rose,
    I cannot give it vital growth again,
    It must needs wither; I'll smell it on the tree.
      Kisses her.

    O, balmy breath, that dost almost persuade
    Justice to break her sword! One more, one more;  
    Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
    And love thee after.
 One more, and this the last;
    So sweet was ne'er so fatal.
 I must weep,
    But they are cruel tears; this sorrow's heavenly,
    It strikes where it doth love.
 She wakes.

  DESDEMONA.
 Have you pray'd tonight, Desdemona?
  DESDEMONA.
 Ay, my lord.

  OTHELLO.
 If you bethink yourself of any crime
    Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace,
    Solicit for it straight.
 Well, do it, and be brief; I will walk by.

    I would not kill thy unprepared spirit.

    No, heaven forfend! I would not kill thy soul.

  DESDEMONA.
 Talk you of killing?
  OTHELLO.

  DESDEMONA.
 Amen, with all my heart!
  DESDEMONA.
 If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.

  OTHELLO.
 Hum!
  DESDEMONA.

  OTHELLO.
 Think on thy sins.
                  They are loves I bear to you.

  OTHELLO.
 Ay, and for that thou diest.

  DESDEMONA.
 That death's unnatural that kills for loving.

    Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
    Some bloody passion shakes your very frame.

    These are portents; but yet I hope, I hope,
    They do not point on me.

  OTHELLO.
                   Peace, and be still!
  DESDEMONA.
 I will so.
 What's the matter?
  OTHELLO.
 That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee
    Thou gavest to Cassio.
               No, by my life and soul!
    Send for the man, and ask him.
  
  OTHELLO.

  DESDEMONA.
 Ay, but not yet to die.

  OTHELLO.
                           Yes, presently:
    Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin,
    For to deny each article with oath
    Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
    That I do groan withal.
 Then Lord have mercy on me!
  OTHELLO.
 And have you mercy too! I never did
    Offend you in my life; never loved Cassio
    But with such general warranty of heaven
    As I might love.
 I never gave him token.

    O perjured woman! Thou dost stone my heart,
    And makest me call what I intend to do
    A murther, which I thought a sacrifice.

    I saw the handkerchief.

  DESDEMONA.
                He found it then;  
    I never gave it him.
 Send for him hither;
    Let him confess a truth.
                   He hath confess'd.

  DESDEMONA.
 That he hath used thee.

  DESDEMONA.
                       How? unlawfully?
  OTHELLO.
 Ay.

  DESDEMONA.
 O, my fear interprets! What, is he dead?
  OTHELLO.
 Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
    Had stomach for them all.

  DESDEMONA.
 Alas, he is betray'd, and I undone!
  OTHELLO.
 Out, strumpet! Weep'st thou for him to my face?
  DESDEMONA.
 O, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!
  OTHELLO.
 Kill me tomorrow; let me live tonight!
  OTHELLO.
 Nay, if you strive-
  DESDEMONA.
 But half an hour!  
  OTHELLO.

  DESDEMONA.
 But while I say one prayer!
  OTHELLO.
                        It is too late.
     He stifles her.
 [Within.
 What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead?
    I that am cruel am yet merciful;
    I would not have thee linger in thy pain.

  EMILIA.
] What, ho! my lord, my lord!
  OTHELLO.
 [Within.
] O, good my lord, I would speak a word with you!
  OTHELLO.
 Yes, 'tis Emilia.
 She's dead.

    The noise was here.
 Shall she come in? were't good?
    I think she stirs again.
 No.
 What's best to do?
    If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife.

  EMILIA.
 [Within.

    Soft, by and by.
 Let me the curtains draw.


                            Enter Emilia.
 O, my good lord, yonder's foul murthers done!
  OTHELLO.
 But now, my lord.

  OTHELLO.
 It is the very error of the moon;
    She comes more nearer earth than she was wont
    And makes men mad.
 Cassio, my lord, hath kill'd a young Venetian
    Call'd Roderigo.

  OTHELLO.

  OTHELLO.
 Not Cassio kill'd! Then murther's out of tune,
    And sweet revenge grows harsh.
 O, falsely, falsely murther'd!
  EMILIA.
                                   Alas, what cry is that?
  OTHELLO.
 That? what?
  EMILIA.
 Out, and alas! That was my lady's voice.

    Help! help, ho! help! O lady, speak again!
    Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!
  DESDEMONA.
 O, who hath done this deed?
  DESDEMONA.
 O, farewell!                    Dies.

  OTHELLO.
                                    Alas, who knows?
  OTHELLO.
 You heard her say herself, it was not I.

  EMILIA.
 She said so; I must needs report the truth.
 She's like a liar gone to burning hell;
    'Twas I that kill'd her.
  
  EMILIA.
 Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.
 O, she was heavenly true!
  OTHELLO.
 Cassio did top her; ask thy husband else.

    O, I were damn'd beneath all depth in hell,
    But that I did proceed upon just grounds
    To this extremity.
 Thy husband knew it all.
 My husband?
  OTHELLO.

  EMILIA.
 That she was false to wedlock?
  OTHELLO.
 Nay, had she been true,
    If heaven would make me such another world
    Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,
    I'ld not have sold her for it.
                          My husband?
  OTHELLO.

  EMILIA.
 What needs this iteration, woman? I say thy husband.

  EMILIA.

  EMILIA.
 If he say so, may his pernicious soul
    Rot half a grain a day! He lies to the heart.

  OTHELLO.
 Ha!
  EMILIA.

  OTHELLO.
                     Peace, you were best.

  EMILIA.
 O gull! O dolt!
    As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed-  
    I care not for thy sword; I'll make thee known,
    Though I lost twenty lives.
 What is the matter? How now, general?
  EMILIA.
 O, are you come, Iago? You have done well,
    That men must lay their murthers on your neck.

  GRATIANO.
 Disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man.

    He says thou told'st him that his wife was false;
    I know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain.

    Speak, for my heart is full.

  IAGO.
 I told him what I thought, and told no more
    Than what he found himself was apt and true.
 But did you ever tell him she was false?
  IAGO.

  EMILIA.
 You told a lie, an odious, damned lie;
    Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie!  
    She false with Cassio? Did you say with Cassio?
  IAGO.
 With Cassio, mistress.

  EMILIA.
 And your reports have set the murther on.

  GRATIANO.
 'Tis a strange truth.
                   Villainy, villainy, villainy!
    I think upon't, I think, I smell't, O villainy!
    I thought so then.

  EMILIA.

    Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home.
 O! O! O!                                 Falls on the bed.

  EMILIA.

  OTHELLO.

    I know this act shows horrible and grim.

  GRATIANO.
 Poor Desdemon! I am glad thy father's dead.

  OTHELLO.
 I saw it in his hand,
    It was a handkerchief, an antique token
    My father gave my mother.

  EMILIA.

  IAGO.
 Be wise, and get you home.

  EMILIA.
                                    Fie!
    Your sword upon a woman?
  EMILIA.
 O thou dull Moor! That handkerchief thou speak'st of
    I found by fortune and did give my husband,
    For often with a solemn earnestness,
    More than indeed belong'd to such a trifle,
    He begg'd of me to steal it.
 She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found it,
    And I did give't my husband.

  IAGO.
                          Filth, thou liest!
  EMILIA.
  
    O murtherous coxcomb! What should such a fool
    Do with so good a wife?
  OTHELLO.
                  Are there not stones in heaven
    But what serve for thunder? Precious villain!
                                         He runs at Iago, but Montano
                                      disarms him.
 Iago stabs Emilia.

  GRATIANO.
 The woman falls; sure, he hath kill'd his wife.

  EMILIA.
 He's gone, but his wife's kill'd.

  MONTANO.
 'Tis a notorious villain.
 Take you this weapon,
    Which I have here recover'd from the Moor.
 I'll after that same villain,
    For 'tis a damned slave.
       Exeunt all but Othello and Emilia.
          What did thy song bode, lady?
    Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan,  
    And die in music.
 [Sings.
] "Willow, willow, willow.
"
    Moor, she was chaste; she loved thee, cruel Moor;
    So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true;
    So speaking as I think, I die, I die.

  OTHELLO.
 I have another weapon in this chamber;
    It is a sword of Spain, the ice-brook's temper-
    O, here it is.
 Uncle, I must come forth.

  GRATIANO.
 [Within.

    Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.

  OTHELLO.
 Look in upon me then, and speak with me,
    Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.
 But, O vain boast!
    Who can control his fate? 'Tis not so now.

    Do you go back dismay'd? 'Tis a lost fear.

    Man but a rush against Othello's breast,
    And he retires.
 Cold, cold, my girl?
    Even like thy chastity.


  LODOVICO.
 That's he that was Othello.
 Here I am.

  LODOVICO.

  OTHELLO.
 I look down towards his feet; but that's a fable.
      Wounds Iago.
 Wrench his sword from him.
                                I bleed, sir, but not kill'd.

  OTHELLO.
 O thou Othello, that wert once so good,
    Fall'n in the practice of a damned slave,
    What shall be said to thee?
  OTHELLO.

  LODOVICO.
 This wretch hath part confess'd his villainy.

    Did you and he consent in Cassio's death?  
  OTHELLO.
 Ay.

  CASSIO.
 Dear general, I never gave you cause.

  OTHELLO.
 I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.

    Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil
    Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?
  IAGO.
 Demand me nothing; what you know, you know.

  LODOVICO.
 What, not to pray?
  GRATIANO.
                    Torments will ope your lips.
 Well, thou dost best.

  LODOVICO.
 Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n,
    Which, as I think, you know not.
 The one of them imports
    The death of Cassio to be undertook
    By Roderigo.

  OTHELLO.
 O villain!
  CASSIO.
             Most heathenish and most gross!
  LODOVICO.
 Now here's another discontented paper,
    Found in his pocket too; and this, it seems,  
    Roderigo meant to have sent this damned villain;
    But that, belike, Iago in the interim
    Came in and satisfied him.

  OTHELLO.
                     O the pernicious caitiff!
    How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
    That was my wife's?
  CASSIO.
               I found it in my chamber;
    And he himself confess'd but even now
    That there he dropp'd it for a special purpose
    Which wrought to his desire.

  OTHELLO.
                       O fool! fool! fool!
  CASSIO.
 There is besides in Roderigo's letter,
    How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
    Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came
    That I was cast.
 And even but now he spake
    After long seeming dead, Iago hurt him,
    Iago set him on.

  LODOVICO.
 You must forsake this room, and go with us.
 Come, bring away.

    I have done the state some service, and they know't.
 I pray you, in your letters,
    When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
    Speak of me as I am; nothing extenuate,
    Nor set down aught in malice.
 Then must you speak
    Of one that loved not wisely but too well;
    Of one not easily jealous, but, being wrought,
    Perplex'd in the extreme; of one whose hand,
    Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away
    Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdued eyes,
    Albeit unused to the melting mood,
    Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees
    Their medicinal gum.
 Set you down this;
    And say besides, that in Aleppo once,  
    Where a malignant and a turban'd Turk
    Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,
    I took by the throat the circumcised dog
    And smote him, thus.
                               Stabs himself.
 O bloody period!
  GRATIANO.
                  All that's spoke is marr'd.

  OTHELLO.
 I kiss'd thee ere I kill'd thee.
 No way but this,
    Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.

  CASSIO.
 This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon;
    For he was great of heart.

  LODOVICO.
] O Spartan dog,
    More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea!
    Look on the tragic loading of this bed;
    This is thy work.
 Gratiano, keep the house,
    And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
    For they succeed on you.
 To you, Lord Governor,
    Remains the censure of this hellish villain,
    The time, the place, the torture.
 O, enforce it!  
    Myself will straight aboard, and to the state
    This heavy act with heavy heart relate.



THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1596


KING RICHARD THE SECOND


by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  KING RICHARD THE SECOND
  JOHN OF GAUNT, Duke of Lancaster - uncle to the King
  EDMUND LANGLEY, Duke of York - uncle to the King
  HENRY, surnamed BOLINGBROKE, Duke of Hereford, son of
    John of Gaunt, afterwards King Henry IV
  DUKE OF AUMERLE, son of the Duke of York
  THOMAS MOWBRAY, Duke of Norfolk
  DUKE OF SURREY
  EARL OF SALISBURY
  EARL BERKELEY
  BUSHY - favourites of King Richard
  BAGOT -     "      "   "     "
  GREEN -     "      "   "     "
  EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND
  HENRY PERCY, surnamed HOTSPUR, his son
  LORD Ross                             LORD WILLOUGHBY
  LORD FITZWATER                        BISHOP OF CARLISLE
  ABBOT OF WESTMINSTER                  LORD MARSHAL
  SIR STEPHEN SCROOP                    SIR PIERCE OF EXTON
  CAPTAIN of a band of Welshmen         TWO GARDENERS  

  QUEEN to King Richard
  DUCHESS OF YORK
  DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER, widow of Thomas of Woodstock,
    Duke of Gloucester
  LADY attending on the Queen

  Lords, Heralds, Officers, Soldiers, Keeper, Messenger,
    Groom, and other Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



SCENE:
England and Wales


ACT I.
 Old John of Gaunt, time-honoured Lancaster,
    Hast thou, according to thy oath and band,
    Brought hither Henry Hereford, thy bold son,
    Here to make good the boist'rous late appeal,
    Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
    Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
  GAUNT.
 I have, my liege.

  KING RICHARD.
 As near as I could sift him on that argument,
    On some apparent danger seen in him
    Aim'd at your Highness-no inveterate malice.


         Enter BOLINGBROKE and MOWBRAY

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Each day still better other's happiness
    Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,
    Add an immortal title to your crown!
  KING RICHARD.
 We thank you both; yet one but flatters us,
    As well appeareth by the cause you come;
    Namely, to appeal each other of high treason.

    Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
    And mark my greeting well; for what I speak
    My body shall make good upon this earth,
    Or my divine soul answer it in heaven-
    Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,
    Too good to be so, and too bad to live,
    Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
    The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.

  MOWBRAY.
 Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal.

    'Tis not the trial of a woman's war,
    The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,
    Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain;
    The blood is hot that must be cool'd for this.

    Yet can I not of such tame patience boast
    As to be hush'd and nought at an to say.

    Setting aside his high blood's royalty,
    And let him be no kinsman to my liege,
    I do defy him, and I spit at him,
    Call him a slanderous coward and a villain;
    Which to maintain, I would allow him odds
    And meet him, were I tied to run afoot
    Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
    Or any other ground inhabitable
    Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.
 Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,
    Disclaiming here the kindred of the King;
    And lay aside my high blood's royalty,
    Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.

  MOWBRAY.
 I take it up; and by that sword I swear
    Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder
    I'll answer thee in any fair degree
    Or chivalrous design of knightly trial;
    And when I mount, alive may I not light
    If I be traitor or unjustly fight!
  KING RICHARD.
 What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?
    It must be great that can inherit us
    So much as of a thought of ill in him.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Look what I speak, my life shall prove it true-
    That Mowbray hath receiv'd eight thousand nobles
    In name of lendings for your Highness' soldiers,
    The which he hath detain'd for lewd employments
    Like a false traitor and injurious villain.

    Besides, I say and will in battle prove-
    Or here, or elsewhere to the furthest verge  
    That ever was survey'd by English eye-
    That all the treasons for these eighteen years
    Complotted and contrived in this land
    Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.

  KING RICHARD.
 How high a pitch his resolution soars!
    Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this?
  MOWBRAY.

  KING RICHARD.
 Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and cars.

    Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,
    As he is but my father's brother's son,
    Now by my sceptre's awe I make a vow,
    Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood
    Should nothing privilege him nor partialize
    The unstooping firmness of my upright soul.
 For Gloucester's death-
    I slew him not, but to my own disgrace  
    Neglected my sworn duty in that case.

    In haste whereof, most heartily I pray
    Your Highness to assign our trial day.

    Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed:
    Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.

  GAUNT.

    Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.
 And, Norfolk, throw down his.
 When, Harry, when?
    Obedience bids I should not bid again.

  KING RICHARD.
 Norfolk, throw down; we bid.

  MOWBRAY.
 Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot;
    My life thou shalt command, but not my shame:
    The one my duty owes; but my fair name,
    Despite of death, that lives upon my grave
    To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have.

  KING RICHARD.
 Yea, but not change his spots.
 Take but my shame,
    And I resign my gage.
 My dear dear lord,
    The purest treasure mortal times afford
    Is spotless reputation; that away,
    Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.

    Mine honour is my life; both grow in one;
    Take honour from me, and my life is done:
    Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try;
    In that I live, and for that will I die.

  KING RICHARD.

                                                      Exit GAUNT
  KING RICHARD.
 We were not born to sue, but to command;
    Which since we cannot do to make you friends,
    Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,
    At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert's day.

London.
 The DUKE OF LANCASTER'S palace

Enter JOHN OF GAUNT with the DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER

  GAUNT.
 Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood
    Doth more solicit me than your exclaims
    To stir against the butchers of his life!
    But since correction lieth in those hands
    Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
    Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven;
    Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth,
    Will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.

    Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,
    Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;
    But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,
    One vial full of Edward's sacred blood,  
    One flourishing branch of his most royal root,
    Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt;
    Is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded,
    By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.

    Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! That bed, that womb,
    That mettle, that self mould, that fashion'd thee,
    Made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest,
    Yet art thou slain in him.
 Thou dost consent
    In some large measure to thy father's death
    In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
    Who was the model of thy father's life.

    Call it not patience, Gaunt-it is despair;
    In suff'ring thus thy brother to be slaught'red,
    Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,
    Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee.

    That which in mean men we entitle patience
    Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.

    What shall I say? To safeguard thine own life
    The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.
 God's is the quarrel; for God's substitute,  
    His deputy anointed in His sight,
    Hath caus'd his death; the which if wrongfully,
    Let heaven revenge; for I may never lift
    An angry arm against His minister.

  DUCHESS.
 Where then, alas, may I complain myself?
  GAUNT.
 To God, the widow's champion and defence.

  DUCHESS.
 Why then, I will.

    O, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear,
    That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast!
    Or, if misfortune miss the first career,
    Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom
    That they may break his foaming courser's back
    And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
    A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford!
    Farewell, old Gaunt; thy sometimes brother's wife,
    With her companion, Grief, must end her life.

  GAUNT.
 Yet one word more- grief boundeth where it falls,
    Not with the empty hollowness, but weight.
 Bid him- ah, what?-
    With all good speed at Plashy visit me.

    Alack, and what shall good old York there see
    But empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls,
    Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
    And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
    Therefore commend me; let him not come there
    To seek out sorrow that dwells every where.

    Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die;
    The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.
          Exeunt




SCENE 3.

The lists at Coventry

Enter the LORD MARSHAL and the DUKE OF AUMERLE

  MARSHAL.
 Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.

  MARSHAL.
 The Duke of Norfolk, spightfully and bold,
    Stays but the summons of the appelant's trumpet.


     The trumpets sound, and the KING enters with his nobles,
     GAUNT, BUSHY, BAGOT, GREEN, and others.
 Marshal, demand of yonder champion
    The cause of his arrival here in arms;
    Ask him his name; and orderly proceed
    To swear him in the justice of his cause.

  MARSHAL.

    And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!

   The trumpets sound.

  MARSHAL.

    And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
  MARSHAL.
 On pain of death, no person be so bold
    Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,
    Except the Marshal and such officers
    Appointed to direct these fair designs.

    Then let us take a ceremonious leave
    And loving farewell of our several friends.
 The appellant in all duty greets your Highness,
    And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.

  KING RICHARD.
 We will descend and fold him in our arms.

  BOLINGBROKE.

    As confident as is the falcon's flight
    Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.

    Lo, as at English feasts, so I regreet  
    The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Mine innocence and Saint George to thrive!
  MOWBRAY.
 However God or fortune cast my lot,
    There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne,
    A loyal, just, and upright gentleman.
  
    Never did captive with a freer heart
    Cast off his chains of bondage, and embrace
    His golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement,
    More than my dancing soul doth celebrate
    This feast of battle with mine adversary.

    As gentle and as jocund as to jest
    Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.

    Order the trial, Marshal, and begin.

  MARSHAL.
 Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
    Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!
  BOLINGBROKE.

  FIRST HERALD.
 Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
    On pain to be found false and recreant,
    Both to defend himself, and to approve
    Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
    To God, his sovereign, and to him disloyal,
    Courageously and with a free desire
    Attending but the signal to begin.

  MARSHAL.

                                           [A charge sounded]
    Stay, the King hath thrown his warder down.

  KING RICHARD.
 Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,
    And both return back to their chairs again.


    A long flourish, while the KING consults his Council
  
    Draw near,
    And list what with our council we have done.

    You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,
    Till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields
    Shall not regreet our fair dominions,  
    But tread the stranger paths of banishment.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
    Which I with some unwillingness pronounce:
    The sly slow hours shall not determinate
    The dateless limit of thy dear exile;
    The hopeless word of 'never to return'
    Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.
 A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,
    And all unlook'd for from your Highness' mouth.

    What is thy sentence, then, but speechless death,
    Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?
  KING RICHARD.
 It boots thee not to be compassionate;
    After our sentence plaining comes too late.

  MOWBRAY.
 Then thus I turn me from my countrv's light,
    To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.

    Lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands;
    Swear by the duty that you owe to God,
    Our part therein we banish with yourselves,
    To keep the oath that we administer:  
    You never shall, so help you truth and God,
    Embrace each other's love in banishment;
    Nor never look upon each other's face;
    Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile
    This louring tempest of your home-bred hate;
    Nor never by advised purpose meet
    To plot, contrive, or complot any ill,
    'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.

  BOLINGBROKE.

  MOWBRAY.
 And I, to keep all this.

  BOLINGBROKE.

    By this time, had the King permitted us,
    One of our souls had wand'red in the air,
    Banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh,
    As now our flesh is banish'd from this land-
    Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm;
    Since thou hast far to go, bear not along
    The clogging burden of a guilty soul.

  MOWBRAY.
 No, Bolingbroke; if ever I were traitor,
    My name be blotted from the book of life,  
    And I from heaven banish'd as from hence!
    But what thou art, God, thou, and I, do know;
    And all too soon, I fear, the King shall rue.

    Farewell, my liege.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 How long a time lies in one little word!
    Four lagging winters and four wanton springs
    End in a word: such is the breath of Kings.

  GAUNT.
 Why, uncle, thou hast many years to live.
 But not a minute, King, that thou canst give:
    Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow
    And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow;
    Thou can'st help time to furrow me with age,
    But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage;
    Thy word is current with him for my death,
    But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.

  KING RICHARD.
 Thy son is banish'd upon good advice,
    Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave.

    Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?
  GAUNT.
 Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.

    O, had it been a stranger, not my child,
    To smooth his fault I should have been more mild.

    A partial slander sought I to avoid,
    And in the sentence my own life destroy'd.
 Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so.

    Six years we banish him, and he shall go.

                                  Flourish.
 Exit KING with train
  AUMERLE.

  MARSHAL.

  GAUNT.
 I have too few to take my leave of you,
    When the tongue's office should be prodigal
    To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.
 Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.

  GAUNT.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.
  
  GAUNT.
 Call it a travel that thou tak'st for pleasure.
 My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,
    Which finds it an enforced pilgrimage.

  GAUNT.
 All places that the eye of heaven visits
    Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.

    Teach thy necessity to reason thus:
    There is no virtue like necessity.

    Think not the King did banish thee,
    But thou the King.
  
    Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour,
    And not the King exil'd thee; or suppose
    Devouring pestilence hangs in our air
    And thou art flying to a fresher clime.

    Look what thy soul holds dear, imagine it
    To lie that way thou goest, not whence thou com'st.

  BOLINGBROKE.
  
    Fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more
    Than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore.

  GAUNT.

    Had I thy youtli and cause, I would not stay.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Then, England's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu;
    My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!
    Where'er I wander, boast of this I can:
    Though banish'd, yet a trueborn English man.
          Exeunt




SCENE 4.

London.
 The court

Enter the KING, with BAGOT and GREEN, at one door;
and the DUKE OF AUMERLE at another

  KING RICHARD.
 Cousin Aumerle,
    How far brought you high Hereford on his way?
  AUMERLE.
 I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,
    But to the next high way, and there I left him.
 Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind,
    Which then blew bitterly against our faces,
    Awak'd the sleeping rheum, and so by chance
    Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
 What said our cousin when you parted with him?
  AUMERLE.
 'Farewell.
'
    And, for my heart disdained that my tongue
    Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
    To counterfeit oppression of such grief
    That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave.

    Marry, would the word 'farewell' have length'ned hours  
    And added years to his short banishment,
    He should have had a volume of farewells;
    But since it would not, he had none of me.

  KING RICHARD.

    Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench;
    A brace of draymen bid God speed him well
    And had the tribute of his supple knee,
    With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends';
    As were our England in reversion his,
    And he our subjects' next degree in hope.
  
  GREEN.

  KING RICHARD.
 We will ourself in person to this war;
    And, for our coffers, with too great a court
    And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,
    We are enforc'd to farm our royal realm;
    The revenue whereof shall furnish us
    For our affairs in hand.
 Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,
    Suddenly taken; and hath sent poste-haste
    To entreat your Majesty to visit him.
 Where lies he?
  BUSHY.

  KING RICHARD.

    Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him.
                                              Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.

London.
 Ely House

Enter JOHN OF GAUNT, sick, with the DUKE OF YORK, etc.


  GAUNT.
 Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath;
    For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.
 O, but they say the tongues of dying men
    Enforce attention like deep harmony.

    The setting sun, and music at the close,
    As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,
    Writ in remembrance more than things long past.

    Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear,
    My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.

  YORK.

  GAUNT.

    This royal throne of kings, this scept'red isle,
    This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
    This other Eden, demi-paradise,
    This fortress built by Nature for herself
    Against infection and the hand of war,
    This happy breed of men, this little world,
    This precious stone set in the silver sea,
    Which serves it in the office of a wall,
    Or as a moat defensive to a house,
    Against the envy of less happier lands;
    This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,
    This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,
    Fear'd by their breed, and famous by their birth,
    Renowned for their deeds as far from home,
    For Christian service and true chivalry,
    As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry
    Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son;
    This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,  
    Dear for her reputation through the world,
    Is now leas'd out-I die pronouncing it-
    Like to a tenement or pelting farm.
 The King is come; deal mildly with his youth,
    For young hot colts being rag'd do rage the more.

  QUEEN.
 How fares our noble uncle Lancaster?
  KING RICHARD.
 What comfort, man? How is't with aged Gaunt?
  GAUNT.
 O, how that name befits my composition!  
    Old Gaunt, indeed; and gaunt in being old.

    Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast;
    And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?
    For sleeping England long time have I watch'd;
    Watching breeds leanness, leanness is an gaunt.

    Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
    Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.

  KING RICHARD.
 Can sick men play so nicely with their names?
  GAUNT.
 Should dying men flatter with those that live?
  GAUNT.
 Thou, now a-dying, sayest thou flatterest me.

  GAUNT.
 O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.
 I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.
 Now He that made me knows I see thee ill;  
    Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.

    O, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye
    Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons,
    From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,
    Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd,
    Which art possess'd now to depose thyself.
  
    Thy state of law is bondslave to the law;
    And thou-
  KING RICHARD.
 A lunatic lean-witted fool,
    Presuming on an ague's privilege,
    Darest with thy frozen admonition
    Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood
    With fury from his native residence.

    Now by my seat's right royal majesty,
    Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,
    This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head
    Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.

  GAUNT.
 O, Spare me not, my brother Edward's son,
    For that I was his father Edward's son;
    That blood already, like the pelican,
    Hast thou tapp'd out, and drunkenly carous'd.

    Join with the present sickness that I have;  
    And thy unkindness be like crooked age,
    To crop at once a too long withered flower.

    Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!
    These words hereafter thy tormentors be!
    Convey me to my bed, then to my grave.

    Love they to live that love and honour have.

                               Exit, borne out by his attendants
  KING RICHARD.
 And let them die that age and sullens have;
    For both hast thou, and both become the grave.

  KING RICHARD.
 Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his;
    As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.


                Enter NORTHUMBERLAND

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

  KING RICHARD.
 What says he?  
  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Nay, nothing; all is said.

    His tongue is now a stringless instrument;
    Words, life, and all, old Lancaster hath spent.

  YORK.

    We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns,
    Which live like venom where no venom else
    But only they have privilege to live.

    And for these great affairs do ask some charge,
    Towards our assistance we do seize to us
    The plate, coin, revenues, and moveables,
    Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd.
 How long shall I be patient? Ah, how long
    Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
    Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment,
    Nor Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs,
    Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke  
    About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,
    Have ever made me sour my patient cheek
    Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face.

    In war was never lion rag'd more fierce,
    In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,
    Than was that young and princely gentleman.
 His noble hand
    Did win what he did spend, and spent not that
    Which his triumphant father's hand had won.
 Why, uncle, what's the matter?
  YORK.

    Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands
    The royalties and rights of banish'd Hereford?
    Is not Gaunt dead? and doth not Hereford live?
    Was not Gaunt just? and is not Harry true?
    Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
    Is not his heir a well-deserving son?
    Take Hereford's rights away, and take from Time
    His charters and his customary rights;
    Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day;
    Be not thyself-for how art thou a king
    But by fair sequence and succession?
    Now, afore God-God forbid I say true!-
    If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights,
    Call in the letters patents that he hath
    By his attorneys-general to sue
    His livery, and deny his off'red homage,
    You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,
    You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts,  
    And prick my tender patience to those thoughts
    Which honour and allegiance cannot think.

  KING RICHARD.
 Think what you will, we seize into our hands
    His plate, his goods, his money, and his lands.
 My liege, farewell.

    What will ensue hereof there's none can tell;
    But by bad courses may be understood
    That their events can never fall out good.
              Exit
  KING RICHARD.
 To-morrow next
    We will for Ireland; and 'tis time, I trow.
 Exeunt KING, QUEEN, BUSHY, AUMERLE,
                                                GREEN, and BAGOT
  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.
 Barely in title, not in revenues.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

  ROSS.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne'er speak more
    That speaks thy words again to do thee harm!
  WILLOUGHBY.
 Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?
    If it be so, out with it boldly, man;
    Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
 No good at all that I can do for him;
    Unless you call it good to pity him,
    Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

    The King is not himself, but basely led
    By flatterers; and what they will inform,
    Merely in hate, 'gainst any of us an,
    That will the King severely prosecute  
    'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.

  ROSS.
 The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes;
    And quite lost their hearts; the nobles hath he find
    For ancient quarrels and quite lost their hearts.

  WILLOUGHBY.
 And daily new exactions are devis'd,
    As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what;
    But what, a God's name, doth become of this?
  NORTHUMBERLAND.

  ROSS.

  WILLOUGHBY.
 The King's grown bankrupt like a broken man.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 He hath not money for these Irish wars,
    His burdenous taxations notwithstanding,
    But by the robbing of the banish'd Duke.

  ROSS.
 We see the very wreck that we must suffer;
    And unavoided is the danger now
    For suffering so the causes of our wreck.
 Nay, let us share thy thoughts as thou dost ours.

  ROSS.
 Be confident to speak, Northumberland.

    We three are but thyself, and, speaking so,
    Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore be bold.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

    If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
    Imp out our drooping country's broken wing,
    Redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown,
    Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt,
    And make high majesty look like itself,
    Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh;
    But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
    Stay and be secret, and myself will go.
 To horse, to horse! Urge doubts to them that fear.
 Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE 2.

    You promis'd, when you parted with the King,
    To lay aside life-harming heaviness
    And entertain a cheerful disposition.
 To please the King, I did; to please myself
    I cannot do it; yet I know no cause
    Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,
    Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest
    As my sweet Richard.

  BUSHY.
 So your sweet Majesty,
    Looking awry upon your lord's departure,
    Find shapes of grief more than himself to wail;
    Which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows
    Of what it is not.
 It may be so; but yet my inward soul
    Persuades me it is otherwise.
 'Tis nothing less: conceit is still deriv'd
    From some forefather grief; mine is not so,
    For nothing hath begot my something grief,
    Or something hath the nothing that I grieve;  
    'Tis in reversion that I do possess-
    But what it is that is not yet known what,
    I cannot name; 'tis nameless woe, I wot.


                   Enter GREEN

  GREEN.
 God save your Majesty! and well met, gentlemen.

  QUEEN.

    Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd?
  GREEN.
 That he, our hope, might have retir'd his power
    And driven into despair an enemy's hope
    Who strongly hath set footing in this land.

    The banish'd Bolingbroke repeals himself,
    And with uplifted arms is safe arriv'd
    At Ravenspurgh.

  QUEEN.

  BUSHY.
 We have; whereupon the Earl of Worcester
    Hath broken his staff, resign'd his stewardship,
    And all the household servants fled with him
    To Bolingbroke.

  QUEEN.
  

                    Enter YORK

  GREEN.

  QUEEN.

    Your husband, he is gone to save far off,
    Whilst others come to make him lose at home.

    Here am I left to underprop his land,
    Who, weak with age, cannot support myself.

    Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;
    Now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him.


                   Enter a SERVINGMAN

  SERVINGMAN.
 My lord, your son was gone before I came.
  
  YORK.

    Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;
    Bid her send me presently a thousand pound.

  SERVINGMAN.
 My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship,
    To-day, as I came by, I called there-
    But I shall grieve you to report the rest.

  YORK.
 What is't, knave?
  SERVINGMAN.
 An hour before I came, the Duchess died.

  YORK.
 God for his mercy! what a tide of woes
    Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!
    I know not what to do.
 I would to God,
    So my untruth had not provok'd him to it,
    The King had cut off my head with my brother's.

    Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts,  
    And bring away the armour that is there.

                                                 Exit SERVINGMAN
    Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
    If I know how or which way to order these affairs
    Thus disorderly thrust into my hands,
    Never believe me.

    Well, somewhat we must do.
 Gentlemen, go muster up your men
    And meet me presently at Berkeley.

    I should to Plashy too,
    But time will not permit.

                                           Exeunt YORK and QUEEN
  BUSHY.
 The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland.
 For us to levy power
    Proportionable to the enemy  
    Is all unpossible.

  GREEN.
 Besides, our nearness to the King in love
    Is near the hate of those love not the King.

  BAGOT.

  BUSHY.
 Wherein the King stands generally condemn'd.

  GREEN.
 Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristow Castle.

  BUSHY.
 Thither will I with you; for little office
    Will the hateful commons perform for us,
    Except Eke curs to tear us all to pieces.
 No; I will to Ireland to his Majesty.

    Farewell.
 If heart's presages be not vain,
    We three here part that ne'er shall meet again.
 Alas, poor Duke! the task he undertakes  
    Is numb'ring sands and drinking oceans dry.

    Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
 Well, we may meet again.

  BAGOT.
 How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?
  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Believe me, noble lord,
    I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire.

    These high wild hills and rough uneven ways
    Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome;
    And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,
    Making the hard way sweet and delectable.

    But theirs is sweet'ned with the hope to have
    The present benefit which I possess;
    And hope to joy is little less in joy
    Than hope enjoy'd.
 Of much less value is my company
    Than your good words.
 But who comes here?

                 Enter HARRY PERCY

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 It is my son, young Harry Percy,
    Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.

    Harry, how fares your uncle?
  PERCY.
 I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Why, is he not with the Queen?
  PERCY.
 No, my good lord; he hath forsook the court,
    Broken his staff of office, and dispers'd
    The household of the King.

  PERCY.
 Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 No, my good lord; for that is not forgot
    Which ne'er I did remember; to my knowledge,
    I never in my life did look on him.

  BOLINGBROKE.

    My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 How far is it to Berkeley? And what stir
    Keeps good old York there with his men of war?
  PERCY.
 Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,
    Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.
 Welcome, my lords.

  ROSS.

  WILLOUGHBY.
 And far surmounts our labour to attain it.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 But who comes here?

                     Enter BERKELEY
  
  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.
 My lord, my answer is-'to Lancaster';
    And I am come to seek that name in England;
    And I must find that title in your tongue
    Before I make reply to aught you say.
 Mistake me not, my lord; 'tis not my meaning
    To raze one title of your honour out.


                 Enter YORK, attended

  BOLINGBROKE.
 I shall not need transport my words by you;
    Here comes his Grace in person.
 My noble uncle!
                                                     [Kneels]
  YORK.
 Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,  
    Whose duty is deceivable and false.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 My gracious uncle!-
  YORK.

    Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs
    Dar'd once to touch a dust of England's ground?
    But then more 'why?'-why have they dar'd to march
    So many miles upon her peaceful bosom,
    Frighting her pale-fac'd villages with war
    And ostentation of despised arms?
    Com'st thou because the anointed King is hence?
    Why, foolish boy, the King is left behind,
    And in my loyal bosom lies his power.

    Were I but now lord of such hot youth
    As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself
    Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
    From forth the ranks of many thousand French,
    O, then how quickly should this arm of mine,  
    Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise the
    And minister correction to thy fault!
  BOLINGBROKE My gracious uncle, let me know my fault;
    On what condition stands it and wherein?
  YORK.
 Even in condition of the worst degree-
    In gross rebellion and detested treason.

    Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come
    Before the expiration of thy time,
    In braving arms against thy sovereign.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford;
    But as I come, I come for Lancaster.

    You are my father, for methinks in you
    I see old Gaunt alive.
 O, then, my father,
    Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd
    A wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties
    Pluck'd from my arms perforce, and given away
    To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born?
    If that my cousin king be King in England,  
    It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster.

    You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin;
    Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,
    He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father
    To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.

    What would you have me do? I am a subject,
    And I challenge law-attorneys are denied me;
    And therefore personally I lay my claim
    To my inheritance of free descent.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 The noble Duke hath been too much abused.

  ROSS.

  WILLOUGHBY.
 Base men by his endowments are made great.

  YORK.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 The noble Duke hath sworn his coming is
    But for his own; and for the right of that
    We all have strongly sworn to give him aid;
    And let him never see joy that breaks that oath!
  YORK.

    I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,
    Because my power is weak and all ill left;
    But if I could, by Him that gave me life,
    I would attach you all and make you stoop
    Unto the sovereign mercy of the King;
    But since I cannot, be it known unto you
    I do remain as neuter.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 An offer, uncle, that we will accept.

  YORK.

    Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are.

    Things past redress are now with me past care.
        Exeunt




SCENE 4.
 Farewell.
 'Tis thought the King is dead; we will not stay.

    The bay trees in our country are all wither'd,
    And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;
    The pale-fac'd moon looks bloody on the earth,
    And lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change;
    Rich men look sad, and ruffians dance and leap-
    The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,
    The other to enjoy by rage and war.

    Farewell.
             Exit  
  SALISBURY.
 Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind,
    I see thy glory like a shooting star
    Fall to the base earth from the firmament!
    The sun sets weeping in the lowly west,
    Witnessing storms to come, woe, and unrest;
    Thy friends are fled, to wait upon thy foes;
    And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.
               Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT III.

BOLINGBROKE'S camp at Bristol

Enter BOLINGBROKE, YORK, NORTHUMBERLAND, PERCY, ROSS, WILLOUGHBY,
BUSHY and GREEN, prisoners

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Bring forth these men.

    Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls-
    Since presently your souls must part your bodies-
    With too much urging your pernicious lives,
    For 'twere no charity; yet, to wash your blood
    From off my hands, here in the view of men
    I will unfold some causes of your deaths:
    You have misled a prince, a royal king,
    A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments,
    By you unhappied and disfigured clean;
    You have in manner with your sinful hours
    Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him;
    Broke the possession of a royal bed,
    And stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks
    With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs;
    Myself-a prince by fortune of my birth,  
    Near to the King in blood, and near in love
    Till you did make him misinterpret me-
    Have stoop'd my neck under your injuries
    And sigh'd my English breath in foreign clouds,
    Eating the bitter bread of banishment,
    Whilst you have fed upon my signories,
    Dispark'd my parks and fell'd my forest woods,
    From my own windows torn my household coat,
    Raz'd out my imprese, leaving me no sign
    Save men's opinions and my living blood
    To show the world I am a gentleman.
 See them delivered over
    To execution and the hand of death.

  BUSHY.

           Exeunt NORTHUMBERLAND, and others, with the prisoners  
    Uncle, you say the Queen is at your house;
    For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated.
 A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'd
    With letters of your love to her at large.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Thanks, gentle uncle.
 Flourish and colours.
 Yea, my lord.

    This earth shall have a feeling, and these stones
    Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king
    Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.

  CARLISLE.
 Fear not, my lord; that Power that made you king
    Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.

    The means that heaven yields must be embrac'd
    And not neglected; else, if heaven would,
    And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse,
    The proffered means of succour and redress.

  AUMERLE.
 He means, my lord, that we are too remiss;
    Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,
    Grows strong and great in substance and in power.

  KING RICHARD.
 Then, if angels fight,
    Weak men must fall; for heaven still guards the right.


                 Enter SALISBURY

    Welcome, my lord.
 How far off lies your power?
  SALISBURY.
 Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,
    Than this weak arm.
 Discomfort guides my tongue,
    And bids me speak of nothing but despair.

    One day too late, I fear me, noble lord,
    Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth.

    O, call back yesterday, bid time return,
    And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men!
    To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late,
    O'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune, and thy state;
    For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead,  
    Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispers'd, and fled.

  AUMERLE.
 Comfort, my liege, why looks your Grace so pale?
  KING RICHARD.
 But now the blood of twenty thousand men
    Did triumph in my face, and they are fled;
    And, till so much blood thither come again,
    Have I not reason to look pale and dead?
    All souls that will be safe, fly from my side;
    For time hath set a blot upon my pride.
 Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.

  KING RICHARD.
 I had forgot myself; am I not King?
    Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.
 Look not to the ground,
    Ye favourites of a king; are we not high?
    High be our thoughts.
 I know my uncle York
    Hath power enough to serve our turn.
 More health and happiness betide my liege
    Than can my care-tun'd tongue deliver him.

  KING RICHARD.
 Mine ear is open and my heart prepar'd.

    The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.

    Say, is my kingdom lost? Why, 'twas my care,
    And what loss is it to be rid of care?
    Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?
    Greater he shall not be; if he serve God,
    We'll serve him too, and be his fellow so.

    Revolt our subjects? That we cannot mend;
    They break their faith to God as well as us.

  SCROOP.
 Glad am I that your Highness is so arm'd
    To bear the tidings of calamity.

    Like an unseasonable stormy day
    Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,
    As if the world were all dissolv'd to tears,
    So high above his limits swells the rage
    Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land  
    With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.
 Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so in.

    I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.

  SCROOP.

  KING RICHARD.
 O villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption!
    Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man!  
    Snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart!
    Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas!
    Would they make peace? Terrible hell make war
    Upon their spotted souls for this offence!
  SCROOP.
 Sweet love, I see, changing his property,
    Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate.

    Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made
    With heads, and not with hands; those whom you curse
    Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound
    And lie full low, grav'd in the hollow ground.
 Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?
  SCROOP.
 Ay, all of them at Bristow lost their heads.

  AUMERLE.
 Where is the Duke my father with his power?
  KING RICHARD.

    To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,
    Gives, in your weakness, strength unto your foe,
    And so your follies fight against yourself.

    Fear and be slain-no worse can come to fight;
    And fight and die is death destroying death,
    Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.

  AUMERLE.
 Thou chid'st me well.

    Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?
    Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.

  SCROOP.
 Men judge by the complexion of the sky
    The state in inclination of the day;
    So may you by my dull and heavy eye,
    My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.

    I play the torturer, by small and small
    To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:
    Your uncle York is join'd with Bolingbroke;
    And all your northern castles yielded up,
    And all your southern gentlemen in arms
    Upon his party.
 Thou hast said enough.

    Go to Flint Castle; there I'll pine away;  
    A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.

    That power I have, discharge; and let them go
    To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,
    For I have none.

Wales.
 Before Flint Castle

Enter, with drum and colours, BOLINGBROKE, YORK, NORTHUMBERLAND,
and forces

  BOLINGBROKE.
 So that by this intelligence we learn
    The Welshmen are dispers'd; and Salisbury
    Is gone to meet the King, who lately landed
    With some few private friends upon this coast.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 The news is very fair and good, my lord.

    Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.
 It would beseem the Lord Northumberland
    To say 'King Richard.
' Alack the heavy day
    When such a sacred king should hide his head!
  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Your Grace mistakes; only to be brief,
    Left I his title out.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.
 Take not, good cousin, further than you should,
    Lest you mistake.
 What, will not this castle yield?
  PIERCY.
 The castle royally is mann'd, my lord,
    Against thy entrance.
 Yes, my good lord,
    It doth contain a king; King Richard lies
    Within the limits of yon lime and stone;
    And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
    Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman
    Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 [To NORTHUMBERLAND] Noble lord,  
    Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle;
    Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley
    Into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver:
    Henry Bolingbroke
    On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand,
    And sends allegiance and true faith of heart
    To his most royal person; hither come
    Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,
    Provided that my banishment repeal'd
    And lands restor'd again be freely granted;
    If not, I'll use the advantage of my power
    And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood
    Rain'd from the wounds of slaughtered Englishmen;
    The which how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke
    It is such crimson tempest should bedrench
    The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land,
    My stooping duty tenderly shall show.

    Go, signify as much, while here we march
    Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.

           [NORTHUMBERLAND advances to the Castle, with a trumpet]  
    Let's march without the noise of threat'ning drum,
    That from this castle's tottered battlements
    Our fair appointments may be well perus'd.

    Methinks King Richard and myself should meet
    With no less terror than the elements
    Of fire and water, when their thund'ring shock
    At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.


      Parle without, and answer within; then a flourish.

  YORK.
 Alack, alack, for woe,
    That any harm should stain so fair a show!
  KING RICHARD.
 [To NORTHUMBERLAND] We are amaz'd; and thus long
      have we stood
    To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
    Because we thought ourself thy lawful King;
    And if we be, how dare thy joints forget
    To pay their awful duty to our presence?
    If we be not, show us the hand of God
    That hath dismiss'd us from our stewardship;
    For well we know no hand of blood and bone
    Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,
    Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.

    This swears he, as he is a prince, is just;
    And as I am a gentleman I credit him.

  KING RICHARD.
  
    With all the gracious utterance thou hast
    Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.
 No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle words
    Till time lend friends, and friends their helpful swords.
 Must he be depos'd?  
    The King shall be contented.
 Must he lose
    The name of king? A God's name, let it go.

    Or shall we play the wantons with our woes  
    And make some pretty match with shedding tears?
    As thus: to drop them still upon one place
    Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
    Within the earth; and, therein laid-there lies
    Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes.

    Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see
    I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.

    Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland,
    What says King Bolingbroke? Will his Majesty
    Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?
    You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Down, down I come, like glist'ring Phaethon,
    Wanting the manage of unruly jades.

    In the base court? Come down? Down, court! down, king!
    For night-owls shriek where mounting larks should sing.

                                               Exeunt from above  
  BOLINGBROKE.
 Stand all apart,
    And show fair duty to his Majesty.
   [He kneels down]
    My gracious lord-
  KING RICHARD.

    Me rather had my heart might feel your love
    Than my unpleas'd eye see your courtesy.

    Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know,
    [Touching his own head] Thus high at least, although your
      knee be low.
 My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.

  KING RICHARD.
 Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,  
    As my true service shall deserve your love.

  KING RICHARD.
 Well you deserve.
 They well deserve to have
    That know the strong'st and surest way to get.

    Uncle, give me your hands; nay, dry your eyes:
    Tears show their love, but want their remedies.

    Cousin, I am too young to be your father,
    Though you are old enough to be my heir.

    What you will have, I'll give, and willing too;
    For do we must what force will have us do.

    Set on towards London.
 Cousin, is it so?
  BOLINGBROKE.
 Yea, my good lord.
 Then I must not say no.

The DUKE OF YORK's garden

Enter the QUEEN and two LADIES

  QUEEN.
 Madam, we'll play at bowls.

  QUEEN.
 'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs
    And that my fortune runs against the bias.

  LADY.

  QUEEN.

  LADY.
 Of sorrow or of joy?
  LADY.
 Of either, madam.

  QUEEN.

  LADY.

  QUEEN.

  LADY.

  QUEEN.
 And I could sing, would weeping do me good,
    And never borrow any tear of thee.


           Enter a GARDENER and two SERVANTS

    But stay, here come the gardeners.
 Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,
    Which, like unruly children, make their sire
    Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight;  
    Give some supportance to the bending twigs.

    Go thou, and Eke an executioner
    Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays
    That look too lofty in our commonwealth:
    All must be even in our government.

    You thus employ'd, I will go root away
    The noisome weeds which without profit suck
    The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.

  SERVANT.
 Hold thy peace.

    He that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring
    Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf;
    The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter,  
    That seem'd in eating him to hold him up,
    Are pluck'd up root and all by Bolingbroke-
    I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.

  SERVANT.
 They are; and Bolingbroke
    Hath seiz'd the wasteful King.
 What, think you the King shall be deposed?
  GARDENER.
 Letters came last night  
    To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's
    That tell black tidings.

  QUEEN.
 O, I am press'd to death through want of speaking!
                                                [Coming forward]
    Thou, old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden,
    How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?
    What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested the
    To make a second fall of cursed man?
    Why dost thou say King Richard is depos'd?
    Dar'st thou, thou little better thing than earth,
    Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how,
    Cam'st thou by this ill tidings? Speak, thou wretch.

  GARDENER.
 Pardon me, madam; little joy have
    To breathe this news; yet what I say is true.

    King Richard, he is in the mighty hold
    Of Bolingbroke.
 Their fortunes both are weigh'd.

  QUEEN.
 Come, ladies, go
    To meet at London London's King in woe.

    What, was I born to this, that my sad look
    Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?
    Gard'ner, for telling me these news of woe,
    Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow!
                                         Exeunt QUEEN and LADIES
  GARDENER.
 Poor Queen, so that thy state might be no worse,
    I would my skill were subject to thy curse.

    Here did she fall a tear; here in this place
    I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace.
                Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT IV.

Westminster Hall

Enter, as to the Parliament, BOLINGBROKE, AUMERLE, NORTHUMBERLAND, PERCY,
FITZWATER, SURREY, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE, the ABBOT OF WESTMINSTER,
and others; HERALD, OFFICERS, and BAGOT

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Call forth Bagot.
 Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.

  BAGOT.
 My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
    Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd.

  AUMERLE.
 Princes, and noble lords,
    What answer shall I make to this base man?
    Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars
    On equal terms to give him chastisement?
    Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd
    With the attainder of his slanderous lips.

    There is my gage, the manual seal of death
    That marks thee out for hell.
 I say thou liest,
    And will maintain what thou hast said is false
    In thy heart-blood, through being all too base
    To stain the temper of my knightly sword.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.

  AUMERLE.

  FITZWATER.
 If that thy valour stand on sympathy,  
    There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine.

    If thou deniest it twenty times, thou liest;
    And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,
    Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.

  AUMERLE.
 Thou dar'st not, coward, live to see that day.

  FITZWATER.
 Now, by my soul, I would it were this hour.

  AUMERLE.

  PERCY.
 Aumerle, thou liest; his honour is as true
    In this appeal as thou art an unjust;
    And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,
    To prove it on thee to the extremest point
    Of mortal breathing.
 Seize it, if thou dar'st.

  AUMERLE.
 An if I do not, may my hands rot of
    And never brandish more revengeful steel
    Over the glittering helmet of my foe!
  ANOTHER LORD.
 There is my honour's pawn;
    Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
 'Tis very true; you were in presence then,
    And you can witness with me this is true.

  FITZWATER.
 Surrey, thou liest.

  SURREY.
 Dishonourable boy!
    That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword
    That it shall render vengeance and revenge
    Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do he
    In earth as quiet as thy father's skull.

    In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn;
    Engage it to the trial, if thou dar'st.

  FITZWATER.
 There is my bond of faith,
    To tie thee to my strong correction.

    Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say
    That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men
    To execute the noble Duke at Calais.
 Here do I throw down this,
    If he may be repeal'd to try his honour.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 These differences shall all rest under gage
    Till Norfolk be repeal'd-repeal'd he shall be
    And, though mine enemy, restor'd again
    To all his lands and signories.
 When he is return'd,
    Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.

    Many a time hath banish'd Norfolk fought  
    For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,
    Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross
    Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens;
    And, toil'd with works of war, retir'd himself
    To Italy; and there, at Venice, gave
    His body to that pleasant country's earth,
    And his pure soul unto his captain, Christ,
    Under whose colours he had fought so long.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Why, Bishop, is Norfolk dead?
  CARLISLE.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to the
    From plume-pluck'd Richard, who with willing soul
    Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields  
    To the possession of thy royal hand.
 Marry, God forbid!
    Worst in this royal presence may I speak,
    Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.

    Would God that any in this noble presence
    Were enough noble to be upright judge
    Of noble Richard! Then true noblesse would
    Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.

    My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,
    Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king;
    And if you crown him, let me prophesy-
    The blood of English shall manure the ground,
    And future ages groan for this foul act;
    Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,
    And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars
    Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound;
    Disorder, horror, fear, and mutiny,
    Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd
    The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls.
  
  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains,
    Of capital treason we arrest you here.

  YORK.
 I will be his conduct.
                              Exit
  BOLINGBROKE.
 Lords, you that here are under our arrest,
    Procure your sureties for your days of answer.

    Little are we beholding to your love,
    And little look'd for at your helping hands.


      Re-enter YORK, with KING RICHARD, and OFFICERS
                bearing the regalia

  KING RICHARD.
 Alack, why am I sent for to a king,
    Before I have shook off the regal thoughts
    Wherewith I reign'd? I hardly yet have learn'd  
    To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my knee.
 Yet I well remember
    The favours of these men.
 Were they not mine?
    Did they not sometime cry 'All hail!' to me?
    So Judas did to Christ; but he, in twelve,
    Found truth in all but one; I, in twelve thousand, none.

    God save the King! Will no man say amen?
    Am I both priest and clerk? Well then, amen.

    To do what service am I sent for hither?
  YORK.
 Give me the crown.
 Here, cousin, seize the crown.

    Now is this golden crown like a deep well  
    That owes two buckets, filling one another;
    The emptier ever dancing in the air,
    The other down, unseen, and full of water.

    That bucket down and fun of tears am I,
    Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 I thought you had been willing to resign.

  KING RICHARD.

    You may my glories and my state depose,
    But not my griefs; still am I king of those.
 Part of your cares you give me with your crown.

  KING RICHARD.
 Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Are you contented to resign the crown?
  KING RICHARD.
 Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be;
    Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.

    Now mark me how I will undo myself:
    I give this heavy weight from off my head,  
    And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand,
    The pride of kingly sway from out my heart;
    With mine own tears I wash away my balm,
    With mine own hands I give away my crown,
    With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,
    With mine own breath release all duteous oaths;
    All pomp and majesty I do forswear;
    My manors, rents, revenues, I forgo;
    My acts, decrees, and statutes, I deny.

    God pardon all oaths that are broke to me!
    God keep all vows unbroke are made to thee!
    Make me, that nothing have, with nothing griev'd,
    And thou with all pleas'd, that hast an achiev'd.

    God save King Henry, unking'd Richard says,
    And send him many years of sunshine days!
    What more remains?
  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 No more; but that you read
    These accusations, and these grievous crimes  
    Committed by your person and your followers
    Against the state and profit of this land;
    That, by confessing them, the souls of men
    May deem that you are worthily depos'd.
 Must I do so? And must I ravel out
    My weav'd-up follies? Gentle Northumberland,
    If thy offences were upon record,
    Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop
    To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst,
    There shouldst thou find one heinous article,
    Containing the deposing of a king
    And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,
    Mark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

  KING RICHARD.

    Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,
    I find myself a traitor with the rest;
    For I have given here my soul's consent
    T'undeck the pompous body of a king;
    Made glory base, and sovereignty a slave,
    Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,
    Nor no man's lord; I have no name, no tide-
    No, not that name was given me at the font-
    But 'tis usurp'd.
 Alack the heavy day,
    That I have worn so many winters out,
    And know not now what name to call myself!
    O that I were a mockery king of snow,
    Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke
    To melt myself away in water drops!  
    Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,
    An if my word be sterling yet in England,
    Let it command a mirror hither straight,
    That it may show me what a face I have
    Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.
 Fiend, thou torments me ere I come to hell.

  BOLINGBROKE.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

  KING RICHARD.

    No deeper wrinkles yet? Hath sorrow struck
    So many blows upon this face of mine  
    And made no deeper wounds? O flatt'ring glass,
    Like to my followers in prosperity,
    Thou dost beguile me! Was this face the face
    That every day under his household roof
    Did keep ten thousand men? Was this the face
    That like the sun did make beholders wink?
    Is this the face which fac'd so many follies
    That was at last out-fac'd by Bolingbroke?
    A brittle glory shineth in this face;
    As brittle as the glory is the face;
                        [Dashes the glass against the ground]
    For there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers.

    Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport-
    How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.
 The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd
    The shadow of your face.

  KING RICHARD.
 Say that again.

    'Tis very true: my grief lies all within;
    And these external manner of laments  
    Are merely shadows to the unseen grief
    That swells with silence in the tortur'd soul.
 I'll beg one boon,
    And then be gone and trouble you no more.

    Shall I obtain it?
  BOLINGBROKE.
 Name it, fair cousin.

  KING RICHARD.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Yet ask.

  KING RICHARD.
 And shall I have?
  BOLINGBROKE.

  KING RICHARD.
 Whither?
  KING RICHARD.
 Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.
 O, good! Convey! Conveyers are you all,
    That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.

                     Exeunt KING RICHARD, some Lords and a Guard
  BOLINGBROKE.
 On Wednesday next we solemnly set down
    Our coronation.
 Lords, prepare yourselves.
 A woeful pageant have we here beheld.

  CARLISLE.
 The woe's to come; the children yet unborn
    Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
 You holy clergymen, is there no plot
    To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
  ABBOT.
 My lord,
    Before I freely speak my mind herein,
    You shall not only take the sacrament
    To bury mine intents, but also to effect
    Whatever I shall happen to devise.

    I see your brows are full of discontent,
    Your hearts of sorrow, and your eyes of tears.
  
    Come home with me to supper; I will lay
    A plot shall show us all a merry day.
                 Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>



ACT V.
 A street leading to the Tower

Enter the QUEEN, with her attendants

  QUEEN.
 This way the King will come; this is the way
    To Julius Caesar's ill-erected tower,
    To whose flint bosom my condemned lord
    Is doom'd a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke.

    Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth
    Have any resting for her true King's queen.

    Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand;
    Thou map of honour, thou King Richard's tomb,
    And not King Richard; thou most beauteous inn,
    Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodg'd in thee,  
    When triumph is become an alehouse guest?
  KING RICHARD.
 Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so,
    To make my end too sudden.
 Learn, good soul,
    To think our former state a happy dream;
    From which awak'd, the truth of what we are
    Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet,
    To grim Necessity; and he and
    Will keep a league till death.

    Our holy lives must win a new world's crown,
    Which our profane hours here have thrown down.
 A king of beasts, indeed! If aught but beasts,
    I had been still a happy king of men.

    In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire
    With good old folks, and let them tell thee tales
    Of woeful ages long ago betid;
    And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs
    Tell thou the lamentable tale of me,
    And send the hearers weeping to their beds;
    For why, the senseless brands will sympathize
    The heavy accent of thy moving tongue,
    And in compassion weep the fire out;
    And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,
    For the deposing of a rightful king.


             Enter NORTHUMBERLAND attended

  NORTHUMBERLAND.

    And, madam, there is order ta'en for you:
    With all swift speed you must away to France.

  KING RICHARD.
 Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
    The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,
    The time shall not be many hours of age
    More than it is, ere foul sin gathering head
    Shall break into corruption.
 Thou shalt think
    Though he divide the realm and give thee half
    It is too little, helping him to all;
    And he shall think that thou, which knowest the way
    To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,
    Being ne'er so little urg'd, another way
    To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.

  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 My guilt be on my head, and there an end.

    Take leave, and part; for you must part forthwith.

  KING RICHARD.

    Part us, Northumberland; I towards the north,
    Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;
    My wife to France, from whence set forth in pomp,
    She came adorned hither like sweet May,
    Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.
 Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.

  QUEEN.
 Banish us both, and send the King with me.
 That were some love, but little policy.

  QUEEN.
 Then whither he goes thither let me go.
 So two, together weeping, make one woe.

    Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;
    Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.

  QUEEN.
 So longest way shall have the longest moans.

  KING RICHARD.
 Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,  
    And piece the way out with a heavy heart.

    One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part;
    Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.

  QUEEN.
 Give me mine own again; 'twere no good part
    To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.

    So, now I have mine own again, be gone.

  KING RICHARD.
 We make woe wanton with this fond delay.

    Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.
            Exeunt




SCENE 2.

  YORK.
 Where did I leave?
  DUCHESS.
 At that sad stop, my lord,
    Where rude misgoverned hands from windows' tops
    Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.

  YORK.
'
    And thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.

  DUCHESS.
 Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?
  YORK.
 As in a theatre the eyes of men
    After a well-grac'd actor leaves the stage
    Are idly bent on him that enters next,
    Thinking his prattle to be tedious;
    Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
    Did scowl on gentle Richard; no man cried 'God save him!'
    No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home;
    But dust was thrown upon his sacred head;
    Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
    His face still combating with tears and smiles,
    The badges of his grief and patience,
    That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel'd
    The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted,
    And barbarism itself have pitied him.

  DUCHESS.
 Here comes my son Aumerle.

  YORK.

    I am in Parliament pledge for his truth
    And lasting fealty to the new-made king.
 Welcome, my son.
 Who are the violets now
    That strew the green lap of the new come spring?
  AUMERLE.

  YORK.

    What news from Oxford? Do these justs and triumphs hold?  
  AUMERLE.
 For aught I know, my lord, they do.

  YORK.
 You will be there, I know.
 What seal is that that without thy bosom?
    Yea, look'st thou pale? Let me see the writing.
 My lord, 'tis nothing.

  YORK.

  YORK.
 Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.

    I fear, I fear-
  DUCHESS.
 Bound to himself! What doth he with a bond
    That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.

  AUMERLE.
  
  YORK.
 I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say.
 What is the matter, my lord?
  YORK.
 Ho! who is within there?

                    Enter a servant

    Saddle my horse.

    God for his mercy, what treachery is here!
  DUCHESS.
 Why, York, what is it, my lord?
  YORK.
 Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse.

  DUCHESS.
 What is the matter?
  YORK.

  DUCHESS.
 What is the matter, Aumerle?
  AUMERLE.
 Good mother, be content; it is no more
    Than my poor life must answer.
 Bring me my boots.


              His man enters with his boots

  DUCHESS.
 Strike him, Aumerle.
 Poor boy, thou art amaz'd.

    Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.
 Give me my boots, I say.

  DUCHESS.
 Why, York, what wilt thou do?
    Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
    Have we more sons? or are we like to have?
    Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
    And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age
    And rob me of a happy mother's name?
    Is he not like thee? Is he not thine own?
  YORK.
 Thou fond mad woman,
    Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
    A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament,
    And interchangeably set down their hands
    To kill the King at Oxford.
  
  DUCHESS.
 He shall be none;
    We'll keep him here.
 Then what is that to him?
  YORK.

  DUCHESS.
 Hadst thou groan'd for him
    As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.

    But now I know thy mind: thou dost suspect
    That I have been disloyal to thy bed
    And that he is a bastard, not thy son.

    Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind.

    He is as like thee as a man may be
    Not like to me, or any of my kin,
    And yet I love him.
 Make way, unruly woman!                             Exit
  DUCHESS.
 After, Aumerle! Mount thee upon his horse;
    Spur post, and get before him to the King,
    And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE 3.

Windsor Castle

Enter BOLINGBROKE as King, PERCY, and other LORDS

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son?
    'Tis full three months since I did see him last.

    If any plague hang over us, 'tis he.

    I would to God, my lords, he might be found.

  PERCY.
 My lord, some two days since I saw the Prince,
    And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.
 And what said the gallant?
  PERCY.
 His answer was, he would unto the stews,
    And from the common'st creature pluck a glove  
    And wear it as a favour; and with that
    He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 As dissolute as desperate; yet through both
    I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years
    May happily bring forth.
 What means our cousin that he stares and looks
    So wildly?
  AUMERLE.
 God save your Grace! I do beseech your Majesty,
    To have some conference with your Grace alone.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
                                                    [Kneels]
    My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth,
    Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.
 Intended or committed was this fault?
    If on the first, how heinous e'er it be,
    To win thy after-love I pardon thee.

  AUMERLE.
 Then give me leave that I may turn the key,
    That no man enter till my tale be done.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 [Within] My liege, beware; look to thyself;
    Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.

    Shall I, for love, speak treason to thy face?
    Open the door, or I will break it open.
 Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know  
    The treason that my haste forbids me show.
 Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd.

    I do repent me; read not my name there;
    My heart is not confederate with my hand.
 It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.

    I tore it from the traitor's bosom, King;
    Fear, and not love, begets his penitence.

    Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove
    A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.
 O heinous, strong, and bold conspiracy!
    O loyal father of a treacherous son!
    Thou sheer, immaculate, and silver fountain,
    From whence this stream through muddy passages
    Hath held his current and defil'd himself!
    Thy overflow of good converts to bad;
    And thy abundant goodness shall excuse
    This deadly blot in thy digressing son.
 So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd;
    And he shall spend mine honour with his shame,
    As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.
  
    Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies,
    Or my sham'd life in his dishonour lies.

    Thou kill'st me in his life; giving him breath,
    The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.

  DUCHESS.

    A beggar begs that never begg'd before.
 Our scene is alt'red from a serious thing,
    And now chang'd to 'The Beggar and the King.
'
    My dangerous cousin, let your mother in.
 If thou do pardon whosoever pray,
    More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.

    This fest'red joint cut off, the rest rest sound;
    This let alone will all the rest confound.


                 Enter DUCHESS
  
  DUCHESS.
 Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?
    Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?
  DUCHESS.
 Hear me, gentle liege.

                                                     [Kneels]
  BOLINGBROKE.

  DUCHESS.

    For ever will I walk upon my knees,
    And never see day that the happy sees
    Till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy
    By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.

  AUMERLE.

                                                     [Kneels]
  YORK.

    His weary joints would gladly rise, I know;
    Our knees still kneel till to the ground they grow.

    His prayers are full of false hypocrisy;
    Ours of true zeal and deep integrity.

    Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have
    That mercy which true prayer ought to have.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Good aunt, stand up.
 do not say 'stand up';
    Say 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.

    The word is short, but not so short as sweet;
    No word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.

  YORK.
 Speak it in French, King, say 'pardonne moy.

    Thine eye begins to speak, set thy tongue there;
    Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear,
    That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,
    Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Good aunt, stand up.

  DUCHESS.
 I do not sue to stand;
    Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.

  DUCHESS.
 Speak it again.

    Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain,
    But makes one pardon strong.

  DUCHESS.
 A god on earth thou art.
 But for our trusty brother-in-law and the Abbot,
    With all the rest of that consorted crew,  
    Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.

    Good uncle, help to order several powers
    To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are.

    Uncle, farewell; and, cousin, adieu;
    Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.

  DUCHESS.
      Exeunt




SCENE 4.

Windsor Castle

Enter SIR PIERCE OF EXTON and a servant

  EXTON.
 Didst thou not mark the King, what words he spake?
    'Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?'
    Was it not so?
  SERVANT.

  EXTON.
 'Have I no friend?' quoth he.
 And, speaking it, he wishtly look'd on me,
    As who should say 'I would thou wert the man
    That would divorce this terror from my heart';
    Meaning the King at Pomfret.
 Come, let's go.

    I am the King's friend, and will rid his foe.
         Exeunt




SCENE 5.

Pomfret Castle.
 I have been studying how I may compare
    This prison where I live unto the world
    And, for because the world is populous
    And here is not a creature but myself,
    I cannot do it.

    Thus play I in one person many people,
    And none contented.
 Sometimes am I king;
    Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar,
    And so I am.
 Then crushing penury
    Persuades me I was better when a king;
    Then am I king'd again; and by and by
    Think that I am unking'd by Bolingbroke,  
    And straight am nothing.
 But whate'er I be,
    Nor I, nor any man that but man is,
    With nothing shall be pleas'd till he be eas'd
    With being nothing.

    Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is
    Are clamorous groans which strike upon my heart,  
    Which is the bell.
 Let it sound no more;
    For though it have holp madmen to their wits,
    In me it seems it will make wise men mad.

    Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me!
    For 'tis a sign of love; and love to Richard
    Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.


              Enter a GROOM of the stable

  GROOM.
 Hail, royal Prince!
  KING RICHARD.
 Thanks, noble peer!
    The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.

    What art thou? and how comest thou hither,
    Where no man never comes but that sad dog
    That brings me food to make misfortune live?
  GROOM.
 I was a poor groom of thy stable, King,  
    When thou wert king; who, travelling towards York,
    With much ado at length have gotten leave
    To look upon my sometimes royal master's face.
 Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,
    How went he under him?
  GROOM.

    Would he not stumble? would he not fall down,
    Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck
    Of that proud man that did usurp his back?
    Forgiveness, horse! Why do I rail on thee,
    Since thou, created to be aw'd by man,
    Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse;  
    And yet I bear a burden like an ass,
    Spurr'd, gall'd, and tir'd, by jauncing Bolingbroke.
 Fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.

  GROOM.
 my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.
 Taste of it first as thou art wont to do.

  KEEPER.
 Sir Pierce of Exton,
    Who lately came from the King, commands the contrary.

  KING RICHARD.
 The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!
    Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.

                                           [Beats the KEEPER]
  KEEPER.
 How now! What means death in this rude assault?
    Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
  
                         [Snatching a weapon and killing one]
    Go thou and fill another room in hell.

              [He kills another, then EXTON strikes him down]
    That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire
    That staggers thus my person.

                                                       [Dies]
  EXTON.
 As full of valour as of royal blood.

    Both have I spill'd.

    Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.
 Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear
    Is that the rebels have consum'd with fire
    Our town of Ciceter in Gloucestershire;
    But whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.


              Enter NORTHUMBERLAND

    Welcome, my lord.
 What is the news?
  NORTHUMBERLAND.
 First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.

    The next news is, I have to London sent
    The heads of Salisbury, Spencer, Blunt, and Kent.

    The manner of their taking may appear
    At large discoursed in this paper here.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains;
    And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.

  
                  Enter FITZWATER

  FITZWATER.
 My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London
    The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely;
    Two of the dangerous consorted traitors
    That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.
 Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot;
    Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.
 The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,
    With clog of conscience and sour melancholy,
    Hath yielded up his body to the grave;
    But here is Carlisle living, to abide
    Thy kingly doom, and sentence of his pride.

  BOLINGBROKE.
 Carlisle, this is your doom:
    Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,
    More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life;
    So as thou liv'st in peace, die free from strife;  
    For though mine enemy thou hast ever been,
    High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.


      Enter EXTON, with attendants, hearing a coffin

  EXTON.

  EXTON.
 From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.
 They love not poison that do poison need,
    Nor do I thee.

    The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,
    But neither my good word nor princely favour;
    With Cain go wander thorough shades of night,
    And never show thy head by day nor light.
  
    Lords, I protest my soul is full of woe
    That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow.

    Come, mourn with me for what I do lament,
    And put on sullen black incontinent.

    March sadly after; grace my mournings here
    In weeping after this untimely bier.
                  Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1593

KING RICHARD III

by William Shakespeare


Dramatis Personae

  EDWARD THE FOURTH

    Sons to the King
  EDWARD, PRINCE OF WALES afterwards KING EDWARD V
  RICHARD, DUKE OF YORK,

    Brothers to the King
  GEORGE, DUKE OF CLARENCE,
  RICHARD, DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, afterwards KING RICHARD III

  A YOUNG SON OF CLARENCE (Edward, Earl of Warwick)
  HENRY, EARL OF RICHMOND, afterwards KING HENRY VII
  CARDINAL BOURCHIER, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY
  THOMAS ROTHERHAM, ARCHBISHOP OF YORK
  JOHN MORTON, BISHOP OF ELY
  DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
  DUKE OF NORFOLK
  EARL OF SURREY, his son
  EARL RIVERS, brother to King Edward's Queen
  MARQUIS OF DORSET and LORD GREY, her sons
  EARL OF OXFORD  
  LORD HASTINGS
  LORD LOVEL
  LORD STANLEY, called also EARL OF DERBY
  SIR THOMAS VAUGHAN
  SIR RICHARD RATCLIFF
  SIR WILLIAM CATESBY
  SIR JAMES TYRREL
  SIR JAMES BLOUNT
  SIR WALTER HERBERT
  SIR WILLIAM BRANDON
  SIR ROBERT BRAKENBURY, Lieutenant of the Tower
  CHRISTOPHER URSWICK, a priest
  LORD MAYOR OF LONDON
  SHERIFF OF WILTSHIRE
  HASTINGS, a pursuivant
  TRESSEL and BERKELEY, gentlemen attending on Lady Anne
  ELIZABETH, Queen to King Edward IV
  MARGARET, widow of King Henry VI
  DUCHESS OF YORK, mother to King Edward IV
  LADY ANNE, widow of Edward, Prince of Wales, son to King  
    Henry VI; afterwards married to the Duke of Gloucester
  A YOUNG DAUGHTER OF CLARENCE (Margaret Plantagenet,
    Countess of Salisbury)
  Ghosts, of Richard's victims
  Lords, Gentlemen, and Attendants; Priest, Scrivener, Page, Bishops,
    Aldermen, Citizens, Soldiers, Messengers, Murderers, Keeper




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.


London.
 Now is the winter of our discontent
    Made glorious summer by this sun of York;
    And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house
    In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.

    Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths;
    Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;
    Our stern alarums chang'd to merry meetings,
    Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.

    And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover
    To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
    I am determined to prove a villain
    And hate the idle pleasures of these days.

    Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,
    By drunken prophecies, libels, and dreams,
    To set my brother Clarence and the King
    In deadly hate the one against the other;
    And if King Edward be as true and just
    As I am subtle, false, and treacherous,  
    This day should Clarence closely be mew'd up-
    About a prophecy which says that G
    Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be.
 His Majesty,
    Tend'ring my person's safety, hath appointed
    This conduct to convey me to th' Tower.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Upon what cause?
  CLARENCE.

    O, belike his Majesty hath some intent
    That you should be new-christ'ned in the Tower.

    But what's the matter, Clarence? May I know?
  CLARENCE.
 Yea, Richard, when I know; for I protest  
    As yet I do not; but, as I can learn,
    He hearkens after prophecies and dreams,
    And from the cross-row plucks the letter G,
    And says a wizard told him that by G
    His issue disinherited should be;
    And, for my name of George begins with G,
    It follows in his thought that I am he.

  GLOUCESTER.

    Was it not she and that good man of worship,
    Antony Woodville, her brother there,
    That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,
    From whence this present day he is delivered?
    We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe.

  CLARENCE.

    Heard you not what an humble suppliant
    Lord Hastings was, for her delivery?
  GLOUCESTER.

  BRAKENBURY.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Even so; an't please your worship, Brakenbury,
    You may partake of any thing we say:
    We speak no treason, man; we say the King
    Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen
    Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous;  
    We say that Shore's wife hath a pretty foot,
    A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue;
    And that the Queen's kindred are made gentlefolks.
 With this, my lord, myself have naught to do.

  BRAKENBURY.
 What one, my lord?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Her husband, knave! Wouldst thou betray me?
  BRAKENBURY.
 I do beseech your Grace to pardon me, and
    withal
    Forbear your conference with the noble Duke.

  CLARENCE.

  CLARENCE.
 I know it pleaseth neither of us well.
 Well, your imprisonment shall not be long;
    I will deliver or else lie for you.

  CLARENCE.

                          Exeunt CLARENCE, BRAKENBURY, and guard
  GLOUCESTER.
 Good time of day unto my gracious lord!
  GLOUCESTER.
  
    How hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment?
  HASTINGS.
 With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must;
    But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks
    That were the cause of my imprisonment.
 No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too;
    For they that were your enemies are his,
    And have prevail'd as much on him as you.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Now, by Saint John, that news is bad indeed.

    Where is he? In his bed?
  HASTINGS.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Go you before, and I will follow you.
  
                                                   Exit HASTINGS
    He cannot live, I hope, and must not die
    Till George be pack'd with posthorse up to heaven.

    I'll in to urge his hatred more to Clarence
    With lies well steel'd with weighty arguments;
    And, if I fail not in my deep intent,
    Clarence hath not another day to live;
    Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,
    And leave the world for me to bustle in!
    For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter.

    What though I kill'd her husband and her father?
    The readiest way to make the wench amends
    Is to become her husband and her father;
    The which will I-not all so much for love
    As for another secret close intent
    By marrying her which I must reach unto.

    But yet I run before my horse to market.

    Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns;
    When they are gone, then must I count my gains.

    Poor key-cold figure of a holy king!
    Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster!
    Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood!
    Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost
    To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,
    Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtered son,
    Stabb'd by the self-same hand that made these wounds.

    O, cursed be the hand that made these holes!
    Cursed the heart that had the heart to do it!  
    Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence!
    More direful hap betide that hated wretch
    That makes us wretched by the death of thee
    Than I can wish to adders, spiders, toads,
    Or any creeping venom'd thing that lives!
    If ever he have child, abortive be it,
    Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,
    Whose ugly and unnatural aspect
    May fright the hopeful mother at the view,
    And that be heir to his unhappiness!
    If ever he have wife, let her be made
    More miserable by the death of him
    Than I am made by my young lord and thee!
    Come, now towards Chertsey with your holy load,
    Taken from Paul's to be interred there;
    And still as you are weary of this weight
    Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry's corse.
 Villains, set down the corse; or, by Saint Paul,
    I'll make a corse of him that disobeys!
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 Unmannerd dog! Stand thou, when I command.

    Advance thy halberd higher than my breast,
    Or, by Saint Paul, I'll strike thee to my foot
    And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.

                               [The bearers set down the coffin]
  ANNE.
 What, do you tremble? Are you all afraid?
    Alas, I blame you not, for you are mortal,
    And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.

    Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell!
    Thou hadst but power over his mortal body,
    His soul thou canst not have; therefore, be gone.

  GLOUCESTER.
  
  ANNE.
 Foul devil, for God's sake, hence and trouble us not;
    For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell
    Fill'd it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.

    If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
    Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.

    O, gentlemen, see, see! Dead Henry's wounds
    Open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh.

    Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity,
    For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood
    From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells;
    Thy deeds inhuman and unnatural
    Provokes this deluge most unnatural.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Lady, you know no rules of charity,
    Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.

  GLOUCESTER.
 But I know none, and therefore am no beast.
 O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
  GLOUCESTER.
 More wonderful when angels are so angry.

  ANNE.
 Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make
    No excuse current but to hang thyself.

  GLOUCESTER.
 And by despairing shalt thou stand excused
    For doing worthy vengeance on thyself
    That didst unworthy slaughter upon others.

  GLOUCESTER.

    But dead they are, and, devilish slave, by thee.

  GLOUCESTER.
 I did not kill your husband.

  ANNE.
 Why, then he is alive.
 Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edward's hands.

  ANNE.
 In thy foul throat thou liest: Queen Margaret saw
    Thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood;
    The which thou once didst bend against her breast,
    But that thy brothers beat aside the point.
 I was provoked by her sland'rous tongue
    That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.

  ANNE.

    Didst thou not kill this king?
  GLOUCESTER.
 I grant ye.

  ANNE.
  
  ANNE.
 He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.

  GLOUCESTER.
 And thou unfit for any place but hell.
 Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.

  ANNE.
 Some dungeon.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Your bed-chamber.

  ANNE.
 Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!
  GLOUCESTER.

  ANNE.

  GLOUCESTER.
 I know so.
 But, gentle Lady Anne,
    To leave this keen encounter of our wits,
    And fall something into a slower method-
    Is not the causer of the timeless deaths
    Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,
    As blameful as the executioner?
  ANNE.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Your beauty was the cause of that effect-
    Your beauty that did haunt me in my sleep  
    To undertake the death of all the world
    So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.

  ANNE.
 If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
    These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.
 These eyes could not endure that beauty's
    wreck;
    You should not blemish it if I stood by.

    As all the world is cheered by the sun,
    So I by that; it is my day, my life.

  ANNE.
 Curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.
 I would I were, to be reveng'd on thee.

  GLOUCESTER.
 It is a quarrel most unnatural,
    To be reveng'd on him that loveth thee.
 It is a quarrel just and reasonable,
    To be reveng'd on him that kill'd my husband.

  ANNE.

  GLOUCESTER.
 He lives that loves thee better than he could.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Plantagenet.

  ANNE.
 Why, that was he.

  GLOUCESTER.

  ANNE.
 Where is he?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Here.
 Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake!
  GLOUCESTER.
 Never came poison from so sweet a place.

  ANNE.

    Out of my sight! Thou dost infect mine eyes.

  ANNE.
 I would they were, that I might die at once;
    For now they kill me with a living death.

    I never sued to friend nor enemy;
    My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word;
    But, now thy beauty is propos'd my fee,
    My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.

                                   [She looks scornfully at him]
    Teach not thy lip such scorn; for it was made
    For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.

    If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,
    Lo here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword;
    Which if thou please to hide in this true breast
    And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,  
    I lay it naked to the deadly stroke,
    And humbly beg the death upon my knee.

    Nay, now dispatch; 'twas I that stabb'd young Edward-
    But 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on.

                                           [She falls the sword]
    Take up the sword again, or take up me.

  ANNE.
 Arise, dissembler; though I wish thy death,
    I will not be thy executioner.

  GLOUCESTER.
 I have already.

  ANNE.
 'Tis figur'd in my tongue.
  
  ANNE.
 well put up your sword.
 Say, then, my peace is made.
 That shalt thou know hereafter.

  GLOUCESTER.
 But shall I live in hope?
  ANNE.
 All men, I hope, live so.

  GLOUCESTER.

  ANNE.
 To take is not to give.
 Look how my ring encompasseth thy finger,
    Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart;
    Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.

  ANNE.
 What is it?
  GLOUCESTER.

    For divers unknown reasons, I beseech you,
    Grant me this boon.
 With all my heart; and much it joys me too
    To see you are become so penitent.

  ANNE.
 'Tis more than you deserve;
    But since you teach me how to flatter you,
    Imagine I have said farewell already.

                             Exeunt two GENTLEMEN With LADY ANNE
  GLOUCESTER.

  GENTLEMEN.
 Towards Chertsey, noble lord?
  GLOUCESTER.
  
    What! I that kill'd her husband and his father-
    To take her in her heart's extremest hate,
    With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,
    The bleeding witness of my hatred by;
    Having God, her conscience, and these bars against me,
    And I no friends to back my suit at all
    But the plain devil and dissembling looks,
    And yet to win her, all the world to nothing!
    Ha!
    Hath she forgot already that brave prince,
    Edward, her lord, whom I, some three months since,
    Stabb'd in my angry mood at Tewksbury?
    A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman-
    Fram'd in the prodigality of nature,
    Young, valiant, wise, and no doubt right royal-
    The spacious world cannot again afford;
    And will she yet abase her eyes on me,
    That cropp'd the golden prime of this sweet prince
    And made her widow to a woeful bed?
    On me, whose all not equals Edward's moiety?  
    On me, that halts and am misshapen thus?
    My dukedom to a beggarly denier,
    I do mistake my person all this while.

    Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot,
    Myself to be a marv'llous proper man.

    Since I am crept in favour with myself,
    I will maintain it with some little cost.

    Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,
    That I may see my shadow as I pass.
                     Exit




SCENE 3.


London.
 The palace

Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH, LORD RIVERS, and LORD GREY

  RIVERS.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 If he were dead, what would betide on
    me?
  GREY.
 No other harm but loss of such a lord.

  GREY.
 The heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son
    To be your comforter when he is gone.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.

  RIVER.
 Is it concluded he shall be Protector?  
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 It is determin'd, not concluded yet;
    But so it must be, if the King miscarry.


                     Enter BUCKINGHAM and DERBY

  GREY.
 Here come the Lords of Buckingham and Derby.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Good time of day unto your royal Grace!
  DERBY.
 God make your Majesty joyful as you have been.
 The Countess Richmond, good my Lord
    of Derby,
    To your good prayer will scarcely say amen.

  DERBY.
 Saw you the King to-day, my Lord of  
    Derby?
  DERBY.
 But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
    Are come from visiting his Majesty.
 What likelihood of his amendment,
    Lords?
  BUCKINGHAM.
 Madam, good hope; his Grace speaks
    cheerfully.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 God grant him health! Did you confer
    with him?
  BUCKINGHAM.
 Ay, madam; he desires to make atonement
    Between the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers,
    And between them and my Lord Chamberlain;
    And sent to warn them to his royal presence.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.


              Enter GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, and DORSET

  GLOUCESTER.
  
    Who is it that complains unto the King
    That I, forsooth, am stern and love them not?
    By holy Paul, they love his Grace but lightly
    That fill his ears with such dissentious rumours.

    Because I cannot flatter and look fair,
    Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive, and cog,
    Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,
    I must be held a rancorous enemy.
 To who in all this presence speaks your Grace?
  GLOUCESTER.

    When have I injur'd thee? when done thee wrong,
    Or thee, or thee, or any of your faction?
    A plague upon you all! His royal Grace-
    Whom God preserve better than you would wish!-
    Cannot be quiet searce a breathing while
    But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
 Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the  
    matter.

    The King, on his own royal disposition
    And not provok'd by any suitor else-
    Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred
    That in your outward action shows itself
    Against my children, brothers, and myself-
    Makes him to send that he may learn the ground.
 I cannot tell; the world is grown so bad
    That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch.
 Come, come, we know your meaning,
    brother Gloucester:
    You envy my advancement and my friends';
    God grant we never may have need of you!
  GLOUCESTER.
 Meantime, God grants that I have need of you.
 By Him that rais'd me to this careful
    height
    From that contented hap which I enjoy'd,
    I never did incense his Majesty
    Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been
    An earnest advocate to plead for him.

  GLOUCESTER.

  RIVERS.
 She may, my lord; for-
  GLOUCESTER.
 She may, Lord Rivers? Why, who knows
    not so?
    She may do more, sir, than denying that:
    She may help you to many fair preferments
    And then deny her aiding hand therein,
    And lay those honours on your high desert.
 What, marry, may she? Marry with a king,
    A bachelor, and a handsome stripling too.

    Iwis your grandam had a worser match.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.

    I had rather be a country servant-maid
    Than a great queen with this condition-
    To be so baited, scorn'd, and stormed at.


                Enter old QUEEN MARGARET, behind

    Small joy have I in being England's Queen.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 And less'ned be that small, God, I
    beseech Him!
    Thy honour, state, and seat, is due to me.
 What! Threat you me with telling of the
    King?  
    Tell him and spare not.
 Look what I have said
    I will avouch't in presence of the King.

    I dare adventure to be sent to th' Tow'r.

  GLOUCESTER.
 In all which time you and your husband Grey
    Were factious for the house of Lancaster;
    And, Rivers, so were you.
 Was not your husband
    In Margaret's battle at Saint Albans slain?  
    Let me put in your minds, if you forget,
    What you have been ere this, and what you are;
    Withal, what I have been, and what I am.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 A murd'rous villain, and so still thou art.
 Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick,
    Ay, and forswore himself-which Jesu pardon!-
  QUEEN MARGARET.

  QUEEN MARGARET.

  RIVERS.

  GLOUCESTER.
 If I should be! I had rather be a pedlar.

    I can no longer hold me patient.
                 [Advancing]
    Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out
    In sharing that which you have pill'd from me.
 Foul wrinkled witch, what mak'st thou in my
    sight?
  QUEEN MARGARET.
 But repetition of what thou hast marr'd,
    That will I make before I let thee go.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Wert thou not banished on pain of death?
  QUEEN MARGARET.
 I was; but I do find more pain in  
    banishment
    Than death can yield me here by my abode.

    A husband and a son thou ow'st to me;
    And thou a kingdom; all of you allegiance.

    This sorrow that I have by right is yours;
    And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.

  GLOUCESTER.
 The curse my noble father laid on thee,
    When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper
    And with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes,
    And then to dry them gav'st the Duke a clout
    Steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland-
    His curses then from bitterness of soul
    Denounc'd against thee are all fall'n upon thee;
    And God, not we, hath plagu'd thy bloody deed.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 So just is God to right the innocent.

  HASTINGS.
 O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,
    And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!
  RIVERS.
 Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.

  DORSET.
 No man but prophesied revenge for it.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.
  
  QUEEN MARGARET.
 What, were you snarling all before I came,
    Ready to catch each other by the throat,
    And turn you all your hatred now on me?
    Did York's dread curse prevail so much with heaven
    That Henry's death, my lovely Edward's death,
    Their kingdom's loss, my woeful banishment,
    Should all but answer for that peevish brat?
    Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
    Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!
    Though not by war, by surfeit die your king,
    As ours by murder, to make him a king!
    Edward thy son, that now is Prince of Wales,
    For Edward our son, that was Prince of Wales,
    Die in his youth by like untimely violence!
    Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,
    Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self!
    Long mayest thou live to wail thy children's death,
    And see another, as I see thee now,
    Deck'd in thy rights, as thou art stall'd in mine!
    Long die thy happy days before thy death;  
    And, after many length'ned hours of grief,
    Die neither mother, wife, nor England's Queen!
    Rivers and Dorset, you were standers by,
    And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son
    Was stabb'd with bloody daggers.
 Have done thy charm, thou hateful wither'd
    hag.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou
    shalt hear me.

    If heaven have any grievous plague in store
    Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
    O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,
    And then hurl down their indignation
    On thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace!
    The worm of conscience still be-gnaw thy soul!
    Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou liv'st,
    And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends!
    No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,  
    Unless it be while some tormenting dream
    Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils!
    Thou elvish-mark'd, abortive, rooting hog,
    Thou that wast seal'd in thy nativity
    The slave of nature and the son of hell,
    Thou slander of thy heavy mother's womb,
    Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins,
    Thou rag of honour, thou detested-
  GLOUCESTER.
 Ha?
  QUEEN MARGARET.

  GLOUCESTER.
 I cry thee mercy then, for I did think
    That thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Why, so I did, but look'd for no reply.

    O, let me make the period to my curse!
  GLOUCESTER.
 'Tis done by me, and ends in-Margaret.
 Thus have you breath'd your curse
    against yourself.
 False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,
    Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
 Foul shame upon you! you have all
    mov'd mine.
 Were you well serv'd, you would be taught your
      duty.
 To serve me well you all should do me
    duty,
    Teach me to be your queen and you my subjects.
 Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.
 Peace, Master Marquis, you are malapert;
    Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Good counsel, marry; learn it, learn it, Marquis.

  DORSET.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Ay, and much more; but I was born so high,
    Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top,
    And dallies with the wind, and scorns the sun.

  QUEEN MARGARET.

    Your aery buildeth in our aery's nest.

    O God that seest it, do not suffer it;
    As it is won with blood, lost be it so!
  BUCKINGHAM.
 Peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity!
  QUEEN MARGARET.

    Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
    And shamefully my hopes by you are butcher'd.

    My charity is outrage, life my shame;  
    And in that shame still live my sorrow's rage!
  BUCKINGHAM.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 O princely Buckingham, I'll kiss thy
    hand
    In sign of league and amity with thee.

    Now fair befall thee and thy noble house!
    Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,
    Nor thou within the compass of my curse.

  BUCKINGHAM.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 I will not think but they ascend the sky
    And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace.
 What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham?
  BUCKINGHAM.
 What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle
    counsel,
    And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?
    O, but remember this another day,
    When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,
    And say poor Margaret was a prophetess!
    Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
    And he to yours, and all of you to God's!               Exit
  BUCKINGHAM.
 My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.

  RIVERS.
 I muse why she's at liberty.

  GLOUCESTER.
 I cannot blame her; by God's holy Mother,
    She hath had too much wrong; and I repent
    My part thereof that I have done to her.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.

  GLOUCESTER.

    Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid;
    He is frank'd up to fatting for his pains;
    God pardon them that are the cause thereof!  
  RIVERS.
 So do I ever-  [Aside]  being well advis'd;
    For had I curs'd now, I had curs'd myself.


                         Enter CATESBY

  CATESBY.
 I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.

    Now they believe it, and withal whet me
    To be reveng'd on Rivers, Dorset, Grey;
    But then I sigh and, with a piece of Scripture,
    Tell them that God bids us do good for evil.

    And thus I clothe my naked villainy
    With odd old ends stol'n forth of holy writ,
    And seem a saint when most I play the devil.


                       Enter two MURDERERS

    But, soft, here come my executioners.

    How now, my hardy stout resolved mates!
    Are you now going to dispatch this thing?
  FIRST MURDERER.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Well thought upon; I have it here about me.

                                             [Gives the warrant]
    When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.

  FIRST MURDERER.
 Tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to
    prate;
    Talkers are no good doers.
 Be assur'd
    We go to use our hands and not our tongues.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Your eyes drop millstones when fools' eyes fall
    tears.

    I like you, lads; about your business straight;
    Go, go, dispatch.
 We will, my noble lord.
 The Tower

Enter CLARENCE and KEEPER

  KEEPER.
 Why looks your Grace so heavily to-day?
  CLARENCE.
 O, I have pass'd a miserable night,
    So full of fearful dreams, of ugly sights,
    That, as I am a Christian faithful man,
    I would not spend another such a night
    Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days-
    So full of dismal terror was the time!
  KEEPER.
 What was your dream, my lord? I pray you
    tell me.
 As we pac'd along  
    Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
    Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and in falling
    Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard
    Into the tumbling billows of the main.

  KEEPER.
 Methought I had; and often did I strive  
    To yield the ghost, but still the envious flood
    Stopp'd in my soul and would not let it forth
    To find the empty, vast, and wand'ring air;
    But smother'd it within my panting bulk,
    Who almost burst to belch it in the sea.
 Awak'd you not in this sore agony?
  CLARENCE.
 No, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life.

    O, then began the tempest to my soul!
    I pass'd, methought, the melancholy flood
    With that sour ferryman which poets write of,
    Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
 Then came wand'ring by
    A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
    Dabbled in blood, and he shriek'd out aloud
    'Clarence is come-false, fleeting, perjur'd Clarence,
    That stabb'd me in the field by Tewksbury.

  KEEPER.
 No marvel, lord, though it affrighted you;
    I am afraid, methinks, to hear you tell it.

  CLARENCE.
 Ah, Keeper, Keeper, I have done these things
    That now give evidence against my soul
    For Edward's sake, and see how he requites me!
    O God! If my deep prayers cannot appease Thee,
    But Thou wilt be aveng'd on my misdeeds,
    Yet execute Thy wrath in me alone;
    O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!
  KEEPER, I prithee sit by me awhile;
    My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.
 I will, my lord.
 God give your Grace good rest.

    Princes have but their titles for their glories,
    An outward honour for an inward toil;
    And for unfelt imaginations
    They often feel a world of restless cares,
    So that between their tides and low name
    There's nothing differs but the outward fame.


                      Enter the two MURDERERS

  FIRST MURDERER.
 What wouldst thou, fellow, and how cam'st
    thou hither?
  FIRST MURDERER.
 What, so brief?  
  SECOND MURDERER.
 Let
    him see our commission and talk no more.

    I will not reason what is meant hereby,
    Because I will be guiltless from the meaning.

    There lies the Duke asleep; and there the keys.

    I'll to the King and signify to him
    That thus I have resign'd to you my charge.
 Fare
    you well.
                       Exeunt BRAKENBURY and KEEPER
  SECOND MURDERER.
 What, shall I stab him as he sleeps?
  FIRST MURDERER.
 No; he'll say 'twas done cowardly, when
    he wakes.

  SECOND MURDERER.

  FIRST MURDERER.
 What, art thou afraid?
  SECOND MURDERER.
 Not to kill him, having a warrant; but to
    be damn'd for killing him, from the which no warrant can
    defend me.
 I'll back to the Duke of Gloucester and
    tell him so.

  SECOND MURDERER.

  FIRST MURDERER.
 Remember our reward, when the deed's
    done.
 Zounds, he dies; I had forgot the reward.
 Where's thy conscience now?
  SECOND MURDERER.
 O, in the Duke of Gloucester's purse!  
  FIRST MURDERER.

  SECOND MURDERER.
 What if it come to thee again?
  SECOND MURDERER.
 I'll not meddle with it-it makes a man
    coward: a man cannot steal, but it accuseth him; a man
    cannot swear, but it checks him; a man cannot lie with his
    neighbour's wife, but it detects him.

    It is turn'd out of towns and cities for a dangerous thing;
    and every man that means to live well endeavours to trust
    to himself and live without it.

  FIRST MURDERER.

  SECOND MURDERER.
 Take the devil in thy mind and believe
    him not; he would insinuate with thee but to make the
    sigh.
  
  FIRST MURDERER.
 Spoke like a tall man that respects thy
    reputation.
 Take him on the costard with the hilts of
    thy sword, and then chop him in the malmsey-butt in the
    next room.
 O excellent device! and make a sop of
    him.
 Soft! he wakes.

  SECOND MURDERER.
 Strike!
  FIRST MURDERER.

  CLARENCE.

  SECOND MURDERER.
 You shall have wine enough, my lord,
    anon.
 In God's name, what art thou?
  FIRST MURDERER.

  CLARENCE.

  SECOND MURDERER.
 Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.

  CLARENCE.
 Why look you pale?
    Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
  SECOND MURDERER.
 To murder me?
  BOTH MURDERERS.
 Ay, ay.

  CLARENCE.
 Offended us you have not, but the King.

  CLARENCE.
 I shall be reconcil'd to him again.
 Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die.

  CLARENCE.
 Are you drawn forth among a world of men
    To slay the innocent? What is my offence?
    Where is the evidence that doth accuse me?
    What lawful quest have given their verdict up
    Unto the frowning judge, or who pronounc'd
    The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death?  
    Before I be convict by course of law,
    To threaten me with death is most unlawful.

    I charge you, as you hope to have redemption
    By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins,
    That you depart and lay no hands on me.

  FIRST MURDERER.
 What we will do, we do upon command.
 And he that hath commanded is our
    King.

  CLARENCE.
 Will you then
    Spurn at his edict and fulfil a man's?
    Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hand
    To hurl upon their heads that break his law.
 And that same vengeance doth he hurl
    on thee
    For false forswearing, and for murder too;
    Thou didst receive the sacrament to fight
    In quarrel of the house of Lancaster.

  SECOND MURDERER.
 Whom thou wast sworn to cherish and
    defend.

  FIRST MURDERER.
 Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed?
    For Edward, for my brother, for his sake.

    He sends you not to murder me for this,
    For in that sin he is as deep as I.

    Take not the quarrel from His pow'rful arm;
    He needs no indirect or lawless course
    To cut off those that have offended Him.

  FIRST MURDERER.
 Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy
    faults,
    Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.

  CLARENCE.

    If you are hir'd for meed, go back again,
    And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,
    Who shall reward you better for my life
    Than Edward will for tidings of my death.
 You are deceiv'd: your brother Gloucester
    hates you.

  CLARENCE.

    Go you to him from me.
 Ay, so we will.

    Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.
 Ay, millstones; as he lesson'd us to weep.

  CLARENCE.

  FIRST MURDERER.
 Right, as snow in harvest.
 It cannot be; for he bewept my fortune
    And hugg'd me in his arms, and swore with sobs
    That he would labour my delivery.

  FIRST MURDERER.

  SECOND MURDERER.

  CLARENCE.

  SECOND MURDERER.
 What shall we do?
  CLARENCE.
  
  FIRST MURDERER.

  CLARENCE.
 Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.

    Which of you, if you were a prince's son,
    Being pent from liberty as I am now,
    If two such murderers as yourselves came to you,
    Would not entreat for life?
    My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks;
    O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,
    Come thou on my side and entreat for me-
    As you would beg were you in my distress.

    A begging prince what beggar pities not?
  SECOND MURDERER.
 Look behind you, my lord.

  FIRST MURDERER.
 If all
    this will not do,
    I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.
 A bloody deed, and desperately
    dispatch'd!
    How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands
    Of this most grievous murder!  

                       Re-enter FIRST MURDERER

  FIRST MURDERER-How now, what mean'st thou that thou
    help'st me not?
    By heavens, the Duke shall know how slack you have
    been!
  SECOND MURDERER.
                 Exit
  FIRST MURDERER.
 So do not I.

    Well, I'll go hide the body in some hole,
    Till that the Duke give order for his burial;
    And when I have my meed, I will away;
    For this will out, and then I must not stay.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT II.
 SCENE 1.


London.
 The palace

Flourish.
 Enter KING EDWARD sick, QUEEN ELIZABETH, DORSET, RIVERS,
HASTINGS, BUCKINGHAM, GREY, and others

  KING EDWARD.
 Why, so.
 Now have I done a good day's
    work.

    You peers, continue this united league.

    I every day expect an embassage
    From my Redeemer to redeem me hence;
    And more at peace my soul shall part to heaven,
    Since I have made my friends at peace on earth.
 By heaven, my soul is purg'd from grudging hate;
    And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.
 So thrive I, as I truly swear the like!
  KING EDWARD.
 Take heed you dally not before your king;
    Lest He that is the supreme King of kings
    Confound your hidden falsehood and award  
    Either of you to be the other's end.

  HASTINGS.
 And I, as I love Hastings with my heart!
  KING EDWARD.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Dorset, embrace him; Hastings, love Lord
    Marquis.

  HASTINGS.
 And so swear I.
 Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this
    league
    With thy embracements to my wife's allies,
    And make me happy in your unity.

                                                  [They embrace]
  KING EDWARD.
 A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,
    Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.

    There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here
    To make the blessed period of this peace.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 And, in good time,
    Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliff and the Duke.


                      Enter GLOUCESTER, and RATCLIFF
  
  GLOUCESTER.
 Good morrow to my sovereign king and
    Queen;
    And, princely peers, a happy time of day!
  KING EDWARD.

  GLOUCESTER.
 A blessed labour, my most sovereign lord.

    Among this princely heap, if any here,
    By false intelligence or wrong surmise,
    Hold me a foe-
    If I unwittingly, or in my rage,
    Have aught committed that is hardly borne
    To any in this presence, I desire
    To reconcile me to his friendly peace:
    'Tis death to me to be at enmity;
    I hate it, and desire all good men's love.

    I do not know that Englishman alive
    With whom my soul is any jot at odds
    More than the infant that is born to-night.

    I would to God all strifes were well compounded.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Why, madam, have I off'red love for this,
    To be so flouted in this royal presence?
    Who knows not that the gentle Duke is dead?
                                                [They all start]
    You do him injury to scorn his corse.

  KING EDWARD.
 Who knows not he is dead! Who knows
    he is?  
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 All-seeing heaven, what a world is this!
  BUCKINGHAM.
 Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?
  DORSET.
 Ay, my good lord; and no man in the presence
    But his red colour hath forsook his cheeks.

  GLOUCESTER.
 But he, poor man, by your first order died,
    And that a winged Mercury did bear;
    Some tardy cripple bare the countermand
    That came too lag to see him buried.
 I prithee, peace; my soul is full of sorrow.
 I Will not rise unless your Highness hear me.
  
  DERBY.
 Have I a tongue to doom my brother's death,
    And shall that tongue give pardon to a slave?
    My brother killed no man-his fault was thought,
    And yet his punishment was bitter death.

    But when your carters or your waiting-vassals
    Have done a drunken slaughter and defac'd
    The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
    You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon;
    And I, unjustly too, must grant it you.
        [DERBY rises]
    But for my brother not a man would speak;
    Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself
    For him, poor soul.
 The proudest of you all
    Have been beholding to him in his life;
    Yet none of you would once beg for his life.

    O God, I fear thy justice will take hold
    On me, and you, and mine, and yours, for this!
    Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.
 Ah, poor Clarence!
                                 Exeunt some with KING and QUEEN
  GLOUCESTER.
 This is the fruits of rashness.
 Come, lords, will you go
    To comfort Edward with our company?
  BUCKINGHAM.
                    Exeunt




SCENE 2.


London.
 The palace

Enter the old DUCHESS OF YORK, with the SON and DAUGHTER of CLARENCE

  SON.
 Good grandam, tell us, is our father dead?
  DUCHESS.
 No, boy.
 Why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast,
    And cry 'O Clarence, my unhappy son!'?
  SON.
 Why do you look on us, and shake your head,
    And call us orphans, wretches, castaways,
    If that our noble father were alive?
  DUCHESS.

  SON.
 Then you conclude, my grandam, he is dead.

  SON.
 Grandam, we can; for my good uncle Gloucester
    Told me the King, provok'd to it by the Queen,
    Devis'd impeachments to imprison him.

    And when my uncle told me so, he wept,
    And pitied me, and kindly kiss'd my cheek;
    Bade me rely on him as on my father,
    And he would love me dearly as a child.
 Ah, that deceit should steal such gentle shape,
    And with a virtuous vizor hide deep vice!
    He is my son; ay, and therein my shame;
    Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.

  SON.
 Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?
  DUCHESS.
 Ay, boy.

  DUCHESS.
 What means this scene of rude impatience?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.

    Why grow the branches when the root is gone?
    Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?
    If you will live, lament; if die, be brief,
    That our swift-winged souls may catch the King's,
    Or like obedient subjects follow him
    To his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night.
 Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow
    As I had title in thy noble husband!
    I have bewept a worthy husband's death,
    And liv'd with looking on his images;  
    But now two mirrors of his princely semblance
    Are crack'd in pieces by malignant death,
    And I for comfort have but one false glass,
    That grieves me when I see my shame in him.

    Thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother
    And hast the comfort of thy children left;
    But death hath snatch'd my husband from mine arms
    And pluck'd two crutches from my feeble hands-
    Clarence and Edward.
 O, what cause have I-
    Thine being but a moiety of my moan-
    To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries?
  SON.
 Our fatherless distress was left unmoan'd;
    Your widow-dolour likewise be unwept!
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Give me no help in lamentation;
    I am not barren to bring forth complaints.
 Ah for our father, for our dear Lord Clarence!
  DUCHESS.
 Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 What stay had I but Edward? and he's
    gone.
 What stays had I but they? and they are gone.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.

  CHILDREN.
 Were never orphans had so dear a loss.

  DUCHESS.
 Was never mother had so dear a loss.

    Alas, you three on me, threefold distress'd,
    Pour all your tears! I am your sorrow's nurse,
    And I will pamper it with lamentation.

  DORSET.
 God is much displeas'd  
    That you take with unthankfulness his doing.

    In common worldly things 'tis called ungrateful
    With dull unwillingness to repay a debt
    Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;
    Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
    For it requires the royal debt it lent you.
 Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
    Of the young prince your son.
 Send straight for him;
    Let him be crown'd; in him your comfort lives.

    Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward's grave,
    And plant your joys in living Edward's throne.
 Sister, have comfort.
 All of us have cause
    To wail the dimming of our shining star;
    But none can help our harms by wailing them.

    Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy;
    I did not see your Grace.
 God bless thee; and put meekness in thy breast,
    Love, charity, obedience, and true duty!
  GLOUCESTER.
 Amen!  [Aside]  And make me die a good old
    man!
    That is the butt end of a mother's blessing;
    I marvel that her Grace did leave it out.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing
    peers,
    That bear this heavy mutual load of moan,
    Now cheer each other in each other's love.

    Though we have spent our harvest of this king,
    We are to reap the harvest of his son.

    The broken rancour of your high-swol'n hearts,
    But lately splinter'd, knit, and join'd together,
    Must gently be preserv'd, cherish'd, and kept.
 Marry, my lord, lest by a multitude
    The new-heal'd wound of malice should break out,
    Which would be so much the more dangerous
    By how much the estate is green and yet ungovern'd;
    Where every horse bears his commanding rein
    And may direct his course as please himself,
    As well the fear of harm as harm apparent,
    In my opinion, ought to be prevented.

  RIVERS.

  HASTINGS.

  GLOUCESTER.

    Toward Ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind.


London.
 A street

Enter one CITIZEN at one door, and another at the other

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Whither away so
    fast?
  SECOND CITIZEN.
 I promise you, I scarcely know myself.

    Hear you the news abroad?
  FIRST CITIZEN.
 Yes, that the King is dead.
 Ill news, by'r lady; seldom comes the
    better.


                        Enter another CITIZEN

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Give you good morrow, sir.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Doth the news hold of good King Edward's
    death?
  SECOND CITIZEN.
 Ay, sir, it is too true; God help the while!  
  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Then, masters, look to see a troublous
    world.

  FIRST CITIZEN.
 No, no; by God's good grace, his son shall
    reign.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Woe to that land that's govern'd by a child.

  SECOND CITIZEN.
 So stood the state when Henry the Sixth
    Was crown'd in Paris but at nine months old.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Stood the state so? No, no, good friends,
    God wot;
    For then this land was famously enrich'd
    With politic grave counsel; then the King
    Had virtuous uncles to protect his Grace.

  FIRST CITIZEN.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Better it were they all came by his father,
    Or by his father there were none at all;  
    For emulation who shall now be nearest
    Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not.
 Come, come, we fear the worst; all will be
    well.
 When clouds are seen, wise men put on
    their cloaks;
    When great leaves fall, then winter is at hand;
    When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
    Untimely storms make men expect a dearth.

    All may be well; but, if God sort it so,
    'Tis more than we deserve or I expect.

    You cannot reason almost with a man
    That looks not heavily and fun of dread.

  THIRD CITIZEN.
 Before the days of change, still is it so;
    By a divine instinct men's minds mistrust  
    Ensuing danger; as by proof we see
    The water swell before a boist'rous storm.
 Whither away?
  SECOND CITIZEN.
 Marry, we were sent for to the justices.
 And so was I; I'll bear you company.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE 4.
 The palace

Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK, the young DUKE OF YORK, QUEEN ELIZABETH,
and the DUCHESS OF YORK

  ARCHBISHOP.
 I long with all my heart to see the Prince.

    I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 But I hear no; they say my son of York
    Has almost overta'en him in his growth.

  DUCHESS.
 Why, my good cousin, it is good to grow.

  YORK.
 Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper,
    My uncle Rivers talk'd how I did grow
    More than my brother.
 'Ay,' quoth my uncle Gloucester
    'Small herbs have grace: great weeds do grow apace.
 And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.

  DUCHESS.

  YORK.
 Now, by my troth, if I had been rememb'red,
    I could have given my uncle's Grace a flout
    To touch his growth nearer than he touch'd mine.
 How, my young York? I prithee let me hear it.

  YORK.
 Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast
    That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old.

    'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.

    Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.

  DUCHESS.
 I prithee, pretty York, who told thee this?
  YORK.
 Grandam, his nurse.

  DUCHESS.
  
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Good madam, be not angry with the child.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Pitchers have ears.


                        Enter a MESSENGER

  ARCHBISHOP.
 What news?
  MESSENGER.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 How doth the Prince?
  MESSENGER.

  DUCHESS.
 What is thy news?
  MESSENGER.

  DUCHESS.
 Who hath committed them?
  MESSENGER.

  ARCHBISHOP.

    Why or for what the nobles were committed  
    Is all unknown to me, my gracious lord.

    Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre!
    I see, as in a map, the end of all.
 Accursed and unquiet wrangling days,
    How many of you have mine eyes beheld!
    My husband lost his life to get the crown;
    And often up and down my sons were toss'd
    For me to joy and weep their gain and loss;
    And being seated, and domestic broils
    Clean over-blown, themselves the conquerors
    Make war upon themselves-brother to brother,
    Blood to blood, self against self.
 O, preposterous
    And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen,
    Or let me die, to look on death no more!
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Come, come, my boy; we will to
    sanctuary.
  
    Madam, farewell.

  DUCHESS.
 Stay, I will go with you.
 You have no cause.

  ARCHBISHOP.
  [To the QUEEN]  My gracious lady, go.

    And thither bear your treasure and your goods.

    For my part, I'll resign unto your Grace
    The seal I keep; and so betide to me
    As well I tender you and all of yours!
    Go, I'll conduct you to the sanctuary.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
 SCENE 1.
 A street

The trumpets sound.
 Enter the PRINCE OF WALES, GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM,
CATESBY, CARDINAL BOURCHIER, and others

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Welcome, sweet Prince, to London, to your
    chamber.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign.

  PRINCE.
 No, uncle; but our crosses on the way
    Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy.

    I want more uncles here to welcome me.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Sweet Prince, the untainted virtue of your
    years
    Hath not yet div'd into the world's deceit;
    Nor more can you distinguish of a man
    Than of his outward show; which, God He knows,
    Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.

    Those uncles which you want were dangerous;
    Your Grace attended to their sug'red words  
    But look'd not on the poison of their hearts.
 God keep me from false friends! but they were
    none.


                Enter the LORD MAYOR and his train

  MAYOR.
 God bless your Grace with health and happy days!
  PRINCE.
 I thank you, good my lord, and thank you all.

    I thought my mother and my brother York
    Would long ere this have met us on the way.

    Fie, what a slug is Hastings, that he comes not
    To tell us whether they will come or no!

                        Enter LORD HASTINGS

  BUCKINGHAM.
  
  PRINCE.
 What, will our mother come?
  HASTINGS.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
    Is this of hers? Lord Cardinal, will your Grace
    Persuade the Queen to send the Duke of York
    Unto his princely brother presently?
    If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him
    And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.

  CARDINAL.
 My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory
    Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
    Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate
    To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid
    We should infringe the holy privilege
    Of blessed sanctuary! Not for all this land
    Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 You are too senseless-obstinate, my lord,  
    Too ceremonious and traditional.

    This Prince hath neither claim'd it nor deserv'd it,
    And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it.
 My lord, you shall o'errule my mind for once.

    Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?
  HASTINGS.

                                    Exeunt CARDINAL and HASTINGS
    Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
    Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Where it seems best unto your royal self.
  
    If I may counsel you, some day or two
    Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower,
    Then where you please and shall be thought most fit
    For your best health and recreation.

  PRINCE.
 I do not like the Tower, of any place.

    Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?
  BUCKINGHAM.
 Is it upon record, or else reported
    Successively from age to age, he built it?
  BUCKINGHAM.

  PRINCE.
 But say, my lord, it were not regist'red,
    Methinks the truth should Eve from age to age,
    As 'twere retail'd to all posterity,
    Even to the general all-ending day.

  GLOUCESTER.
  [Aside]  So wise so young, they say, do never
    live long.
 What say you, uncle?
  GLOUCESTER.
 I say, without characters, fame lives long.

    [Aside]  Thus, like the formal vice, Iniquity,  
    I moralize two meanings in one word.
 That Julius Caesar was a famous man;
    With what his valour did enrich his wit,
    His wit set down to make his valour live.

    Death makes no conquest of this conqueror;
    For now he lives in fame, though not in life.

    I'll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham-
  BUCKINGHAM.
 What, my gracious lord?
  PRINCE.
 An if I live until I be a man,
    I'll win our ancient right in France again,
    Or die a soldier as I liv'd a king.

  GLOUCESTER.
  [Aside]  Short summers lightly have a forward
    spring.


              Enter HASTINGS, young YORK, and the CARDINAL

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Now, in good time, here comes the Duke of
    York.
 Richard of York, how fares our loving brother?
  YORK.
 Well, my dread lord; so must I can you now.
 Ay brother, to our grief, as it is yours.

  GLOUCESTER.
 How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?
  YORK.
 I thank you, gentle uncle.

    The Prince my brother hath outgrown me far.

  GLOUCESTER.

  YORK.

  YORK.
 Then he is more beholding to you than I.

  GLOUCESTER.
 He may command me as my sovereign;
    But you have power in me as in a kinsman.
 I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.

  GLOUCESTER.
 My dagger, little cousin? With all my heart!
  PRINCE.
 A beggar, brother?
  YORK.
 Of my kind uncle, that I know will give,
    And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.

  GLOUCESTER.
 A greater gift than that I'll give my cousin.
 A greater gift! O, that's the sword to it!  
  GLOUCESTER.
 Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.

  YORK.
 O, then, I see you will part but with light gifts:
    In weightier things you'll say a beggar nay.

  GLOUCESTER.
 It is too heavy for your Grace to wear.

  YORK.
 What, would you have my weapon, little
    Lord?
  YORK.
 I would, that I might thank you as you call me.

  GLOUCESTER.
 How?
  YORK.

  PRINCE.
 My Lord of York will still be cross in talk.

    Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.

  YORK.
 You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 My lord, will't please you pass along?
    Myself and my good cousin Buckingham
    Will to your mother, to entreat of her
    To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.

  YORK.
 What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?
  PRINCE.

  YORK.
 I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.
 Why, what should you fear?
  YORK.

    My grandam told me he was murder'd there.

  PRINCE.
 I fear no uncles dead.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Nor none that live, I hope.

  PRINCE.

    But come, my lord; and with a heavy heart,
    Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.

    A sennet.
 No doubt, no doubt.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Well, let them rest.
 Come hither, Catesby.

    Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend
    As closely to conceal what we impart.

    Thou know'st our reasons urg'd upon the way.
 He for his father's sake so loves the Prince
    That he will not be won to aught against him.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 What think'st thou then of Stanley? Will
    not he?
  CATESBY.

    If thou dost find him tractable to us,
    Encourage him, and tell him all our reasons;
    If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling,
    Be thou so too, and so break off the talk,
    And give us notice of his inclination;
    For we to-morrow hold divided councils,
    Wherein thyself shalt highly be employ'd.
 Commend me to Lord William.
 Tell him,
    Catesby,
    His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries
    To-morrow are let blood at Pomfret Castle;
    And bid my lord, for joy of this good news,
    Give Mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.
 Good Catesby, go effect this business soundly.

  CATESBY.
 My good lords both, with all the heed I can.
 You shall, my lord.

  GLOUCESTER.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 I'll claim that promise at your Grace's hand.

    Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards
    We may digest our complots in some form.
              Exeunt




SCENE 2.


Before LORD HASTING'S house

Enter a MESSENGER to the door of HASTINGS

  MESSENGER.
  [Within]  What is't o'clock?
  MESSENGER.
 Upon the stroke of four.


                        Enter LORD HASTINGS

  HASTINGS.
 Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious
    nights?
  MESSENGER.

    First, he commends him to your noble self.
 What then?
  MESSENGER.
 Then certifies your lordship that this night
    He dreamt the boar had razed off his helm.

    Besides, he says there are two councils kept,
    And that may be determin'd at the one  
    Which may make you and him to rue at th' other.

    Therefore he sends to know your lordship's pleasure-
    If you will presently take horse with him
    And with all speed post with him toward the north
    To shun the danger that his soul divines.

  HASTINGS.
 Go, fellow, go, return unto thy lord;
    Bid him not fear the separated council:
    His honour and myself are at the one,
    And at the other is my good friend Catesby;
    Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us
    Whereof I shall not have intelligence.

    To fly the boar before the boar pursues
    Were to incense the boar to follow us
    And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.
  
  MESSENGER.
 Good morrow, Catesby; you are early stirring.

    What news, what news, in this our tott'ring state?
  CATESBY.
 It is a reeling world indeed, my lord;
    And I believe will never stand upright
    Till Richard wear the garland of the realm.
 How, wear the garland! Dost thou mean the
    crown?
  CATESBY.
 Ay, my good lord.

  HASTINGS.
 Ay, on my life; and hopes to find you forward
    Upon his party for the gain thereof;  
    And thereupon he sends you this good news,
    That this same very day your enemies,
    The kindred of the Queen, must die at Pomfret.
 Indeed, I am no mourner for that news,
    Because they have been still my adversaries;
    But that I'll give my voice on Richard's side
    To bar my master's heirs in true descent,
    God knows I will not do it to the death.

  CATESBY.
 God keep your lordship in that gracious mind!
  HASTINGS.

  HASTINGS.
 O monstrous, monstrous! And so falls it out
    With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey; and so 'twill do
    With some men else that think themselves as safe
    As thou and I, who, as thou knowest, are dear  
    To princely Richard and to Buckingham.

  CATESBY.
 The Princes both make high account of you-
    [Aside]  For they account his head upon the bridge.

  HASTINGS.
 I know they do, and I have well deserv'd it.


                      Enter LORD STANLEY

    Come on, come on; where is your boar-spear, man?
    Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?
  STANLEY.
 My lord, I hold my life as dear as yours,
    And never in my days, I do protest,
    Was it so precious to me as 'tis now.

    Think you, but that I know our state secure,
    I would be so triumphant as I am?
  STANLEY.
 The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from
    London,
    Were jocund and suppos'd their states were sure,  
    And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;
    But yet you see how soon the day o'ercast.

    What, shall we toward the Tower? The day is spent.

  STANLEY.


                 Enter HASTINGS, a pursuivant

  HASTINGS.

                                      Exeunt STANLEY and CATESBY
    How now, Hastings! How goes the world with thee?
  PURSUIVANT.
 The better that your lordship please to ask.

  HASTINGS.

  PURSUIVANT.
 God hold it, to your honour's good content!
  HASTINGS.
 Gramercy, Hastings; there, drink that for me.
                          Exit

                            Enter a PRIEST

  PRIEST.
 Well met, my lord; I am glad to see your honour.

  HASTINGS.
 I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.

    I am in your debt for your last exercise;
    Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.

                                        [He whispers in his ear]
  PRIEST.
 I'll wait upon your lordship.

  HASTINGS.

    What, go you toward the Tower?
  BUCKINGHAM.
 I do, my lord, but long I cannot stay there;
    I shall return before your lordship thence.

  BUCKINGHAM.
  [Aside]  And supper too, although thou
    knowest it not.
 I'll wait upon your lordship.
 Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this:
    To-day shalt thou behold a subject die
    For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.

  VAUGHAN.
 You live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.

  RATCLIFF.
 Dispatch; the limit of your lives is out.
 O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,
    Fatal and ominous to noble peers!
    Within the guilty closure of thy walls
  RICHARD the Second here was hack'd to death;
    And for more slander to thy dismal seat,
    We give to thee our guiltless blood to drink.

  GREY.

  RIVERS.
 O, remember, God,
    To hear her prayer for them, as now for us!
    And for my sister, and her princely sons,
    Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
    Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.

  RATCLIFF.

    Farewell, until we meet again in heaven.
              Exeunt




SCENE 4

London.
 The Tower

Enter BUCKINGHAM, DERBY, HASTINGS, the BISHOP of ELY, RATCLIFF, LOVEL,
with others and seat themselves at a table

  HASTINGS.
 Now, noble peers, the cause why we are met
    Is to determine of the coronation.

    In God's name speak-when is the royal day?
  BUCKINGHAM.
 Is all things ready for the royal time?
  DERBY.
 It is, and wants but nomination.
 To-morrow then I judge a happy day.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Your Grace, we think, should soonest know
    his mind.
 We know each other's faces; for our hearts,
    He knows no more of mine than I of yours;
    Or I of his, my lord, than you of mine.

    Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.

    But you, my honourable lords, may name the time;
    And in the Duke's behalf I'll give my voice,
    Which, I presume, he'll take in gentle part.


                       Enter GLOUCESTER

  BISHOP OF ELY.
 In happy time, here comes the Duke himself.

  GLOUCESTER.

    I have been long a sleeper, but I trust
    My absence doth neglect no great design
    Which by my presence might have been concluded.
 Had you not come upon your cue, my lord,
  WILLIAM Lord Hastings had pronounc'd your part-
    I mean, your voice for crowning of the King.

  GLOUCESTER.

    My lord of Ely, when I was last in Holborn
    I saw good strawberries in your garden there.

    I do beseech you send for some of them.

  BISHOP of ELY.

 Exit
  GLOUCESTER.

  BUCKINGHAM.

  
                    Re-enter the BISHOP OF ELY

  BISHOP OF ELY.
 His Grace looks cheerfully and smooth this
    morning;
    There's some conceit or other likes him well
    When that he bids good morrow with such spirit.

  DERBY.
 What of his heart perceive you in his face
    By any livelihood he show'd to-day?
  HASTINGS.
 Marry, that with no man here he is offended;
    For, were he, he had shown it in his looks.


               Re-enter GLOUCESTER and BUCKINGHAM

  GLOUCESTER.

    I say, my lord, they have deserved death.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Then be your eyes the witness of their evil.

    Look how I am bewitch'd; behold, mine arm
    Is like a blasted sapling wither'd up.

    Off with his head! Now by Saint Paul I swear
    I will not dine until I see the same.

    Lovel and Ratcliff, look that it be done.
 Woe, woe, for England! not a whit for me;
    For I, too fond, might have prevented this.

  STANLEY did dream the boar did raze our helms,
    And I did scorn it and disdain to fly.

    Three times to-day my foot-cloth horse did stumble,
    And started when he look'd upon the Tower,
    As loath to bear me to the slaughter-house.
 Come, come, dispatch; the Duke would be at
    dinner.

  HASTINGS.
 O momentary grace of mortal men,
    Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
    Who builds his hope in air of your good looks  
    Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,
    Ready with every nod to tumble down
    Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
 Come, come, dispatch; 'tis bootless to exclaim.
 O bloody Richard! Miserable England!
    I prophesy the fearfull'st time to thee
    That ever wretched age hath look'd upon.

    They smile at me who shortly shall be dead.
           Exeunt




SCENE 5.


London.
 Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian;
    Speak and look back, and pry on every side,
    Tremble and start at wagging of a straw,
    Intending deep suspicion.
 Ghastly looks
    Are at my service, like enforced smiles;
    And both are ready in their offices
    At any time to grace my stratagems.

    But what, is Catesby gone?
  GLOUCESTER.


                 Enter the LORD MAYOR and CATESBY  

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Look to the drawbridge there!
  BUCKINGHAM.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Catesby, o'erlook the walls.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Lord Mayor, the reason we have sent-
  GLOUCESTER.
 Look back, defend thee; here are enemies.
 God and our innocence defend and guard us!

           Enter LOVEL and RATCLIFF, with HASTINGS' head

  GLOUCESTER.
 Be patient; they are friends-Ratcliff and Lovel.

  LOVEL.
 Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
    The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.

  GLOUCESTER.

    I took him for the plainest harmless creature
    That breath'd upon the earth a Christian;
    Made him my book, wherein my soul recorded
    The history of all her secret thoughts.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Well, well, he was the covert'st shelt'red
    traitor
    That ever liv'd.
 Had he done so?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Now, fair befall you! He deserv'd his death;
    And your good Graces both have well proceeded  
    To warn false traitors from the like attempts.

    I never look'd for better at his hands
    After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.

  BUCKINGHAM.

  MAYOR.
 But, my good lord, your Grace's words shall serve
    As well as I had seen and heard him speak;
    And do not doubt, right noble Princes both,
    But I'll acquaint our duteous citizens
    With all your just proceedings in this cause.
  
  BUCKINGHAM.
 Which since you come too late of our intent,
    Yet witness what you hear we did intend.

    And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid farewell.
 Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham.

    The Mayor towards Guildhall hies him in an post.

    Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen
    Only for saying he would make his son
    Heir to the crown-meaning indeed his house,
    Which by the sign thereof was termed so.

    Moreover, urge his hateful luxury
    And bestial appetite in change of lust,
    Which stretch'd unto their servants, daughters, wives,
    Even where his raging eye or savage heart
    Without control lusted to make a prey.

    Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:
    Tell them, when that my mother went with child
    Of that insatiate Edward, noble York  
    My princely father then had wars in France
    And, by true computation of the time,
    Found that the issue was not his begot;
    Which well appeared in his lineaments,
    Being nothing like the noble Duke my father.

    Yet touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off;
    Because, my lord, you know my mother lives.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 I go; and towards three or four o'clock
    Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.
 Go, Lovel, with all speed to Doctor Shaw.

                                       Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER  
    Now will I go to take some privy order
    To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight,
    And to give order that no manner person
    Have any time recourse unto the Princes.
                Exit




SCENE 6.


London.
 A street

Enter a SCRIVENER

  SCRIVENER.
 Here is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings;
    Which in a set hand fairly is engross'd
    That it may be to-day read o'er in Paul's.
 Baynard's Castle

Enter GLOUCESTER and BUCKINGHAM, at several doors

  GLOUCESTER.
 How now, how now! What say the citizens?
  BUCKINGHAM.
 Now, by the holy Mother of our Lord,
    The citizens are mum, say not a word.
 Touch'd you the bastardy of Edward's
    children?
  BUCKINGHAM.
 I did; with his contract with Lady Lucy,
    And his contract by deputy in France;
    Th' insatiate greediness of his desire,
    And his enforcement of the city wives;
    His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy,
    As being got, your father then in France,
    And his resemblance, being not like the Duke.

    Withal I did infer your lineaments,
    Being the right idea of your father,
    Both in your form and nobleness of mind;
    Laid open all your victories in Scotland,
    Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace,  
    Your bounty, virtue, fair humility;
    Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose
    Untouch'd or slightly handled in discourse.
 And did they so?
  BUCKINGHAM.

    His answer was, the people were not used
    To be spoke to but by the Recorder.

    Then he was urg'd to tell my tale again.

    'Thus saith the Duke, thus hath the Duke inferr'd'-
    But nothing spoke in warrant from himself.

    When he had done, some followers of mine own
    At lower end of the hall hurl'd up their caps,
    And some ten voices cried 'God save King Richard!'  
    And thus I took the vantage of those few-
    'Thanks, gentle citizens and friends,' quoth I
    'This general applause and cheerful shout
    Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard.

  GLOUCESTER.
 The Mayor is here at hand.
 Intend some fear;
    Be not you spoke with but by mighty suit;
    And look you get a prayer-book in your hand,
    And stand between two churchmen, good my lord;
    For on that ground I'll make a holy descant;
    And be not easily won to our requests.

    Play the maid's part: still answer nay, and take it.

  GLOUCESTER.
 I go; and if you plead as well for them
    As I can say nay to thee for myself,
    No doubt we bring it to a happy issue.

  BUCKINGHAM.
                                      Exit GLOUCESTER  

           Enter the LORD MAYOR, ALDERMEN, and citizens

    Welcome, my lord.
 I dance attendance here;
    I think the Duke will not be spoke withal.
 He doth entreat your Grace, my noble lord,
    To visit him to-morrow or next day.
 Return, good Catesby, to the gracious Duke;
    Tell him, myself, the Mayor and Aldermen,
    In deep designs, in matter of great moment,
    No less importing than our general good,
    Are come to have some conference with his Grace.

  MAYOR.
 Marry, God defend his Grace should say us nay!
  BUCKINGHAM.
 I fear he will.
 Here Catesby comes again.


                          Re-enter CATESBY

    Now, Catesby, what says his Grace?
  CATESBY.
 My lord,
    He wonders to what end you have assembled
    Such troops of citizens to come to him.
  
    His Grace not being warn'd thereof before,
    He fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.

  BUCKINGHAM.

                                                    Exit CATESBY
    When holy and devout religious men
    Are at their beads, 'tis much to draw them thence,
    So sweet is zealous contemplation.
 Two props of virtue for a Christian prince,
    To stay him from the fall of vanity;
    And, see, a book of prayer in his hand,
    True ornaments to know a holy man.
 I do suspect I have done some offence
    That seems disgracious in the city's eye,
    And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
 You have, my lord.
 Would it might please
    your Grace,
    On our entreaties, to amend your fault!
  GLOUCESTER.
 Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?
  BUCKINGHAM.

    Which to recure, we heartily solicit
    Your gracious self to take on you the charge
    And kingly government of this your land-
    Not as protector, steward, substitute,
    Or lowly factor for another's gain;
    But as successively, from blood to blood,
    Your right of birth, your empery, your own.

    For this, consorted with the citizens,
    Your very worshipful and loving friends,
    And by their vehement instigation,  
    In this just cause come I to move your Grace.
 I cannot tell if to depart in silence
    Or bitterly to speak in your reproof
    Best fitteth my degree or your condition.

    If not to answer, you might haply think
    Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded
    To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,
    Which fondly you would here impose on me;
    If to reprove you for this suit of yours,
    So season'd with your faithful love to me,
    Then, on the other side, I check'd my friends.

    Therefore-to speak, and to avoid the first,
    And then, in speaking, not to incur the last-
    Definitively thus I answer you:
    Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert
    Unmeritable shuns your high request.

    The royal tree hath left us royal fruit
    Which, mellow'd by the stealing hours of time,
    Will well become the seat of majesty
    And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.

    On him I lay that you would lay on me-
    The right and fortune of his happy stars,
    Which God defend that I should wring from him.

    You say that Edward is your brother's son.

    These both put off, a poor petitioner,
    A care-craz'd mother to a many sons,
    A beauty-waning and distressed widow,
    Even in the afternoon of her best days,
    Made prize and purchase of his wanton eye,
    Seduc'd the pitch and height of his degree
    To base declension and loath'd bigamy.

    Then, good my lord, take to your royal self
    This proffer'd benefit of dignity;
    If not to bless us and the land withal,
    Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry  
    From the corruption of abusing times
    Unto a lineal true-derived course.

  MAYOR.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffer'd love.

  CATESBY.
 O, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit!
  GLOUCESTER.

    I do beseech you, take it not amiss:
    I cannot nor I will not yield to you.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 If you refuse it-as, in love and zeal,
    Loath to depose the child, your brother's son;
    As well we know your tenderness of heart
    And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,
    Which we have noted in you to your kindred
    And egally indeed to all estates-
    Yet know, whe'er you accept our suit or no,
    Your brother's son shall never reign our king;
    But we will plant some other in the throne
    To the disgrace and downfall of your house;
    And in this resolution here we leave you.
  
    Come, citizens.
 Zounds, I'll entreat no more.

  GLOUCESTER.
 Will you enforce me to a world of cares?
    Call them again.

  MAYOR.
 God bless your Grace! We see it, and will say it.

  GLOUCESTER.
 In saying so, you shall but say the truth.
 Then I salute you with this royal title-
    Long live King Richard, England's worthy King!
  ALL.
 Amen.
 To-morrow may it please you to be crown'd?
  GLOUCESTER.
 Even when you please, for you will have it so.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 To-morrow, then, we will attend your Grace;
    And so, most joyfully, we take our leave.

  GLOUCESTER.
  [To the BISHOPS]  Come, let us to our holy
    work again.

    Farewell, my cousin; farewell, gentle friends.
        Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.


London.
 Before the Tower

Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH, DUCHESS of YORK, and MARQUIS of DORSET, at one door;
ANNE, DUCHESS of GLOUCESTER, leading LADY MARGARET PLANTAGENET,
CLARENCE's young daughter, at another door

  DUCHESS.
 Who meets us here? My niece Plantagenet,
    Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester?
    Now, for my life, she's wand'ring to the Tower,
    On pure heart's love, to greet the tender Princes.
 God give your Graces both
    A happy and a joyful time of day!
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 As much to you, good sister! Whither
    away?
  ANNE.
 No farther than the Tower; and, as I guess,
    Upon the like devotion as yourselves,
    To gratulate the gentle Princes there.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Kind sister, thanks; we'll enter  
    all together.


                       Enter BRAKENBURY

    And in good time, here the lieutenant comes.

    Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,
    How doth the Prince, and my young son of York?
  BRAKENBURY.
 By your patience,
    I may not suffer you to visit them.
 The King! Who's that?
  BRAKENBURY.
 I mean the Lord Protector.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 I am their father's mother; I will see them.

  ANNE.
 Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother.
 No, madam, no.
 I may not leave it so;
    I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.
            Exit

                         Enter STANLEY

  STANLEY.
 Let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence,
    And I'll salute your Grace of York as mother
    And reverend looker-on of two fair queens.
 Despiteful tidings! O unpleasing news!
  DORSET.
 Be of good cheer; mother, how fares your Grace?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee
    gone!
    Death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels;
    Thy mother's name is ominous to children.

  STANLEY.
 Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.
 O ill-dispersing wind of misery!
    O my accursed womb, the bed of death!
    A cockatrice hast thou hatch'd to the world,
    Whose unavoided eye is murderous.

  STANLEY.
 Come, madam, come; I in all haste was sent.
 And I with all unwillingness will go.

    O, would to God that the inclusive verge
    Of golden metal that must round my brow
    Were red-hot steel, to sear me to the brains!  
    Anointed let me be with deadly venom,
    And die ere men can say 'God save the Queen!'
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Go, go, poor soul; I envy not thy glory.

  ANNE.

    Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick;
    And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.
 Poor heart, adieu! I pity thy complaining.
 No more than with my soul I mourn for yours.

  DORSET.
 Adieu, poor soul, that tak'st thy leave of it!
  DUCHESS.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Stay, yet look back with me unto the
    Tower.


London.
 The palace

Sound a sennet.
 Cousin of Buckingham!
  BUCKINGHAM.
 My gracious sovereign?
  KING RICHARD.
 Sound]
    Thus high, by thy advice
    And thy assistance, is King Richard seated.
 Still live they, and for ever let them last!
  KING RICHARD.
 Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch,
    To try if thou be current gold indeed.

    Young Edward lives-think now what I would speak.
 Why, Buckingham, I say I would be King.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Ha! am I King? 'Tis so; but Edward lives.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 True, noble Prince.

    What say'st thou now? Speak suddenly, be brief.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Your Grace may do your pleasure.

  KING RICHARD.
 Tut, tut, thou art all ice; thy kindness freezes.
 Give me some little breath, some pause,
    dear Lord,
    Before I positively speak in this.

    I will resolve you herein presently.
                    Exit
  CATESBY.

  KING RICHARD.
 I will converse with iron-witted fools
                                      [Descends from the throne]
    And unrespective boys; none are for me  
    That look into me with considerate eyes.

    High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.

    Boy!
  PAGE.
 My lord?
  KING RICHARD.
 Know'st thou not any whom corrupting
    gold
    Will tempt unto a close exploit of death?
  PAGE.

    Gold were as good as twenty orators,
    And will, no doubt, tempt him to anything.

  KING RICHARD.
 What is his name?
  PAGE.

  KING RICHARD.

    Hath he so long held out with me, untir'd,
    And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.
 Come hither, Catesby.

    Inquire me out some mean poor gentleman,
    Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter-
    The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.

    Look how thou dream'st! I say again, give out
    That Anne, my queen, is sick and like to die.

    About it; for it stands me much upon
    To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.

                                                    Exit CATESBY
    I must be married to my brother's daughter,
    Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.

    Murder her brothers, and then marry her!  
    Uncertain way of gain! But I am in
    So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin.

    Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.


                     Re-enter PAGE, with TYRREL

    Is thy name Tyrrel?
  TYRREL.
 James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.

  KING RICHARD.
 Prove me, my gracious lord.

  KING RICHARD.
 Dar'st'thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
  TYRREL.
 Please you;
    But I had rather kill two enemies.

  KING RICHARD.
 Why, then thou hast it.
 Two deep enemies,
    Foes to my rest, and my sweet sleep's disturbers,
    Are they that I would have thee deal upon.
 Thou sing'st sweet music.
 Hark, come  
    hither, Tyrrel.

    Go, by this token.
      [Whispers]
    There is no more but so: say it is done,
    And I will love thee and prefer thee for it.

  TYRREL.
 I will dispatch it straight.
 My lord, I have consider'd in my mind
    The late request that you did sound me in.

  KING RICHARD.
 Well, let that rest.
 Dorset is fled to
    Richmond.

  KING RICHARD.
 Stanley, he is your wife's son: well, look
    unto it.
 My lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise,
    For which your honour and your faith is pawn'd:
    Th' earldom of Hereford and the movables
    Which you have promised I shall possess.
 What says your Highness to my just request?
  KING RICHARD.

    A king!-perhaps-
  BUCKINGHAM.
 My lord, your promise for the earldom-
  KING RICHARD.
 Richmond! When last I was at Exeter,
    The mayor in courtesy show'd me the castle
    And call'd it Rugemount, at which name I started,
    Because a bard of Ireland told me once
    I should not live long after I saw Richmond.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 I am thus bold to put your Grace in mind
    Of what you promis'd me.
 Well, but o'clock?
  BUCKINGHAM.
 Upon the stroke of ten.

  KING RICHARD.
 Why let it strike?
  KING RICHARD.
 May it please you to resolve me in my suit.

  KING RICHARD.
 Thou troublest me; I am not in the vein.

                                       Exeunt all but Buckingham
  BUCKINGHAM.


London.
 The palace

Enter TYRREL

  TYRREL.

    Dighton and Forrest, who I did suborn
    To do this piece of ruthless butchery,
    Albeit they were flesh'd villains, bloody dogs,
    Melted with tenderness and mild compassion,
    Wept like two children in their deaths' sad story.

    A book of prayers on their pillow lay;
    Which once,' quoth Forrest 'almost chang'd my mind;
    But, O, the devil'-there the villain stopp'd;
    When Dighton thus told on: 'We smothered  
    The most replenished sweet work of nature
    That from the prime creation e'er she framed.
'
    Hence both are gone with conscience and remorse
    They could not speak; and so I left them both,
    To bear this tidings to the bloody King.


                        Enter KING RICHARD

    And here he comes.
 All health, my sovereign lord!
  KING RICHARD.
 Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?
  TYRREL.

  KING RICHARD.
 But didst thou see them dead?
  TYRREL.
 I did, my lord.
 The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them;
    But where, to say the truth, I do not know.
 Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after supper,
    When thou shalt tell the process of their death.
  
    Meantime, but think how I may do thee good
    And be inheritor of thy desire.

    Farewell till then.

  TYRREL.
 I humbly take my leave.
                           Exit
  KING RICHARD.
 The son of Clarence have I pent up close;
    His daughter meanly have I match'd in marriage;
    The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom,
    And Anne my wife hath bid this world good night.

    Now, for I know the Britaine Richmond aims
    At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter,
    And by that knot looks proudly on the crown,
    To her go I, a jolly thriving wooer.


                           Enter RATCLIFF

  RATCLIFF.
 Good or bad news, that thou com'st in so
    bluntly?
  RATCLIFF.
 Ely with Richmond troubles me more near
    Than Buckingham and his rash-levied strength.

    Come, I have learn'd that fearful commenting
    Is leaden servitor to dull delay;
    Delay leads impotent and snail-pac'd beggary.

    Then fiery expedition be my wing,
    Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king!
    Go, muster men.
 My counsel is my shield.

    We must be brief when traitors brave the field.
       Exeunt




SCENE 4.


London.
 Before the palace

Enter old QUEEN MARGARET

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 So now prosperity begins to mellow
    And drop into the rotten mouth of death.

    A dire induction am I witness to,
    And will to France, hoping the consequence
    Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.

  DUCHESS.

    Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet,
    Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.
 Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle
    lambs
    And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
    When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
  QUEEN MARGARET.

  DUCHESS.
 Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a
    grave
    As thou canst yield a melancholy seat!
    Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.

    Ah, who hath any cause to mourn but we?
                                           [Sitting down by her]
  QUEEN MARGARET.

    If sorrow can admit society,        [Sitting down with them]
    Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine.

  DUCHESS.
 Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard
    kill'd him.

    That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes
    To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood,
    That foul defacer of God's handiwork,
    That excellent grand tyrant of the earth
    That reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls,
    Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves.

    O upright, just, and true-disposing God,
    How do I thank thee that this carnal cur
    Preys on the issue of his mother's body
    And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!
  DUCHESS.

  QUEEN MARGARET.
 Bear with me; I am hungry for revenge,
    And now I cloy me with beholding it.

    Thy Edward he is dead, that kill'd my Edward;
    The other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;
    Young York he is but boot, because both they
    Match'd not the high perfection of my loss.
  
    Thy Clarence he is dead that stabb'd my Edward;
    And the beholders of this frantic play,
    Th' adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
    Untimely smother'd in their dusky graves.
 But at hand, at hand,
    Ensues his piteous and unpitied end.
'
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 O, thou didst prophesy the time would
      come
    That I should wish for thee to help me curse
    That bottled spider, that foul bunch-back'd toad!
  QUEEN MARGARET.
 I Call'd thee then vain flourish of my
      fortune;
    I call'd thee then poor shadow, painted queen,
    The presentation of but what I was,  
    The flattering index of a direful pageant,
    One heav'd a-high to be hurl'd down below,
    A mother only mock'd with two fair babes,
    A dream of what thou wast, a garish flag
    To be the aim of every dangerous shot,
    A sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble,
    A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.

    Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers?
    Where be thy two sons? Wherein dost thou joy?
    Who sues, and kneels, and says 'God save the Queen'?
    Where be the bending peers that flattered thee?
    Where be the thronging troops that followed thee?
    Decline an this, and see what now thou art:
    For happy wife, a most distressed widow;
    For joyful mother, one that wails the name;
    For one being su'd to, one that humbly sues;
    For Queen, a very caitiff crown'd with care;
    For she that scorn'd at me, now scorn'd of me;
    For she being fear'd of all, now fearing one;
    For she commanding all, obey'd of none.

    Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not
    Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
    Now thy proud neck bears half my burden'd yoke,
    From which even here I slip my weary head
    And leave the burden of it all on thee.
 O thou well skill'd in curses, stay awhile
    And teach me how to curse mine enemies!
  QUEEN MARGARET.
  
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
                                       Exit
  DUCHESS.
 Windy attorneys to their client woes,
    Airy succeeders of intestate joys,
    Poor breathing orators of miseries,
    Let them have scope; though what they will impart
    Help nothing else, yet do they case the heart.

  DUCHESS.
 Go with me,
    And in the breath of bitter words let's smother
    My damned son that thy two sweet sons smother'd.

    The trumpet sounds; be copious in exclaims.


         Enter KING RICHARD and his train, marching with
                     drums and trumpets

  KING RICHARD.
 Who intercepts me in my expedition?
  DUCHESS.
 Where is kind Hastings?
  KING RICHARD.
 Alarums]
    Either be patient and entreat me fair,
    Or with the clamorous report of war  
    Thus will I drown your exclamations.

  DUCHESS.
 Art thou my son?
  KING RICHARD.
 Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.

  DUCHESS.

  KING RICHARD.
 O, let me speak!
  KING RICHARD.
 I will be mild and gentle in my words.

  KING RICHARD.
 And brief, good mother; for I am in haste.

  DUCHESS.

    What comfortable hour canst thou name
    That ever grac'd me with thy company?
  KING RICHARD.
 Faith, none but Humphrey Hour, that call'd
    your Grace
    To breakfast once forth of my company.

    If I be so disgracious in your eye,
    Let me march on and not offend you, madam.

    Strike up the drum.

  DUCHESS.
 I prithee hear me speak.

  DUCHESS.
 Hear me a word;
    For I shall never speak to thee again.

    Bloody thou art; bloody will be thy end.

    Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.
 Stay, madam, I must talk a word with you.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 I have no moe sons of the royal blood
    For thee to slaughter.

  KING RICHARD.
 You have a daughter call'd Elizabeth.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.

  KING RICHARD.
 Her life is safest only in her birth.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 And only in that safety died her
      brothers.

  KING RICHARD.
 Lo, at their birth good stars were opposite.
 No, to their lives ill friends were
      contrary.

  KING RICHARD.
 True, when avoided grace makes destiny.

    My babes were destin'd to a fairer death,
    If grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life.

  KING RICHARD.
 You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.

    Whose hand soever lanc'd their tender hearts,
    Thy head, an indirectly, gave direction.

    No doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt
    Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart
    To revel in the entrails of my lambs.

    But that stiff use of grief makes wild grief tame,
    My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys
    Till that my nails were anchor'd in thine eyes;
    And I, in such a desp'rate bay of death,
    Like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft,
    Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
 What good is cover'd with the face of
      heaven,
    To be discover'd, that can do me good?
  KING RICHARD.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.

  KING RICHARD.
 Then know, that from my soul I love thy
    daughter.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 My daughter's mother thinks it with her
    soul.
  
  KING RICHARD.
 What do you think?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 That thou dost love my daughter from
      thy soul.

    So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers,
    And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it.

  KING RICHARD.
 Well, then, who dost thou mean shall be
    her king?
  KING RICHARD.
 Who else
    should be?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 What, thou?
  KING RICHARD.
 Even so.
 How think you of it?
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 How canst thou woo her?
  KING RICHARD.
' Then haply will she weep;
    Therefore present to her-as sometimes Margaret
    Did to thy father, steep'd in Rutland's blood-
    A handkerchief; which, say to her, did drain
    The purple sap from her sweet brother's body,
    And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal.

  KING RICHARD.
 Say that I did all this for love of her.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but  
      hate thee,
    Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.

  KING RICHARD.
 Look what is done cannot be now amended.

    Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
    Which after-hours gives leisure to repent.

    A grandam's name is little less in love
    Than is the doating title of a mother;
    They are as children but one step below,
    Even of your metal, of your very blood;
    Of all one pain, save for a night of groans
    Endur'd of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.
  
    I cannot make you what amends I would,
    Therefore accept such kindness as I can.

    The King, that calls your beauteous daughter wife,
    Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother;
    Again shall you be mother to a king,
    And all the ruins of distressful times
    Repair'd with double riches of content.

    What! we have many goodly days to see.

    Go, then, my mother, to thy daughter go;
    Make bold her bashful years with your experience;
    Prepare her ears to hear a wooer's tale;
    Put in her tender heart th' aspiring flame  
    Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the Princes
    With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys.

    And when this arm of mine hath chastised
    The petty rebel, dull-brain'd Buckingham,
    Bound with triumphant garlands will I come,
    And lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed;
    To whom I will retail my conquest won,
    And she shall be sole victoress, Caesar's Caesar.
 What were I best to say? Her father's
      brother
    Would be her lord? Or shall I say her uncle?
    Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
    Under what title shall I woo for thee
    That God, the law, my honour, and her love
    Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
  KING RICHARD.

  KING RICHARD.
 That at her hands which the King's
    King forbids.
 Say she shall be a high and mighty queen.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 To wail the title, as her mother doth.

  KING RICHARD.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 But how long shall that title 'ever' last?
  KING RICHARD.
 Sweetly in force unto her fair life's end.
 But how long fairly shall her sweet life
    last?
  KING RICHARD.
 As long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
 Say I, her sovereign, am her subject low.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 But she, your subject, loathes such
    sovereignty.

  KING RICHARD.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Then plainly to her tell my loving tale.
 Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
 Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
  
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Harp on it still shall I till heartstrings
    break.
 Now, by my George, my garter, and my
    crown-
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Profan'd, dishonour'd, and the third
    usurp'd.

  KING RICHARD.
 By nothing; for this is no oath:
    Thy George, profan'd, hath lost his lordly honour;
    Thy garter, blemish'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue;
    Thy crown, usurp'd, disgrac'd his kingly glory.

    If something thou wouldst swear to be believ'd,
    Swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd.
 Then, by my self-
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Thy self is self-misus'd.
 'Tis full of thy foul wrongs.

  KING RICHARD.
 My father's death-
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Why, then, by God-
  QUEEN ELIZABETH.

    If thou didst fear to break an oath with Him,
    The unity the King my husband made
    Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died.

    If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him,
    Th' imperial metal, circling now thy head,
    Had grac'd the tender temples of my child;
    And both the Princes had been breathing here,
    Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust,
    Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
  
    The children live whose fathers thou hast slaughter'd,
    Ungovern'd youth, to wail it in their age;
    The parents live whose children thou hast butcheed,
    Old barren plants, to wail it with their age.

  KING RICHARD.

    In her consists my happiness and thine;
    Without her, follows to myself and thee,
    Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul,
    Death, desolation, ruin, and decay.

    It cannot be avoided but by this;  
    It will not be avoided but by this.

    Urge the necessity and state of times,
    And be not peevish-fond in great designs.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
  KING RICHARD.
 Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.
 Ay, if your self's remembrance wrong
    yourself.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 Yet thou didst kill my children.
 But in your daughter's womb I bury them;
    Where, in that nest of spicery, they will breed
    Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 And be a happy mother by the deed.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH.
 I go.
  
  KING RICHARD.
 Bear her my true love's kiss; and so, farewell.

                               Kissing her.

    Ratcliff, thyself-or Catesby; where is he?
  CATESBY.
 Here, my good lord.

  CATESBY.
 I will my lord, with all convenient haste.
  
  KING RICHARD.
 Ratcliff, come hither.
 Post to Salisbury;
    When thou com'st thither-  [To CATESBY]  Dull,
    unmindfull villain,
    Why stay'st thou here, and go'st not to the Duke?
  CATESBY.
 First, mighty liege, tell me your Highness' pleasure,
    What from your Grace I shall deliver to him.

  KING RICHARD.
 Bid him levy straight
    The greatest strength and power that he can make
    And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.

  CATESBY.
 I go.

  KING RICHARD.
 None good, my liege, to please you with  
    the hearing;
    Nor none so bad but well may be reported.
 Richmond is on the seas.

  KING RICHARD.
 I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
 Well, as you guess?
  STANLEY.
 Stirr'd up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,
    He makes for England here to claim the crown.

  KING RICHARD.
 Is the chair empty? Is the sword unsway'd?
    Is the King dead, the empire unpossess'd?
    What heir of York is there alive but we?
    And who is England's King but great York's heir?
    Then tell me what makes he upon the seas.

  STANLEY.

  KING RICHARD.
 Unless for that he comes to be your liege,  
    You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.

    Thou wilt revolt and fly to him, I fear.
 No, my good lord; therefore mistrust me not.

  KING RICHARD.
 No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.
 Cold friends to me.
 What do they in the
    north,
    When they should serve their sovereign in the west?
  STANLEY.
 They have not been commanded, mighty King.

    Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave,
    I'll muster up my friends and meet your Grace
    Where and what time your Majesty shall please.

  KING RICHARD.

  STANLEY.
 Most mighty sovereign,
    You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful.
 Go, then, and muster men.
 But leave behind
    Your son, George Stanley.

  STANLEY.
 So deal with him as I prove true to you.
 My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire,
    As I by friends am well advertised,
    Sir Edward Courtney and the haughty prelate,
    Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother,
    With many moe confederates, are in arms.


                         Enter another MESSENGER

  SECOND MESSENGER.
  

                         Enter another MESSENGER

  THIRD MESSENGER.
 Out on you, owls! Nothing but songs of
    death?                                      [He strikes him]
    There, take thou that till thou bring better news.

  THIRD MESSENGER.
 The news I have to tell your Majesty
    Is that by sudden floods and fall of waters
    Buckingham's army is dispers'd and scatter'd;
    And he himself wand'red away alone,
    No man knows whither.

  KING RICHARD.

    Hath any well-advised friend proclaim'd
    Reward to him that brings the traitor in?
  THIRD MESSENGER.
 Such proclamation hath been made,
    my Lord.
 He, mistrusting them,
    Hois'd sail, and made his course again for Britaine.
 March on, march on, since we are up in
    arms;
    If not to fight with foreign enemies,
    Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.


                          Re-enter CATESBY

  CATESBY.
 My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken-  
    That is the best news.
 That the Earl of Richmond
    Is with a mighty power landed at Milford
    Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.

  KING RICHARD.
 Away towards Salisbury! While we reason
    here
    A royal battle might be won and lost.

    Some one take order Buckingham be brought
    To Salisbury; the rest march on with me.

    Flourish.
 Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
    That in the sty of the most deadly boar
    My son George Stanley is frank'd up in hold;
    If I revolt, off goes young George's head;
    The fear of that holds off my present aid.

    So, get thee gone; commend me to thy lord.

    Withal say that the Queen hath heartily consented
    He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
 At Pembroke, or at Ha'rford west in Wales.
 What men of name resort to him?
  CHRISTOPHER.

  STANLEY.
                                             Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE 1.


Salisbury.
 An open place

Enter the SHERIFF and guard, with BUCKINGHAM, led to execution

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Will not King Richard let me speak with
    him?
  SHERIFF.
 It is, my lord.

  BUCKINGHAM.
 Why, then All-Souls' day is my body's
    doomsday.

    This is the day which in King Edward's time  
    I wish'd might fall on me when I was found
    False to his children and his wife's allies;
    This is the day wherein I wish'd to fall
    By the false faith of him whom most I trusted;
    This, this All-Souls' day to my fearful soul
    Is the determin'd respite of my wrongs;
    That high All-Seer which I dallied with
    Hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head
    And given in earnest what I begg'd in jest.

    Thus doth He force the swords of wicked men
    To turn their own points in their masters' bosoms.

    Thus Margaret's curse falls heavy on my neck.
'
    Come lead me, officers, to the block of shame;
    Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
 Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,
    Bruis'd underneath the yoke of tyranny,
    Thus far into the bowels of the land
    Have we march'd on without impediment;
    And here receive we from our father Stanley
    Lines of fair comfort and encouragement.

    From Tamworth thither is but one day's march.
 Every man's conscience is a thousand men,
    To fight against this guilty homicide.

  HERBERT.
 I doubt not but his friends will turn to us.

  BLUNT.
 He hath no friends but what are friends for fear,
    Which in his dearest need will fly from him.

  RICHMOND.
 All for our vantage.

    True hope is swift and flies with swallow's wings;
    Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
      Exeunt




SCENE 3.


Bosworth Field

Enter KING RICHARD in arms, with NORFOLK, RATCLIFF,
the EARL of SURREYS and others

  KING RICHARD.
 My Lord of Norfolk!
  NORFOLK.
 Here, most gracious liege.

  KING RICHARD.
 Up With my tent! Here will I lie to-night;
                      [Soldiers begin to set up the KING'S tent]
    But where to-morrow? Well, all's one for that.

  KING RICHARD.
 Why, our battalia trebles that account;
    Besides, the King's name is a tower of strength,  
    Which they upon the adverse faction want.

    Call for some men of sound direction.

    Let's lack no discipline, make no delay;
    For, lords, to-morrow is a busy day.
                  Exeunt

             Enter, on the other side of the field,
          RICHMOND, SIR WILLIAM BRANDON, OXFORD, DORSET,
              and others.
 Some pitch RICHMOND'S tent

  RICHMOND.
 The weary sun hath made a golden set,
    And by the bright tract of his fiery car
    Gives token of a goodly day to-morrow.

    Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.

    My Lord of Oxford-you, Sir William Brandon-  
    And you, Sir Walter Herbert-stay with me.

    The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment;
    Good Captain Blunt, bear my good night to him,
    And by the second hour in the morning
    Desire the Earl to see me in my tent.

    Yet one thing more, good Captain, do for me-
    Where is Lord Stanley quarter'd, do you know?
  BLUNT.

  RICHMOND.
 If without peril it be possible,
    Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with him
    And give him from me this most needful note.
 Upon my life, my lord, I'll undertake it;
    And so, God give you quiet rest to-night!
  RICHMOND.
 Come,
    gentlemen,
    Let us consult upon to-morrow's business.

    In to my tent; the dew is raw and cold.
 What is't o'clock?
  CATESBY.
 It's supper-time, my lord;
    It's nine o'clock.

  KING RICHARD.

    Give me some ink and paper.

  KING RICHARD.
 Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge;
    Use careful watch, choose trusty sentinels.
 I go, my lord.

  KING RICHARD.
 Stir with the lark to-morrow, gentle Norfolk.

  NORFOLK.
 I warrant you, my lord.
                          Exit
  KING RICHARD.
           Exit CATESBY
    Fill me a bowl of wine.
 Give me a watch.

    Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow.

    Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.

    Ratcliff!
  RATCLIFF.
 My lord?
  KING RICHARD.
 Thomas the Earl of Surrey and himself,
    Much about cock-shut time, from troop to troop
    Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.

  KING RICHARD.
 So, I am satisfied.

    Set it down.
 Is ink and paper ready?
  RATCLIFF.
 Leave me, I say.

                                   Exit RATCLIFF.
 All comfort that the dark night can afford
    Be to thy person, noble father-in-law!
    Tell me, how fares our loving mother?
  DERBY.

    So much for that.

    In brief, for so the season bids us be,
    Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
    And put thy fortune to the arbitrement
    Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.

    I, as I may-that which I would I cannot-  
    With best advantage will deceive the time
    And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms;
    But on thy side I may not be too forward,
    Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,
    Be executed in his father's sight.

    Farewell; the leisure and the fearful time
    Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
    And ample interchange of sweet discourse
    Which so-long-sund'red friends should dwell upon.
 Good lords, conduct him to his regiment.

    I'll strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap,
    Lest leaden slumber peise me down to-morrow
    When I should mount with wings of victory.

    Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.

                                         Exeunt all but RICHMOND
    O Thou, whose captain I account myself,
    Look on my forces with a gracious eye;
    Put in their hands Thy bruising irons of wrath,  
    That they may crush down with a heavy fall
    The usurping helmets of our adversaries!
    Make us Thy ministers of chastisement,
    That we may praise Thee in the victory!
    To Thee I do commend my watchful soul
    Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes.
  [To RICHARD]  Let me sit heavy on thy soul
    to-morrow!
    Think how thou stabb'dst me in my prime of youth
    At Tewksbury; despair, therefore, and die!
    [To RICHMOND]  Be cheerful, Richmond; for the wronged
    souls
    Of butcher'd princes fight in thy behalf.

  
              Enter the GHOST of HENRY THE SIXTH

  GHOST.
  [To RICHARD]  When I was mortal, my anointed
    body
    By thee was punched full of deadly holes.

    Think on the Tower and me.
 Despair, and die.

    [To RICHMOND]  Virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror!
    Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be King,
    Doth comfort thee in thy sleep.
 Live and flourish!

                   Enter the GHOST of CLARENCE

  GHOST.
  [To RICHARD]  Let me sit heavy in thy soul
    to-morrow! I that was wash'd to death with fulsome wine,
    Poor Clarence, by thy guile betray'd to death!
    To-morrow in the battle think on me,
    And fall thy edgeless sword.
 Despair and die!
    [To RICHMOND]  Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster,
    The wronged heirs of York do pray for thee.
  [To RICHARD]  Let me sit heavy in thy
    soul to-morrow,
    Rivers that died at Pomfret! Despair and die!
  GHOST OF GREY.
  [To RICHARD]  Think upon Grey, and let
    thy soul despair!
  GHOST OF VAUGHAN.
  [To RICHARD]  Think upon Vaughan,
    and with guilty fear
    Let fall thy lance.
 Despair and die!
  ALL.
  [To RICHMOND]  Awake, and think our wrongs in
    Richard's bosom
    Will conquer him.
  [To RICHARD]  Dream on thy cousins smothered in
    the Tower.

    Let us be lead within thy bosom, Richard,
    And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death!
    Thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die.

    [To RICHMOND]  Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace, and
    wake in joy;
    Good angels guard thee from the boar's annoy!
    Live, and beget a happy race of kings!
    Edward's unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.


          Enter the GHOST of LADY ANNE, his wife

  GHOST.
  [To RICHARD]  Richard, thy wife, that wretched  
    Anne thy wife
    That never slept a quiet hour with thee
    Now fills thy sleep with perturbations.

    Thy adversary's wife doth pray for thee.

    O, in the battle think on Buckingham,
    And die in terror of thy guiltiness!
    Dream on, dream on of bloody deeds and death;
    Fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath!
    [To RICHMOND]  I died for hope ere I could lend thee aid;
    But cheer thy heart and be thou not dismay'd:  
    God and good angels fight on Richmond's side;
    And Richard falls in height of all his pride.
 RICHARD starts out of his dream]
  KING RICHARD.

    O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!
    The lights burn blue.

    Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.

    What do I fear? Myself? There's none else by.

    Is there a murderer here? No-yes, I am.

    Then fly.
 What, from myself? Great reason why-
    Lest I revenge.
 What, myself upon myself!
    Alack, I love myself.
 Wherefore? For any good
    That I myself have done unto myself?
    O, no! Alas, I rather hate myself
    For hateful deeds committed by myself!
    I am a villain; yet I lie, I am not.

    Fool, of thyself speak well.
 There is no creature loves me;
    And if I die no soul will pity me:
    And wherefore should they, since that I myself
    Find in myself no pity to myself?
    Methought the souls of all that I had murder'd
    Came to my tent, and every one did threat
    To-morrow's vengeance on the head of Richard.


                            Enter RATCLIFF

  RATCLIFF.
 My lord!
  KING RICHARD.
 Ratcliff, my lord; 'tis I.

  KING RICHARD.
 No doubt, my lord.

  RATCLIFF.

  KING RICHARD By the apostle Paul, shadows to-night
    Have stuck more terror to the soul of Richard
    Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
    Armed in proof and led by shallow Richmond.

    'Tis not yet near day.
                 Exeunt

          Enter the LORDS to RICHMOND sitting in his tent

  LORDS.
 Good morrow, Richmond!
  RICHMOND.
 Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,
    That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.

  LORDS.
 How have you slept, my lord?  
  RICHMOND.

    Methought their souls whose bodies Richard murder'd
    Came to my tent and cried on victory.

    I promise you my soul is very jocund
    In the remembrance of so fair a dream.

    How far into the morning is it, lords?
  LORDS.
 Upon the stroke of four.
 Why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction.

    Then if you fight against God's enemy,
    God will in justice ward you as his soldiers;
    If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,
    You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain;
    If you do fight against your country's foes,
    Your country's foes shall pay your pains the hire;
    If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
    Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors;
    If you do free your children from the sword,
    Your children's children quits it in your age.

    For me, the ransom of my bold attempt
    Shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face;
    But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt
    The least of you shall share his part thereof.

  KING RICHARD.
 He said the truth; and what said Surrey
    then?
  RATCLIFF.

                                                 [Clock strikes]
    Tell the clock there.
 Give me a calendar.
 Not I, my lord.

  KING RICHARD.

    A black day will it be to somebody.

    Ratcliff!
  RATCLIFF.
 My lord?
  KING RICHARD.
 The sun will not be seen to-day;
    The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.

    I would these dewy tears were from the ground.


                       Enter NORFOLK

  NORFOLK.
 Arm, arm, my lord; the foe vaunts in the field.
 Come, bustle, bustle; caparison my horse;
    Call up Lord Stanley, bid him bring his power.

    I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain,  
    And thus my battle shall be ordered:
    My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,
    Consisting equally of horse and foot;
    Our archers shall be placed in the midst.

    This, and Saint George to boot! What think'st thou,
    Norfolk?
  NORFOLK.

    This found I on my tent this morning.
                                          [Reads]
    'Jockey of Norfolk, be not so bold,
    For Dickon thy master is bought and sold.

    If we be conquered, let men conquer us,
    And not these bastard Britaines, whom our fathers
    Have in their own land beaten, bobb'd, and thump'd,
    And, in record, left them the heirs of shame.

    Fight, gentlemen of England! Fight, bold yeomen!
    Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head!
    Spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood;
    Amaze the welkin with your broken staves!

                        Enter a MESSENGER
  
    What says Lord Stanley? Will he bring his power?
  MESSENGER.
 My lord, he doth deny to come.
 Off with his son George's head!
  NORFOLK.
 My lord, the enemy is pass'd the marsh.

    After the battle let George Stanley die.
 A thousand hearts are great within my
    bosom.

    Advance our standards, set upon our foes;
    Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,
    Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons!
    Upon them! Victory sits on our helms.


Another part of the field

Alarum; excursions.
 Rescue, my Lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue!
    The King enacts more wonders than a man,
    Daring an opposite to every danger.

    His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
    Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death.

    Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost.


                     Alarums.
 A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse!
  CATESBY.

  KING RICHARD.

    A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse!             Exeunt  




SCENE 5.
 Enter RICHMOND, DERBY bearing the crown,
with other LORDS

  RICHMOND.

  DERBY.
 Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee!
    Lo, here, this long-usurped royalty
    From the dead temples of this bloody wretch
    Have I pluck'd off, to grace thy brows withal.

    Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.

  DERBY.

  RICHMOND.
 What men of name are slain on either side?
  DERBY.

  RICHMOND.
  
    Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled
    That in submission will return to us.

    And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,
    We will unite the white rose and the red.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1595


THE TRAGEDY OF ROMEO AND JULIET

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  Chorus.


  Escalus, Prince of Verona.

  Capulet, heads of two houses at variance with each other.

  An old Man, of the Capulet family.

  Romeo, son to Montague.

  Friar John, Franciscan.

  Balthasar, servant to Romeo.

  Abram, servant to Montague.

  Sampson, servant to Capulet.

  Gregory, servant to Capulet.

  Peter, servant to Juliet's nurse.

  An Apothecary.


  Lady Montague, wife to Montague.

  Lady Capulet, wife to Capulet.

  Juliet, daughter to Capulet.

  Nurse to Juliet.


  Citizens of Verona; Gentlemen and Gentlewomen of both houses;
    Maskers, Torchbearers, Pages, Guards, Watchmen, Servants, and
    Attendants.




                        THE PROLOGUE

                        Enter Chorus.

    From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
    A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
    Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
    Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
]




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT I.
 A public place.


  Samp.
 Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.

  Greg.
 No, for then we should be colliers.

  Samp.
 Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.

  Greg.

  Samp.
 A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
 To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.

    Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.

  Greg.
 That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the
    wall.

  Greg.
 The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
 'Tis all one.
 When I have fought
    with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off
    their heads.
 The heads of the maids?
  Samp.
 Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.

  Samp.
 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been
    poor-John.


           Enter two other Servingmen [Abram and Balthasar].


  Samp.
 My naked weapon is out.
 Quarrel! I will back thee.
 How? turn thy back and run?
  Samp.
 Fear me not.
 No, marry.
 Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
  
  Greg.

  Samp.
 Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
  Samp.

  Abr.
 Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
  Samp.
 [aside to Gregory] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
  Greg.
 [aside to Sampson] No.

  Samp.
 No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my
    thumb, sir.

  Greg.
 But if you do, sir, am for you.
 I serve as good a man as you.
 Well, sir.


                        Enter Benvolio.


  Greg.
' Here comes one of my
    master's kinsmen.
  
  Samp.
 You lie.

  Samp.
 Draw, if you be men.
 Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.

                                                     They fight.
 Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.
]
    Put up your swords.


  Tyb.
 What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
    Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.
 I do but keep the peace.
 Put up thy sword,
    Or manage it to part these men with me.

  Tyb.

    Have at thee, coward!                            They fight.

  
  Officer.


  Cap.
 My sword, I say! Old Montague is come
    And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
 Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.

  M.

    Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word
    By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
    Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets
    And made Verona's ancient citizens
    Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments
    To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
    Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.

    For this time all the rest depart away.
  
              Exeunt [all but Montague, his Wife, and Benvolio].

  Mon.
 Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
    Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
  Ben.
 Here were the servants of your adversary
    And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.

    I drew to part them.

    While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
    Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
    Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

  M.

  Ben.
 Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
    Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
    A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
    Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
    That westward rooteth from the city's side,  
    So early walking did I see your son.

    I- measuring his affections by my own,
    Which then most sought where most might not be found,
    Being one too many by my weary self-
    Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
    And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.

  Mon.
 Many a morning hath he there been seen,
    With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
    Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
    But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
    Should in the farthest East bean to draw
    The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
    Away from light steals home my heavy son
    And private in his chamber pens himself,
    Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight
    And makes himself an artificial night.

    Black and portentous must this humour prove
    Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
  
  Ben.
 Have you importun'd him by any means?
  Mon.
 Both by myself and many other friend;
    But he, his own affections' counsellor,
    Is to himself- I will not say how true-
    But to himself so secret and so close,
    So far from sounding and discovery,
    As is the bud bit with an envious worm
    Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
    Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.

    Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
    We would as willingly give cure as know.


                       Enter Romeo.


  Ben.
 So please you step aside,
    I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
 I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
    To hear true shrift.

  Ben.
 Good morrow, cousin.
 Is the day so young?
  Ben.

  Rom.

    Was that my father that went hence so fast?
  Ben.
 It was.
 What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
  Rom.
 Not having that which having makes them short.
 In love?
  Rom.
 Out-
  Ben.
 Of love?
  Rom.
 Out of her favour where I am in love.

  Ben.
 Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
    Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
  Rom.
 Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
    Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
    Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
    Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.

    Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
 Good heart, at what?
  Ben.
 At thy good heart's oppression.

  Rom.
 Why, such is love's transgression.

    Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
    Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
    With more of thine.
  
    Farewell, my coz.

  Rom.
 Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here:
    This is not Romeo, he's some other where.

  Ben.
 What, shall I groan and tell thee?
  Ben.
 Groan? Why, no;
    But sadly tell me who.

  Rom.

  Ben.
 I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.

  Rom.
 A right good markman! And she's fair I love.
 A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

  Rom.
 Well, in that hit you miss.
 She'll not be hit
    With Cupid's arrow.

    O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
    That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.

  Ben.
 Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
  Rom.

    She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
    To merit bliss by making me despair.

    She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
    Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
 O, teach me how I should forget to think!
  Ben.
 By giving liberty unto thine eyes.

    Examine other beauties.
  
    He that is strucken blind cannot forget
    The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
 Thou canst not teach me to forget.

  Ben.
 I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
      Exeunt.

A Street.


  Cap.
 But Montague is bound as well as I,
    In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
    For men so old as we to keep the peace.

  Par.
 But saying o'er what I have said before:
    My child is yet a stranger in the world,
    She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
    Let two more summers wither in their pride
    Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
 Younger than she are happy mothers made.

    The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
    She is the hopeful lady of my earth.

    But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
    My will to her consent is but a part.
  
    An she agree, within her scope of choice
    Lies my consent and fair according voice.

    This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
    Whereto I have invited many a guest,
    Such as I love; and you among the store,
    One more, most welcome, makes my number more.

    At my poor house look to behold this night
    Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
 Hear all, all see,
    And like her most whose merit most shall be;
    Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
    May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
 [To Servant, giving him a paper] Go, sirrah,
      trudge about
    Through fair Verona; find those persons out
    Whose names are written there, and to them say,  
    My house and welcome on their pleasure stay-
                                     Exeunt [Capulet and Paris].
 Find them out whose names are written here? It is written
    that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor
    with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with
    his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are
    here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath
    here writ.
 In good time!

                   Enter Benvolio and Romeo.


  Ben.

    Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
    And the rank poison of the old will die.

  Rom.
 For what, I pray thee?
  Rom.
 For your broken shin.
 Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
  Rom.
 Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
    Shut up in Prison, kept without my food,
    Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.
 God gi' go-den.
 I pray, sir, can you read?
  Rom.
 Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

  Serv.
 But I pray, can you
    read anything you see?
  Rom.
 Rest you merry!
  Rom.
 Stay, fellow; I can read.


      'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
      County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
      The lady widow of Vitruvio;
      Signior Placentio and His lovely nieces;
      Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
      Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
      My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
      Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;  
      Lucio and the lively Helena.
 Whither should they come?
  Serv.
 Up.
 Whither?
  Serv.
 To supper, to our house.
 My master's.

  Rom.
 Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.

  Serv.
 Now I'll tell you without asking.
 My master is the great rich
    Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come
    and crush a cup of wine.
 Rest you merry!               Exit.
 At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
    Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
    With all the admired beauties of Verona.

  Rom.
 When the devout religion of mine eye
    Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;  
    And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,
    Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
    One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
    Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

  Ben.
 Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,
    Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
    But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
    Your lady's love against some other maid
    That I will show you shining at this feast,
    And she shall scant show well that now seems best.

  Rom.
 I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
    But to rejoice in splendour of my own.
              [Exeunt.
]




Scene III.
 Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.
 Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
    I bade her come.
 What, lamb! what ladybird!
    God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!

                         Enter Juliet.


  Jul.
 How now? Who calls?
  Nurse.
 Your mother.

  Jul.
 Madam, I am here.

    What is your will?
  Wife.
 This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
    We must talk in secret.

    Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
 She's not fourteen.
  
  Nurse.
 I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
    And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-
    She is not fourteen.
 A fortnight and odd days.
 Even or odd, of all days in the year,
    Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
 Well, Susan is with God;
    She was too good for me.

    'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
    And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),
    Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
    For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
    Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.

    My lord and you were then at Mantua.
 But, as I said,
    When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple  
    Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
    To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
    Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
    To bid me trudge.

    And since that time it is eleven years,
    For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
    She could have run and waddled all about;
    For even the day before, she broke her brow;
    And then my husband (God be with his soul!
    'A was a merry man) took up the child.
'
    To see now how a jest shall come about!
    I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
    I never should forget it.
 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
    And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.
'
  Wife.
 Enough of this.
 I pray thee hold thy peace.

  Nurse.

    'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
    Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
    Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.
 Peace, I have done.
 God mark thee to his grace!
    Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.

  Wife.
 Tell me, daughter Juliet,
    How stands your disposition to be married?
  Jul.
 It is an honour that I dream not of.
 An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,
    I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
 Well, think of marriage now.
 Younger than you,
    Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
    Are made already mothers.
 By my count,  
    I was your mother much upon these years
    That you are now a maid.

  Nurse.
 A man, young lady! lady, such a man
    As all the world- why he's a man of wax.

  Nurse.

  Wife.
 What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
    This night you shall behold him at our feast.

    Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
    And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
    Examine every married lineament,
    And see how one another lends content;
    And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies
    Find written in the margent of his eyes,
    This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
    To beautify him only lacks a cover.

    The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
    For fair without the fair within to hide.

    That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,  
    That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
    So shall you share all that he doth possess,
    By having him making yourself no less.
 I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
    But no more deep will I endart mine eye
    Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.


                        Enter Servingman.


  Serv.
 Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd, my
    young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and
    everything in extremity.
 I must hence to wait.
 I beseech you
    follow straight.
                       Exit [Servingman].

  Nurse.
 Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.





Scene IV.


  Rom.
 What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
    Or shall we on without apology?
  Ben.
 The date is out of such prolixity.

    We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
    Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
    Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
    Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
    After the prompter, for our entrance;
    But, let them measure us by what they will,
    We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.

  Rom.
 Give me a torch.
 I am not for this ambling.

    Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

  Mer.
 Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

  Rom.
 Not I, believe me.
 You have dancing shoes
    With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
    So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
  
  Mer.
 You are a lover.

  Rom.
 I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
    To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
    I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
 Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
    Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
 If love be rough with you, be rough with love.

    Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.

    Give me a case to put my visage in.

    A visor for a visor! What care I
    What curious eye doth quote deformities?
    Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

  Ben.
 Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
    But every man betake him to his legs.

  Rom.

  Mer.
 Come, we burn daylight, ho!
  Rom.
 Nay, that's not so.

  Mer.
 I mean, sir, in delay
    We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
 And we mean well, in going to this masque;
    But 'tis no wit to go.

  Mer.
 Well, what was yours?
  Mer.
 That dreamers often lie.

  Rom.
  
  Mer.
 O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
 This is that very Mab
    That plats the manes of horses in the night
    And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
    Which once untangled much misfortune bodes
    This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,  
    That presses them and learns them first to bear,
    Making them women of good carriage.

  Mer.
 True, I talk of dreams;
    Which are the children of an idle brain,
    Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
    Which is as thin of substance as the air,
    And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
    Even now the frozen bosom of the North
    And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
    Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.

  Ben.

    Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
 I fear, too early; for my mind misgives
    Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
    Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
    With this night's revels and expire the term
    Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,  
    By some vile forfeit of untimely death.

    But he that hath the steerage of my course
    Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!
  Ben.
 [Exeunt.
]




Scene V.


Servingmen come forth with napkins.
 Serv.
 Serv.

  1.
 Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert, look
    to the plate.

    Anthony, and Potpan!
  2.
 Serv.
 Serv.
 You are look'd for and call'd for, ask'd for and sought
    for, in the great chamber.

  3.
 Serv.
 We cannot be here and there too.
 Cheerly, boys!
    Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
      Exeunt.
  

  Cap.

    Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
    Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
    She I'll swear hath corns.
 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!
    You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.

    A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.

                                    Music plays, and they dance.

    Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
    For you and I are past our dancing days.

    How long is't now since last yourself and I
    Were in a mask?  
  2.

  Cap.
 What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much!
    'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
    Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
    Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.

  2.
 Cap.
 'Tis more, 'tis more! His son is elder, sir;
    His son is thirty.
 Will you tell me that?
    His son was but a ward two years ago.
 [to a Servingman] What lady's that, which doth enrich the hand
    Of yonder knight?
  Serv.
 I know not, sir.
 O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
    It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
    Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-
    Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
    So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
    As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
  
    Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
    For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.

  Tyb.
 This, by his voice, should be a Montague.

    Fetch me my rapier, boy.
 Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
  Tyb.

  Cap.
 Young Romeo is it?
  Tyb.

  Cap.
 Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.

    I would not for the wealth of all this town
    Here in my house do him disparagement.
 It fits when such a villain is a guest.

    I'll not endure him.

  Cap.
 He shall be endur'd.
 Go to!
    Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
    You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!
    You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
    You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
  Tyb.
 Go to, go to!
    You are a saucy boy.
 Is't so, indeed?
    This trick may chance to scathe you.

    You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.
-
    Well said, my hearts!- You are a princox- go!
    Be quiet, or- More light, more light!- For shame!
    I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!  
  Tyb.
          Exit.

  Rom.
 If I profane with my unworthiest hand
    This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
    My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
    To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

  Jul.
 Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
    Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
    For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
    And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
 Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
  Jul.
 Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.

  Rom.

  Jul.

  Rom.
 Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.

    Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd.
  [Kisses her.
 Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
                          [Kisses her.
 Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
 What is her mother?
  Nurse.
 Marry, bachelor,
    Her mother is the lady of the house.

    And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.

    I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.

    I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
    Shall have the chinks.

  Rom.
 Is she a Capulet?
    O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
 Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.

  Rom.

  Cap.
 Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
    We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.

    Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.

    I thank you, honest gentlemen.
 Good night.

    More torches here! [Exeunt Maskers.
  
    Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late;
    I'll to my rest.

                              Exeunt [all but Juliet and Nurse].

  Jul.
 Come hither, nurse.
 What is yond gentleman?
  Nurse.
 The son and heir of old Tiberio.

  Jul.
 Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.

  Jul.
 What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
  Nurse.
 Go ask his name.
- If he be married,
    My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

  Nurse.

  Jul.

  Nurse.
 What's this? what's this?
  Jul.
 Anon, anon!
    Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.
        Exeunt.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



PROLOGUE

Enter Chorus.


  Chor.

    Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again,
    Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
    But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,
    And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.

    Being held a foe, he may not have access
    To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
    And she as much in love, her means much less
    To meet her new beloved anywhere;
    But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
    Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.





ACT II.
 Scene I.

A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard.


  Ben.
 He is wise,
    And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.

  Ben.
 He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.

    Call, good Mercutio.

    Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
    Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
    Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!
    Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
    Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,  
    One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
    Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
    When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
    He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
    The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.

    By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
    By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
    And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
    That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
  Ben.
 An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

  Mer.
 This cannot anger him.
 'Twould anger him
    To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
    Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
    Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.

    That were some spite; my invocation
    Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,
    I conjure only but to raise up him.

  Mer.

    Now will he sit under a medlar tree
    And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
    As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
 I'll to my truckle-bed;
    This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.

    Come, shall we go?
  Ben.

                                                         Exeunt.


  Rom.
 He jests at scars that never felt a wound.


                     Enter Juliet above at a window.


    But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?
    It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
    Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
    Who is already sick and pale with grief
    That thou her maid art far more fair than she.

    Be not her maid, since she is envious.

    Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
    And none but fools do wear it.
 Cast it off.
 What of that?
    Her eye discourses; I will answer it.

    I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.
  
    Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
    Having some business, do entreat her eyes
    To twinkle in their spheres till they return.

    What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
    The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
    As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
    Would through the airy region stream so bright
    That birds would sing and think it were not night.
 Ay me!
  Rom.

    O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
    As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
    As is a winged messenger of heaven
    Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
    Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
    When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
    And sails upon the bosom of the air.
 O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
    Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
    Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
    And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

  Rom.
 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.

    What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
    Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
    Belonging to a man.
 O, be some other name!
    What's in a name? That which we call a rose
    By any other name would smell as sweet.
 Romeo, doff thy name;
    And for that name, which is no part of thee,
    Take all myself.

  Rom.

    Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;
    Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

    My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
    Because it is an enemy to thee.

    Had I it written, I would tear the word.

  Jul.

    Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
  Rom.
 Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
 With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
    For stony limits cannot hold love out,
    And what love can do, that dares love attempt.

    Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
 If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
 I would not for the world they saw thee here.

  Rom.

    My life were better ended by their hate
    Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
 By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.

    He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.

  Jul.

    Fain would I dwell on form- fain, fain deny
    What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
    Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';  
    And I will take thy word.
 At lovers' perjuries,
    They say Jove laughs.
 O gentle Romeo,
    If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.

    Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
    I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
    So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.

    In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
    And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
    But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
    Than those that have more cunning to be strange.

    I should have been more strange, I must confess,
    But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
    My true-love passion.
 Therefore pardon me,
    And not impute this yielding to light love,
    Which the dark night hath so discovered.
 Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
    That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-
  Jul.
 O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
    That monthly changes in her circled orb,  
    Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
 What shall I swear by?
  Jul.
 Do not swear at all;
    Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
    Which is the god of my idolatry,
    And I'll believe thee.

  Rom.
 If my heart's dear love-
  Jul.
' Sweet, good night!
    This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
    May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.

    Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest
    Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
  Rom.
 O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
  Jul.
 What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
  Rom.
 Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.

  Jul.
 I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;  
    And yet I would it were to give again.
 Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
  Jul.
 But to be frank and give it thee again.

    And yet I wish but for the thing I have.

    I hear some noise within.

    Stay but a little, I will come again.
]
  Rom.
 O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
    Being in night, all this is but a dream,
    Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.


  Jul.
 Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.

    If that thy bent of love be honourable,
    Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,  
    By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
    Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
    And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
    And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

  Nurse.
 (within) Madam!
  Jul.
 I come, anon.
- But if thou meanest not well,
    I do beseech thee-
  Nurse.
 (within) Madam!
  Jul.
-
    To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief.

    To-morrow will I send.

  Rom.

  Rom.


  Jul.
 Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice  
    To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
    Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;
    Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
    And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
    With repetition of my Romeo's name.

    Romeo!
  Rom.
 It is my soul that calls upon my name.

    How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
    Like softest music to attending ears!
  Jul.
 My dear?
  Jul.
 At what o'clock to-morrow
    Shall I send to thee?
  Rom.
 I will not fail.
 'Tis twenty years till then.

    I have forgot why I did call thee back.

  Rom.
 I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
    Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
 And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,  
    Forgetting any other home but this.

  Jul.
 'Tis almost morning.

  Rom.
 Sweet, so would I.

                                                         [Exit.
]
  Rom.
 Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
    Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
    Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
    His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.

Friar Laurence's cell.


Enter Friar, [Laurence] alone, with a basket.


  Friar.

    Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye
    The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
    I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
    With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.

    What is her burying gave, that is her womb;
    And from her womb children of divers kind
    We sucking on her natural bosom find;
    Many for many virtues excellent,
    None but for some, and yet all different.

    Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
    And vice sometime's by action dignified.

    Within the infant rind of this small flower
    Poison hath residence, and medicine power;
    For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
    Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.

    Two such opposed kings encamp them still
    In man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;
    And where the worser is predominant,
    Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.


                        Enter Romeo.


  Rom.
 Good morrow, father.

  Friar.

    Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
    And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
    But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
    Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.

    Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
    Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;
    Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
    Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.

  Rom.
 God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
  Rom.
 With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.

    I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.

  Friar.
 That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
  Rom.
 I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.

    I have been feasting with mine enemy,
    Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
    That's by me wounded.
 Both our remedies
    Within thy help and holy physic lies.

    I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,  
    My intercession likewise steads my foe.

  Friar.
 Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift
    Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
 Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
    On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
    As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
    And all combin'd, save what thou must combine
    By holy marriage.
 When, and where, and how
    We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,
    I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
    That thou consent to marry us to-day.

  Friar.

    Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
    Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
    How much salt water thrown away in waste,
    To season love, that of it doth not taste!
    The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,  
    Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears.

    Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
    Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.

  Rom.
 Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
 And bad'st me bury love.

  Friar.

  Rom.
 I pray thee chide not.
 She whom I love now
    Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.

    The other did not so.

  Friar.
 O, she knew well
    Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.

    But come, young waverer, come go with me.

  Rom.
 Wisely, and slow.
 They stumble that run fast.

                                                         Exeunt.





Scene IV.


  Mer.
 Where the devil should this Romeo be?
    Came he not home to-night?
  Ben.
 Not to his father's.
 I spoke with his man.

  Mer.
 Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
    Torments him so that he will sure run mad.

  Mer.
 A challenge, on my life.
 Romeo will answer it.
 Any man that can write may answer a letter.

  Ben.

  Mer.
 O, he's the
    courageous captain of compliments.
 He fights as you sing
    pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
    minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
    butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman of
    the very first house, of the first and second cause.
 Ah, the
    immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.

  Ben.
 The what?
  Mer.


  Ben.
 Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!
  Mer.
 Without his roe, like a dried herring.
 O flesh, flesh, how art  
    thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed
    in.
 You gave us the counterfeit
    fairly last night.

  Rom.
 The slip, sir, the slip.
 Pardon, good Mercutio.
 My business was great, and in such a
    case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
 That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
    man to bow in the hams.

  Rom.
 Thou hast most kindly hit it.

  Rom.
 A most courteous exposition.

  Mer.

  Mer.
 Right.
 Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.
  
  Mer.

  Rom.
 O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
  Mer.
 Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
 Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.
 Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou
    hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I
    have in my whole five.
 Was I with you there for the goose?
  Rom.
 Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
    for the goose.
 Nay, good goose, bite not!
  Mer.
 Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
 And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
  Mer.
 I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to the
    goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.

  Mer.
 Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art  
    thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by
    art as well as by nature.
 For this drivelling love is like a
    great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
    a hole.
 Stop there, stop there!
  Mer.

  Ben.

  Mer.
 O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I was
    come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy
    the argument no longer.
 Here's goodly gear!

                      Enter Nurse and her Man [Peter].


  Mer.
 A sail, a sail!
  Ben.
 Two, two! a shirt and a smock.
 Peter!
  Peter.

  Nurse.
 My fan, Peter.
 God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

  Mer.

  Nurse.
 Is it good-den?
  Mer.
 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now
    upon the prick of noon.

  Nurse.
 One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.

  Nurse.
 'For himself to mar,' quoth
    'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young
    Romeo?
  Rom.

  Nurse.
 A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!  
  Rom.
 No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
    something stale and hoar ere it be spent
                                     He walks by them and sings.


                   An old hare hoar,
                   And an old hare hoar,
                Is very good meat in Lent;
                   But a hare that is hoar
                   Is too much for a score
                When it hoars ere it be spent.


    Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.

  Rom.
 I will follow you.
 Farewell, ancient lady.
 Farewell,
    [sings] lady, lady, lady.

  Nurse.
 Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was
    this that was so full of his ropery?
  Rom.
 A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and will  
    speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
 An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a
    were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,
    I'll find those that shall.
 Scurvy knave! I am none of his
    flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates.
 I saw no man use you at his pleasure.

  Nurse.
 Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
    quivers.
 Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,
    my young lady bid me enquire you out.
 What she bid me say, I will
    keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her
    into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
    behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
    therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
    ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.

  Rom.
 Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress.
 Lord,
    Lord! she will be a joyful woman.

  Rom.
 What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.

  Nurse.
 I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take
    it, is a gentlemanlike offer.

  Rom.
 Bid her devise
    Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
    And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
    Be shriv'd and married.
 Here is for thy pains.

  Nurse.
 No, truly, sir; not a penny.

  Rom.

  Nurse.
 This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
 And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.

    Within this hour my man shall be with thee
    And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
    Which to the high topgallant of my joy
    Must be my convoy in the secret night.

    Farewell.
 Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.

    Farewell.
 Commend me to thy mistress.

  Nurse.
  
  Rom.
 Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
    Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
  Rom.

  Nurse.
 Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady.
 Lord, Lord!
    when 'twas a little prating thing- O, there is a nobleman in
    town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good
    soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him.
 Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with
    a letter?
  Rom.
 Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.

  Nurse.
 R is for the- No; I know
    it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
    sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
    to hear it.

  Rom.
 Ay, a thousand times.
 [Exit Romeo.
] Peter!
  Peter.
 Anon.
  
  Nurse.
 Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.

                                                         Exeunt.

Capulet's orchard.


Enter Juliet.


  Jul.
 The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
    In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.
 That's not so.

    O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
    Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
    Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.

    Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
    Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
    Is three long hours; yet she is not come.

    Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
    She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
    My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
    And his to me,
    But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
    Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
  

                      Enter Nurse [and Peter].


    O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
    Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

                                                   [Exit Peter.
]
  Jul.
 I am aweary, give me leave awhile.

    Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!
  Jul.
 I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.

  Nurse.
 Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
    Do you not see that I am out of breath?
  Jul.

    Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.

    Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.

    Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
  Nurse.
 Romeo? No, not he.
 Though his face be better than
    any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
    foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they
    are past compare.
 He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
    warrant him, as gentle as a lamb.
 No, no.
 But all this did I know before.
 Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
    It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.

    Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
    'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
    "Where is your mother?"'
  Nurse.

    Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
    Henceforward do your messages yourself.

  Jul.
 Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?
  Nurse.
 Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
  Jul.

  Nurse.
 Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
    There stays a husband to make you a wife.

    Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
    They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.

    Hie you to church; I must another way,
    To fetch a ladder, by the which your love  
    Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.

    I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
    But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.


Enter Friar [Laurence] and Romeo.


  Friar.
 These violent delights have violent ends
    And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
    Which, as they kiss, consume.
 The sweetest honey
    Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
    And in the taste confounds the appetite.

    Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
    Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
 O, so light a foot
    Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
 Good even to my ghostly confessor.
 Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

  Jul.
 Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
    Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more
    To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
    This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
    Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
    Receive in either by this dear encounter.

  Jul.

    They are but beggars that can count their worth;
    But my true love is grown to such excess
    cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
  
  Friar.

                                                       [Exeunt.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

A public place.


Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, and Men.


  Ben.
 I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.

    The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
 Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the
    confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says
    'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the second
    cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.

  Ben.
 Am I like such a fellow?
  Mer.
 Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man
    that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.

    Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other  
    reason but because thou hast hazel eyes.
 What eye but such an eye
    would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as
    an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as
    addle as an egg for quarrelling.
 The fee simple? O simple!

                       Enter Tybalt and others.


  Ben.

  Mer.
 By my heel, I care not.

    Gentlemen, good den.
 And but one word with one of us?  
    Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.

  Tyb.
 You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me
    occasion.
 Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
 Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make
    minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords.
 Here's my
    fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance.
 We talk here in the public haunt of men.

    Either withdraw unto some private place
    And reason coldly of your grievances,
    Or else depart.
 Here all eyes gaze on us.
 Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
 Here comes my man.

  Mer.
 But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.

    Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower!  
    Your worship in that sense may call him man.
 Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
    No better term than this: thou art a villain.

    Therefore farewell.
 I see thou knowest me not.

  Tyb.

  Mer.
 O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
    Alla stoccata carries it away.
                      [Draws.
 What wouldst thou have with me?
  Mer.
 That I
    mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,  
    dry-beat the rest of the eight.

  Tyb.
 I am for you.

  Mer.
]
  Rom.

    Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
         Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in, and flies
                                           [with his Followers].

  Mer.
 I am hurt.

    Is he gone and hath nothing?
  Ben.
 Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch.
 Marry, 'tis enough.

    Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
  
                                                    [Exit Page.
]
  Rom.

  Mer.
 No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;
    but 'tis enough, 'twill serve.
 Ask for me to-morrow, and you
    shall find me a grave man.
 A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a
    mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a
    villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
    came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.

  Rom.
 I thought all for the best.
 Help me into some house, Benvolio,
    Or I shall faint.
 A plague o' both your houses!
    They have made worms' meat of me.
 O sweet Juliet,  
    Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
    And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel

                      Enter Benvolio.


  Ben.


                       Enter Tybalt.
 Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

  Rom.
 Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
    Away to heaven respective lenity,
    And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now!
    Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
    That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
    Is but a little way above our heads,  
    Staying for thine to keep him company.

    Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.

  Tyb.
 Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
    Shalt with him hence.

  Rom.
 This shall determine that.

                                       They fight.
 Tybalt falls.

  Ben.

    Stand not amaz'd.
 The Prince will doom thee death
    If thou art taken.
 Hence, be gone, away!
  Rom.
 There lies that Tybalt.

    I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
  

  Enter Prince [attended], Old Montague, Capulet, their Wives,
                     and [others].
 Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
  Ben.
 I can discover all
    The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.

    There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
    That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

  Cap.
 Wife.
 Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.

    Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
    How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
    Your high displeasure.
 All this- uttered
    With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd-  
    Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
    Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
    With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
    Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
    And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
    Cold death aside and with the other sends
    It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
    Retorts it.

  Cap.

    I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.

    Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
 Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
 Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend;
    His fault concludes but what the law should end,
    The life of Tybalt.

  Prince.

    I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
    Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.

    Therefore use none.
 Let Romeo hence in haste,
    Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
  
    Bear hence this body, and attend our will.

    Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

                                                         Exeunt.





Scene II.


Enter Juliet alone.

    Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
    By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
    It best agrees with night.
 Come, civil night,
    Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
    And learn me how to lose a winning match,
    Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.

    Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night;
    Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
    Take him and cut him out in little stars,
    And he will make the face of heaven so fine
    That all the world will be in love with night
    And pay no worship to the garish sun.

    O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
    But not possess'd it; and though I am sold,
    Not yet enjoy'd.
 So tedious is this day
    As is the night before some festival
    To an impatient child that hath new robes
    And may not wear them.
 O, here comes my nurse,

                Enter Nurse, with cords.

    Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords  
    That Romeo bid thee fetch?
  Nurse.
 Ay, ay, the cords.
]
  Jul.
 Can heaven be so envious?
  Nurse.
 What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
    This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.

    I am not I, if there be such an 'I';
    Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.
'
    Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
  
  Nurse.
 I swounded at the sight.

  Jul.
 O, break, my heart! poor bankrout, break at once!
    To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
    Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,
    And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
  Nurse.
 What storm is this that blows so contrary?
    Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
    My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
    Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
    For who is living, if those two are gone?
  Nurse.
 Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
    Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
 O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?  
  Nurse.
 It did, it did! alas the day, it did!
  Jul.
 There's no trust,
    No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,
    All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.

    Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.

    Shame come to Romeo!  
  Jul.
 Blister'd be thy tongue
    For such a wish! He was not born to shame.

    O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
  Nurse.
 Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
  Jul.
 Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
    Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name
    When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
    But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
    That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband.

    Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!
    Your tributary drops belong to woe,
    Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.

    All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
    Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
    That murd'red me.
 I would forget it fain;  
    But O, it presses to my memory
    Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds!
    'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo- banished.
'
    That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
    Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts.
 Tybalt's death
    Was woe enough, if it had ended there;
    Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
    And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
    Why followed not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
    Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
    Which modern lamentation might have mov'd?
    But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
    'Romeo is banished'- to speak that word
    Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
    All slain, all dead.
 'Romeo is banished'-
    There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
    In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.

    Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
  Nurse.

    Take up those cords.
 Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,
    Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.

    He made you for a highway to my bed;
    But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
 I'll to my wedding bed;
    And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
  Nurse.
 Hie to your chamber.

    Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.

    I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.

  Jul.
 O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
    And bid him come to take his last farewell.

                                                         Exeunt.





Scene III.


Enter Friar [Laurence].


  Friar.

    Affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts,
    And thou art wedded to calamity.
 Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom
    What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
    That I yet know not?
  Friar.
 A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips-
    Not body's death, but body's banishment.
 Hence from Verona art thou banished.

    Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

  Rom.

    Hence banished is banish'd from the world,
    And world's exile is death.
 Then 'banishment'
    Is death misterm'd.

  Friar.
 O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
    Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince,
    Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
    And turn'd that black word death to banishment.

    This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.

  Rom.
 Heaven is here,
    Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
    And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
    Live here in heaven and may look on her;
    But Romeo may not.

    This may flies do, when I from this must fly;
    They are free men, but I am banished.

    And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
    Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
    No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
    But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?
    O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
    Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,
    Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
    A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
    To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
  Friar.
 Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.

  Rom.
 O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
  
  Friar.

  Rom.

  Friar.
 O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
 How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
  Friar.
 Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

    Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
    An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
    Doting like me, and like me banished,
    Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
    And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
    Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
 Arise; one knocks.
 Good Romeo, hide thyself.

  Rom.
          Knock.

  Friar.
- Stay awhile!- Stand up;          Knock.

    Run to my study.
- By-and-by!- God's will,
    What simpleness is this.
 [within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.

    I come from Lady Juliet.

  Friar.
 Welcome then.


                       Enter Nurse.
 There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

  Nurse.
 O woeful sympathy!
    Piteous predicament!
  Nurse.
 Even so lies she,  
    Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.

    Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.

    For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
    Why should you fall into so deep an O?
  Rom.

  Rom.
 Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
    Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
    Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
    With blood remov'd but little from her own?
    Where is she? and how doth she! and what says
    My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
  Nurse.
 O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
    And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
    And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
    And then down falls again.
                     [Draws his dagger.
]
  Friar.

    Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art;
    Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
    The unreasonable fury of a beast.
 By my holy order,
    I thought thy disposition better temper'd.

    Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
    And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
    By doing damned hate upon thyself?
    Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
    Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
    In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.

    Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
    Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
    And usest none in that true use indeed  
    Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.

    What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
    For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.

    There art thou happy.
 There art thou happy too.

    The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
    And turns it to exile.

    Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
    Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.

    But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
    For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
    Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
    To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
    Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
    With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
    Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.

    Go before, nurse.
 O, what learning is!
    My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.

  Rom.
 Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

    Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.

    Sojourn in Mantua.
 I'll find out your man,
    And he shall signify from time to time
    Every good hap to you that chances here.

    Give me thy hand.
 'Tis late.

  Rom.

    Farewell.





Scene IV.

    Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
    And so did I.
 Well, we were born to die.

    I promise you, but for your company,
    I would have been abed an hour ago.

    Madam, good night.
 Commend me to your daughter.

  Lady.
 I think she will be rul'd
    In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.

    Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
    Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love
    And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-  
    But, soft! what day is this?
  Par.

  Cap.
 Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.

    Thursday let it be- a Thursday, tell her
    She shall be married to this noble earl.

    Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
    We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
    For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
    It may be thought we held him carelessly,
    Being our kinsman, if we revel much.

    Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
    And there an end.

    Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed;
    Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
- Light to my chamber, ho!
    Afore me, It is so very very late
    That we may call it early by-and-by.

    Good night.
  
                                                          Exeunt




Scene V.

Capulet's orchard.


Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft, at the Window.
 Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.

    It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
    That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.

    Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

  Rom.
 Look, love, what envious streaks
    Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.

    Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
    Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.

    I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
 Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.

    It is some meteor that the sun exhales
    To be to thee this night a torchbearer
    And light thee on the way to Mantua.

    Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.

  Rom.
 Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.

    I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
    'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
    Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
    The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.

    I have more care to stay than will to go.

    Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.

  Jul.
 It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
    It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
    Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.

    Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;
    O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
    Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
    Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
    O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.

  Rom.
 Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.

    The day is broke; be wary, look about.
]
  Rom.
 Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
    I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
    For in a minute there are many days.

  Jul.
 O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
  Rom.
 I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve  
    For sweet discourses in our time to come.

  Jul.
 O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
    Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
    As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.

  Rom.
 And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.

    Dry sorrow drinks our blood.
 O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
 [within] Ho, daughter! are you up?
  Jul.
 Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.

  Lady.
 Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
    What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
    An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.

  Jul.

  Lady.
 So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
    Which you weep for.

  Jul.
 Feeling so the loss,
    I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

  Lady.
 Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
    As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.

  Jul.
 What villain, madam?
  Lady.
 That same villain Romeo.

  Jul.
-
    God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
    And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.

  Lady.
 That is because the traitor murderer lives.
 Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.

    Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
  Lady.
 We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.

  Jul.
 Indeed I never shall be satisfied
    With Romeo till I behold him- dead-
    Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.

    Madam, if you could find out but a man
    To bear a poison, I would temper it;
    That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
    Soon sleep in quiet.
 O, how my heart abhors
    To hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,
    To wreak the love I bore my cousin Tybalt
    Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him!
  Lady.
 Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.

    But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
  
  Jul.
 And joy comes well in such a needy time.

    What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
  Lady.
 Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
    One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
    Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
    That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.
 Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
  Lady.
 Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
    He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
    I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
    Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.

    I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
    I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
    It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
    Rather than Paris.
 Here comes your father.
 Tell him so yourself,  
    And see how be will take it at your hands.


                   Enter Capulet and Nurse.
 When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
    But for the sunset of my brother's son
    It rains downright.

    How now? a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
    Evermore show'ring? In one little body
    Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
    For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
    Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
    Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
    Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
    Without a sudden calm will overset
    Thy tempest-tossed body.
 How now, wife?
    Have you delivered to her our decree?
  Lady.
 Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.

    I would the fool were married to her grave!
  Cap.
 Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
 Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.

  Cap.
 How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?
    'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-
    And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,
    Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
    But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
    To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
    Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
 Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
  Jul.
 Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
    Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
 Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!  
    I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
    Or never after look me in the face.

    Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!
    My fingers itch.
 Wife, we scarce thought us blest
    That God had lent us but this only child;
    But now I see this one is one too much,
    And that we have a curse in having her.

    Out on her, hilding!
  Nurse.
 God in heaven bless her!
    You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

  Cap.
 And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,
    Good Prudence.
 Smatter with your gossips, go!
  Nurse.
 I speak no treason.

  Cap.
 O, God-i-god-en!
  Nurse.
 Peace, you mumbling fool!
    Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
    For here we need it not.

  Lady.
 You are too hot.

  Cap.
 God's bread I it makes me mad.
 Day, night, late, early,  
    At home, abroad, alone, in company,
    Waking or sleeping, still my care hath been
    To have her match'd; and having now provided
    A gentleman of princely parentage,
    Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
    Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
    Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
    And then to have a wretched puling fool,
    A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
    To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;
    I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!
    But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you.

    Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.

    Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
    An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
    An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
    For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
    Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.

    Trust to't.
 Bethink you.
  
  Jul.
 Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
    That sees into the bottom of my grief?
    O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
    Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
    Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
    In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

  Lady.
            Exit.

    Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
    Upon so soft a subject as myself!
    What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
    Some comfort, nurse.

  Nurse.
 Faith, here it is.

    Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
    That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;  
    Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.

    Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
    I think it best you married with the County.

    O, he's a lovely gentleman!
    Romeo's a dishclout to him.
 An eagle, madam,
    Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
    As Paris hath.
 Beshrew my very heart,
    I think you are happy in this second match,
    For it excels your first; or if it did not,
    Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
    As living here and you no use of him.

  Jul.
 Speak'st thou this from thy heart?
  Nurse.
 Amen!
  Nurse.
 What?
  Jul.
 Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.

    Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
    Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
    To make confession and to be absolv'd.
 Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
    Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
    Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
    Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
    So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!
    Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.

    If all else fail, myself have power to die.
            Exit.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.

Friar Laurence's cell.


Enter Friar, [Laurence] and County Paris.


  Friar.

  Par.
 My father Capulet will have it so,
    And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

    Uneven is the course; I like it not.

    Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
    That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
    And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
    To stop the inundation of her tears,
    Which, too much minded by herself alone,
    May be put from her by society.

  Friar.
 [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.
-
    Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
  

                    Enter Juliet.
 That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
 That's a certain text.

  Par.
 Come you to make confession to this father?
  Jul.
 To answer that, I should confess to you.
 Do not deny to him that you love me.

  Jul.
 So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.

  Jul.
 Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.

  Par.
 Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.

  Jul.

  Par.

  Jul.

    Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
    Or shall I come to you at evening mass
  Friar.
 My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.

  Par.
 God shield I should disturb devotion!
    Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.

    Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.
             Exit.
 Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
    It strains me past the compass of my wits.

    I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
    On Thursday next be married to this County.

  Jul.
 Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
    Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.

    God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
    And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,
    Shall be the label to another deed,
    Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
    Turn to another, this shall slay them both.

    Be not so long to speak.
 I long to die
    If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

  Friar.
 I do spy a kind of hope,
    Which craves as desperate an execution
    As that is desperate which we would prevent.

    If, rather than to marry County Paris
    Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
    Then is it likely thou wilt undertake  
    A thing like death to chide away this shame,
    That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;
    And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.

  Jul.
 O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
    From off the battlements of yonder tower,
    Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
    Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
    Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,
    O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
    With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
    Or bid me go into a new-made grave
    And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-
    Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
    And I will do it without fear or doubt,
    To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.

    To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
    Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.

    Take thou this vial, being then in bed,  
    And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
    When presently through all thy veins shall run
    A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
    Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;
    No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
    The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
    To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
    Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
    Each part, depriv'd of supple government,
    Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;
    And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
    Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
    And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.

    Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
    To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.

    Then, as the manner of our country is,
    In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
    Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
    Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.

    In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,  
    Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
    And hither shall he come; and he and I
    Will watch thy waking, and that very night
    Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.

    And this shall free thee from this present shame,
    If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
    Abate thy valour in the acting it.
 Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
  Friar.
 Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
    In this resolve.
 I'll send a friar with speed
    To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

  Jul.

                                                         Exeunt.


Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen,
                        two or three.


  Cap.
 So many guests invite as here are writ.
]
    Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

  Serv.
 Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with
    me.

  Cap.
 Go, begone.

                                                Exit Servingman.

    We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.

    What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
  Nurse.
 Ay, forsooth.

  Cap.
 Well, be may chance to do some good on her.

    A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
  

                        Enter Juliet.


  Nurse.
 See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

  Cap.
 How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
  Jul.
 Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
    Of disobedient opposition
    To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
    By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here
    To beg your pardon.
 Pardon, I beseech you!
    Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.

  Cap.

    I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
 I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
    And gave him what becomed love I might,
    Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
 This is well.

    Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.

    Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,  
    All our whole city is much bound to him.

  Jul.
 Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
    To help me sort such needful ornaments
    As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?
  Mother.

  Cap.
 Go, nurse, go with her.
 We'll to church to-morrow.

  Mother.
 We shall be short in our provision.

  Cap.

    Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.

    I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.
 What, ho!
    They are all forth; well, I will walk myself
    To County Paris, to prepare him up
    Against to-morrow.
 My heart is wondrous light,
    Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.

                                                         Exeunt.





Scene III.


Enter Juliet and Nurse.


  Jul.


                          Enter Mother.


  Mother.
 What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
  Jul.
 No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
    As are behooffull for our state to-morrow.
 Good night.

    Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
  
                                      Exeunt [Mother and Nurse.
]
  Jul.
 Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.

    Nurse!- What should she do here?
    My dismal scene I needs must act alone.

    Come, vial.

    What if this mixture do not work at all?
    Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
    No, No! This shall forbid it.
 Lie thou there.

    What if it be a poison which the friar
    Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,
    Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
    Because he married me before to Romeo?
    I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
    For he hath still been tried a holy man.
 Stay, Tybalt, stay!
    Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.





Scene IV.
 Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.

  Nurse.


                       Enter Old Capulet.
 Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,
    The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.

    Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
    Spare not for cost.

  Cap.
 No, not a whit.
 What, I have watch'd ere now
    All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

  Lady.
 Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
    But I will watch you from such watching now.

                                          Exeunt Lady and Nurse.
 A jealous hood, a jealous hood!

  Enter three or four [Fellows, with spits and logs and baskets.


    What is there? Now, fellow,
  Fellow.

  Cap.

    Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.
 I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
    And never trouble Peter for the matter.

  Cap.
 Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
    Thou shalt be loggerhead.
 [Exit Fellow.
] Good faith, 'tis day.

    The County will be here with music straight,
    For so he said he would.
                         Play music.

    I'll go and chat with Paris.
]




Scene V.

Juliet's chamber.


[Enter Nurse.
]

  Nurse.

    Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
    Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
    What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
    Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
    The County Paris hath set up his rest
    That you shall rest but little.
 How sound is she asleep!
    I needs must wake her.


  Mother.
 O lamentable day!
  Mother.
 What is the matter?
  Nurse.
 Look, look! O heavy day!
  Mother.
 O me, O me! My child, my only life!
    Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
    Help, help! Call help.


                            Enter Father.
 She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
  Mother.
 Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
  Cap.
 Ha! let me see her.
 Out alas! she's cold,
    Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
    Life and these lips have long been separated.

  Nurse.
 O woful time!
  Cap.


  Friar.
 Ready to go, but never to return.

    O son, the night before thy wedding day
    Hath Death lain with thy wife.
 See, there she lies,
    Flower as she was, deflowered by him.

    Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
    My daughter he hath wedded.
 I will die
    And leave him all.
 Life, living, all is Death's.

  Par.
 Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
    And doth it give me such a sight as this?
  Mother.
 O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
    Most lamentable day, most woful day
    That ever ever I did yet behold!
    O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
    Never was seen so black a day as this.

    O woful day! O woful day!
  Par.
 Heaven and yourself
    Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,
    And all the better is it for the maid.

    Your part in her you could not keep from death,
    But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.

    The most you sought was her promotion,
    For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;
    And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd
    Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
    O, in this love, you love your child so ill
    That you run mad, seeing that she is well.

    She's not well married that lives married long,
    But she's best married that dies married young.
 Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
    And go, Sir Paris.
 Every one prepare
    To follow this fair corse unto her grave.

    The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;
    Move them no more by crossing their high will.
 Manent Musicians [and Nurse].

  Nurse.
 Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
    For well you know this is a pitiful case.
            [Exit.
]
  1.
 Mus.
 Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
 Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!  
    O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.
'
  1.
 Mus.
' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.

  1.
 Mus.
 Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.
 Mus.
 No.
 No money, on my faith, but the gleek.

  1.
 Then will I give you the serving-creature.

  Pet.
 Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.

    I will carry no crotchets.
 Do you note
    me?
  1.
 Mus.

  2.
 Mus.
 Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.

  Pet.
 Mus.
 Pretty! What say You, Hugh Rebeck?
  2.
 Mus.
 I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for silver.

  Pet.
 Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
  3.
 Mus.

  Pet.


           'Then music with her silver sound
             With speedy help doth lend redress.
 Mus.
 What a pestilent knave is this same?
  2.
 Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the  
    mourners, and stay dinner.





<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 A street.


Enter Romeo.

    I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
    (Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
    And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips
    That I reviv'd and was an emperor.

    Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
    When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!

                Enter Romeo's Man Balthasar, booted.


    News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
    Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
    How doth my lady? Is my father well?  
    How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
    For nothing can be ill if she be well.

  Rom.
 Get me ink and paper
    And hire posthorses.
 I will hence to-night.
 I do beseech you, sir, have patience.

    Your looks are pale and wild and do import
    Some misadventure.

  Rom.
 Tush, thou art deceiv'd.

    Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
 No matter.
 Get thee gone  
    And hire those horses.

    Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.

    Let's see for means.
 O mischief, thou art swift
    To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
    I do remember an apothecary,
    And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted
    In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
    Culling of simples.

    Noting this penury, to myself I said,
    'An if a man did need a poison now
    Whose sale is present death in Mantua,  
    Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.
'
    O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
    And this same needy man must sell it me.

    Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
 What, ho! apothecary!

                        Enter Apothecary.
 Who calls so loud?
  Rom.

    Hold, there is forty ducats.
 Let me have
    A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
    As will disperse itself through all the veins
    That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,
    And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath
    As violently as hasty powder fir'd
    Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
 Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
    Is death to any he that utters them.

  Rom.
 Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness  
    And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
    Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
    Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:
    The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;
    The world affords no law to make thee rich;
    Then be not poor, but break it and take this.

  Apoth.
 My poverty but not my will consents.

  Rom.
 I pay thy poverty and not thy will.

  Apoth.

  Rom.

    I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.

    Farewell.
 Buy food and get thyself in flesh.





Scene II.
 Friar Laurence's cell.
 This same should be the voice of Friar John.

  John.
 Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
  John.

  Laur.
 Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
    The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
    Of dear import; and the neglecting it
    May do much danger.
 Friar John, go hence,
    Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
    Unto my cell.

  John.
                 Exit.

  Laur.

    Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.

    She will beshrew me much that Romeo
    Hath had no notice of these accidents;
    But I will write again to Mantua,
    And keep her at my cell till Romeo come-
    Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!        Exit.





Scene III.


Enter Paris and his Page with flowers and [a torch].


  Par.
 Hence, and stand aloof.

    Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
    Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
 Whistle then to me,
    As signal that thou hear'st something approach.

    Give me those flowers.
 Do as I bid thee, go.
 [aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
    Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.
]
  Par.
 Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew
    (O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones)
    Which with sweet water nightly I will dew;
    Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans.

    What cursed foot wanders this way to-night
    To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
    What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
     [Retires.
 Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.

    Hold, take this letter.
 Upon thy life I charge thee,
    Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
    And do not interrupt me in my course.

    Why I descend into this bed of death
    Is partly to behold my lady's face,
    But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
    A precious ring- a ring that I must use
    In dear employment.
 Therefore hence, be gone.
  
    But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
    In what I farther shall intend to do,
    By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
    And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.

    The time and my intents are savage-wild,
    More fierce and more inexorable far
    Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

  Rom.
 Take thou that.

    His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
        [Retires.
 Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
    Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
    Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
    And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.

                                           Romeo opens the tomb.

  Par.
 This is that banish'd haughty Montague
    That murd'red my love's cousin- with which grief
    It is supposed the fair creature died-  
    And here is come to do some villanous shame
    To the dead bodies.
 I will apprehend him.

    Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.

  Rom.

    Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.

    Fly hence and leave me.
 Think upon these gone;
    Let them affright thee.
 I beseech thee, youth,
    But not another sin upon my head
    By urging me to fury.
 O, be gone!
    By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
    For I come hither arm'd against myself.
 I do defy thy, conjuration
    And apprehend thee for a felon here.
  
  Page.
 O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
]
  Rom.
 In faith, I will.
 Let me peruse this face.

    Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
    Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet
    To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
    One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
    I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.

    A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,
    For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
    This vault a feasting presence full of light.

    Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.

                                         [Lays him in the tomb.
]
    How oft when men are at the point of death  
    Have they been merry! which their keepers call
    A lightning before death.
 O, how may I
    Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
    Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
    Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
 Beauty's ensign yet
    Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
    And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
' Ah, dear Juliet,
    Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
    That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
    And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
    Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
    For fear of that I still will stay with thee
    And never from this palace of dim night
    Depart again.
 Here, here will I remain  
    With worms that are thy chambermaids.
 O, here
    Will I set up my everlasting rest
    And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
    From this world-wearied flesh.
 Eyes, look your last!
    Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
    The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
    A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
    Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavoury guide!
    Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
    The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
    Here's to my love! [Drinks.
 Thus with a kiss I die.
          Falls.


    Enter Friar [Laurence], with lanthorn, crow, and spade.


  Friar.
 Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
    Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
  Bal.
 Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

  Friar.

  Bal.

  Friar.
 Who is it?
  Bal.

  Friar.

  Bal.
 I dare not, sir.
 Stay then; I'll go alone.

    O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.

  Bal.
 Romeo!
    Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains  
    The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
    What mean these masterless and gory swords
    To lie discolour'd by this place of peace? [Enters the tomb.
 O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
    I do remember well where I should be,
    And there I am.
 Where is my Romeo?
  Friar.
 I hear some noise.
 Lady, come from that nest
    Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.

    A greater power than we can contradict
    Hath thwarted our intents.

    Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.

    Come, go, good Juliet.
 I dare no longer stay.

  Jul.
  
                                                   Exit [Friar].

    What's here? A cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?
    Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.

    O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
    To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
             [Kisses him.
]
    Thy lips are warm!
  Chief Watch.
 Which way?
    Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief.
]
    This is thy sheath; there rest, and let me die.

                  She stabs herself and falls [on Romeo's body].


                Enter [Paris's] Boy and Watch.
 This is the place.

  Chief Watch.
 'the ground is bloody.

                                     [Exeunt some of the Watch.
]  
    Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
    And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
    Who here hath lain this two days buried.

                                   [Exeunt others of the Watch.


     Enter [some of the Watch,] with Romeo's Man [Balthasar].
 Watch.
 Here's Romeo's man.
 We found him in the churchyard.

  Chief Watch.
 Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.


          Enter Friar [Laurence] and another Watchman.
 Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
 A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.


              Enter the Prince [and Attendants].


  Prince.
 What misadventure is so early up,
    That calls our person from our morning rest?

            Enter Capulet and his Wife [with others].
 The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
    Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,
    With open outcry, toward our monument.

  Prince.
 What fear is this which startles in our ears?
  Chief Watch.
 Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
    And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
    Warm and new kill'd.

  Prince.
 Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

  Chief Watch.

  Cap.
 O me! this sight of death is as a bell
    That warns my old age to a sepulchre.


               Enter Montague [and others].


  Prince.
 Come, Montague; for thou art early up
    To see thy son and heir more early down.

  Mon.

    What further woe conspires against mine age?
  Prince.
 Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
    Till we can clear these ambiguities  
    And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
    And then will I be general of your woes
    And lead you even to death.

    Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
 I will be brief, for my short date of breath
    Is not so long as is a tedious tale.

    Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
    And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
 Then comes she to me
    And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
    To rid her from this second marriage,
    Or in my cell there would she kill herself.

    But when I came, some minute ere the time  
    Of her awaking, here untimely lay
    The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.

  Prince.
 We still have known thee for a holy man.
  
  Prince.
 Give me the letter.

    Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
    Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
  Boy.
 He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
    And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.

    Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
    And by-and-by my master drew on him;
    And then I ran away to call the watch.

    Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montage,
    See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
    That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
    And I, for winking at you, discords too,
    Have lost a brace of kinsmen.
 All are punish'd.

    This is my daughter's jointure, for no more  
    Can I demand.
 But I can give thee more;
    For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,
    That whiles Verona by that name is known,
    There shall no figure at such rate be set
    As that of true and faithful Juliet.

  Cap.
 As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie-
    Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
  Prince.
 A glooming peace this morning with it brings.

    The sun for sorrow will not show his head.

    Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
    Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;
    For never was a story of more woe
    Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>

1594





THE TAMING OF THE SHREW

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

    Persons in the Induction
  A LORD
  CHRISTOPHER SLY, a tinker
  HOSTESS
  PAGE
  PLAYERS
  HUNTSMEN
  SERVANTS

  BAPTISTA MINOLA, a gentleman of Padua
  VINCENTIO, a Merchant of Pisa
  LUCENTIO, son to Vincentio, in love with Bianca
  PETRUCHIO, a gentleman of Verona, a suitor to Katherina

    Suitors to Bianca
  GREMIO
  HORTENSIO

    Servants to Lucentio
  TRANIO  
  BIONDELLO

    Servants to Petruchio
  GRUMIO
  CURTIS

  A PEDANT

    Daughters to Baptista
  KATHERINA, the shrew
  BIANCA

  A WIDOW

  Tailor, Haberdasher, and Servants attending on Baptista and
    Petruchio

                             SCENE:
            Padua, and PETRUCHIO'S house in the country

SC_1
                      INDUCTION.

                  Before an alehouse on a heath

                      Enter HOSTESS and SLY

  SLY.
 I'll pheeze you, in faith.
 A pair of stocks, you rogue!
  SLY.
 Y'are a baggage; the Slys are no rogues.
 Sessa!
  HOSTESS.
 No, not a denier.

  HOSTESS.

 Exit
  SLY.

                                                  [Falls asleep]

       Wind horns.
 Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds;  
    Brach Merriman, the poor cur, is emboss'd;
    And couple Clowder with the deep-mouth'd brach.
 Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord;
    He cried upon it at the merest loss,
    And twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent;
    Trust me, I take him for the better dog.

  LORD.

    But sup them well, and look unto them all;
    To-morrow I intend to hunt again.
 I will, my lord.

  LORD.
 What's here? One dead, or drunk?
    See, doth he breathe?
  SECOND HUNTSMAN.
 He breathes, my lord.
 Were he not warm'd with ale,
    This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
 Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.

  SECOND HUNTSMAN.
 It would seem strange unto him when he wak'd.

    This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs;
    It will be pastime passing excellent,
    If it be husbanded with modesty.

  FIRST HUNTSMAN.
 My lord, I warrant you we will play our part
    As he shall think by our true diligence
    He is no less than what we say he is.

                          [SLY is carried out.
 Bid them come near.


                             Enter PLAYERS

    Now, fellows, you are welcome.
 We thank your honour.

  LORD.
 Do you intend to stay with me to-night?
  PLAYER.
 So please your lordship to accept our duty.

  LORD.
  
    I have forgot your name; but, sure, that part
    Was aptly fitted and naturally perform'd.

  PLAYER.
 'Tis very true; thou didst it excellent.

    Well, you are come to me in happy time,
    The rather for I have some sport in hand
    Wherein your cunning can assist me much.

    There is a lord will hear you play to-night;
    But I am doubtful of your modesties,
    Lest, over-eying of his odd behaviour,
    For yet his honour never heard a play,
    You break into some merry passion
    And so offend him; for I tell you, sirs,
    If you should smile, he grows impatient.

  PLAYER.
 Fear not, my lord; we can contain ourselves,
    Were he the veriest antic in the world.

  LORD.
 Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery,
    And give them friendly welcome every one;
    Let them want nothing that my house affords.

                                       Exit one with the PLAYERS  
    Sirrah, go you to Bartholomew my page,
    And see him dress'd in all suits like a lady;
    That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber,
    And call him 'madam,' do him obeisance.

    Tell him from me- as he will win my love-
    He bear himself with honourable action,
    Such as he hath observ'd in noble ladies
    Unto their lords, by them accomplished;
    Such duty to the drunkard let him do,
    With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,
    And say 'What is't your honour will command,
    Wherein your lady and your humble wife
    May show her duty and make known her love?'
    And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,
    And with declining head into his bosom,
    Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed
    To see her noble lord restor'd to health,
    Who for this seven years hath esteemed him
    No better than a poor and loathsome beggar.

    And if the boy have not a woman's gift  
    To rain a shower of commanded tears,
    An onion will do well for such a shift,
    Which, in a napkin being close convey'd,
    Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.

    See this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst;
    Anon I'll give thee more instructions.

    I'll in to counsel them; haply my presence
    May well abate the over-merry spleen,
    Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
             Exeunt

SC_2
                            SCENE II.

               A bedchamber in the LORD'S house

    Enter aloft SLY, with ATTENDANTS; some with apparel, basin
             and ewer, and other appurtenances; and LORD

  SLY.

  FIRST SERVANT.
 Will't please your lordship drink a cup of sack?
  SECOND SERVANT.
 What raiment will your honour wear to-day?
  SLY.
' I
    ne'er drank sack in my life; and if you give me any conserves,
    give me conserves of beef.

  LORD.
 Heaven cease this idle humour in your honour!
    O, that a mighty man of such descent,
    Of such possessions, and so high esteem,
    Should be infused with so foul a spirit!
  SLY.
 What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher Sly, old
    Sly's son of Burton Heath; by birth a pedlar, by education a  
    cardmaker, by transmutation a bear-herd, and now by present
    profession a tinker? Ask Marian Hacket, the fat ale-wife of
    Wincot, if she know me not; if she say I am not fourteen pence on
    the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lying'st knave in
    Christendom.
 What! I am not bestraught.
 O, this it is that makes your lady mourn!
  SECOND SERVANT.
 O, this is it that makes your servants droop!
  LORD.

    Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
    Each in his office ready at thy beck.
  
    Say thou wilt walk: we will bestrew the ground.
 Or wilt thou hunt?
    Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
    And fetch shall echoes from the hollow earth.

  FIRST SERVANT.
 Say thou wilt course; thy greyhounds are as swift
    As breathed stags; ay, fleeter than the roe.

  THIRD SERVANT.

  LORD.
 Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord.

    Thou hast a lady far more beautiful
    Than any woman in this waning age.

  FIRST SERVANT.
 Am I a lord and have I such a lady?
    Or do I dream? Or have I dream'd till now?
    I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak;
    I smell sweet savours, and I feel soft things.

    Well, bring our lady hither to our sight;
    And once again, a pot o' th' smallest ale.

  SLY.

    Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
 Ay, the woman's maid of the house.

  THIRD SERVANT.
 Now, Lord be thanked for my good amends!
  ALL.
 I thank thee; thou shalt not lose by it.

  PAGE.
 Marry, I fare well; for here is cheer enough.

    Where is my wife?
  PAGE.
 Are you my wife, and will not call me husband?
    My men should call me 'lord'; I am your goodman.

  PAGE.

  SLY.
 I know it well.
 What must I call her?
  LORD.
 Al'ce madam, or Joan madam?
  LORD.
 Madam, and nothing else; so lords call ladies.
 Madam wife, they say that I have dream'd
    And slept above some fifteen year or more.

  PAGE.
  
  SLY.

  PAGE.

    For your physicians have expressly charg'd,
    In peril to incur your former malady,
    That I should yet absent me from your bed.

    I hope this reason stands for my excuse.

  SLY.
 Ay, it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long.


                       Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER.
 Your honour's players, hearing your amendment,
    Are come to play a pleasant comedy;
    For so your doctors hold it very meet,
    Seeing too much sadness hath congeal'd your blood,  
    And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy.

    Therefore they thought it good you hear a play
    And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
    Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.

  SLY.
 Is not a comonty a
    Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?
  PAGE.
 No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.

  SLY.
 What, household stuff?
  PAGE.
 It is a kind of history.

  SLY.
 Well, we'll see't.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
>>



ACT I.
 SCENE I.
 Tranio, since for the great desire I had
    To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,
    I am arriv'd for fruitful Lombardy,
    The pleasant garden of great Italy,
    And by my father's love and leave am arm'd
    With his good will and thy good company,
    My trusty servant well approv'd in all,
    Here let us breathe, and haply institute
    A course of learning and ingenious studies.

  TRANIO.

    Only, good master, while we do admire
    This virtue and this moral discipline,
    Let's be no Stoics nor no stocks, I pray,
    Or so devote to Aristotle's checks
    As Ovid be an outcast quite abjur'd.

    Balk logic with acquaintance that you have,
    And practise rhetoric in your common talk;
    Music and poesy use to quicken you;
    The mathematics and the metaphysics,  
    Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.
 Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.

    If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,
    We could at once put us in readiness,
    And take a lodging fit to entertain
    Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.
 LUCENTIO and TRANIO stand by

    But stay awhile; what company is this?
  TRANIO.
 Master, some show to welcome us to town.

  BAPTISTA.
 Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
    For how I firmly am resolv'd you know;
    That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter
    Before I have a husband for the elder.

  GREMIO.
 She's too rough for me.

    There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?
  KATHERINA.
  [To BAPTISTA]  I pray you, sir, is it your will
    To make a stale of me amongst these mates?
  HORTENSIO.
 Mates, maid! How mean you that? No mates for you,
    Unless you were of gentler, milder mould.
 I' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear;
    Iwis it is not halfway to her heart;
    But if it were, doubt not her care should be
    To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool,
    And paint your face, and use you like a fool.

  HORTENSIO.
 From all such devils, good Lord deliver us!
  GREMIO.
 Husht, master! Here's some good pastime toward;
    That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
 Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
    What I have said- Bianca, get you in;
    And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
    For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.

  KATHERINA.
 A pretty peat! it is best
    Put finger in the eye, an she knew why.

  BIANCA.
 Sister, content you in my discontent.

    Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe;
    My books and instruments shall be my company,
    On them to look, and practise by myself.
 Hark, Tranio, thou mayst hear Minerva speak!
  HORTENSIO.
 Why will you mew her up,
    Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell,
    And make her bear the penance of her tongue?
  BAPTISTA.
 Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolv'd.

    Go in, Bianca.
                                   Exit BIANCA  
    And for I know she taketh most delight
    In music, instruments, and poetry,
    Schoolmasters will I keep within my house
    Fit to instruct her youth.
 If you, Hortensio,
    Or, Signior Gremio, you, know any such,
    Prefer them hither; for to cunning men
    I will be very kind, and liberal
    To mine own children in good bringing-up;
    And so, farewell.
                 Exit
  KATHERINA.
 There! Love is not so great,
    Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together, and fast it fairly
    out; our cake's dough on both sides.
  
  HORTENSIO.
 Though
    the nature of our quarrel yet never brook'd parle, know now, upon
    advice, it toucheth us both- that we may yet again have access to
    our fair mistress, and be happy rivals in Bianca's love- to
    labour and effect one thing specially.
 What's that, I pray?
  HORTENSIO.
 Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.

  GREMIO.

  HORTENSIO.
 Think'st thou, Hortensio, though her father
    be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?
  HORTENSIO.

  GREMIO.
 Faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten
    apples.
 How say you,
    Signior Gremio?
  GREMIO.
 I am agreed; and would I had given him the best horse in
    Padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her,
    and bed her, and rid the house of her! Come on.
 O Tranio, till I found it to be true,
    I never thought it possible or likely.

    But see! while idly I stood looking on,
    I found the effect of love in idleness;
    And now in plainness do confess to thee,
    That art to me as secret and as dear
    As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was-
    Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,
    If I achieve not this young modest girl.

  TRANIO.
'
  LUCENTIO.

  TRANIO.

    Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.

  TRANIO.
 Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move,
    And with her breath she did perfume the air;
    Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.

  TRANIO.
  
    I pray, awake, sir.
 If you love the maid,
    Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her.
 Thus it stands:
    Her elder sister is so curst and shrewd
    That, till the father rid his hands of her,
    Master, your love must live a maid at home;
    And therefore has he closely mew'd her up,
    Because she will not be annoy'd with suitors.

  LUCENTIO.
 Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he!
    But art thou not advis'd he took some care
    To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
  TRANIO.
 Ay, marry, am I, sir, and now 'tis plotted.

  LUCENTIO.

  LUCENTIO.
 Tell me thine first.
 You will be schoolmaster,
    And undertake the teaching of the maid-
    That's your device.

  LUCENTIO.
 It is.
 May it be done?
  TRANIO.
 Not possible; for who shall bear your part  
    And be in Padua here Vincentio's son;
    Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,
    Visit his countrymen, and banquet them?
  LUCENTIO.
 Basta, content thee, for I have it full.

    We have not yet been seen in any house,
    Nor can we be distinguish'd by our faces
    For man or master.
 Then it follows thus:
    Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,
    Keep house and port and servants, as I should;
    I will some other be- some Florentine,
    Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
 Tranio, at once
    Uncase thee; take my colour'd hat and cloak.

  TRANIO.
                [They exchange habits]
    In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
    And I am tied to be obedient-
    For so your father charg'd me at our parting:
    'Be serviceable to my son' quoth he,  
    Although I think 'twas in another sense-
    I am content to be Lucentio,
    Because so well I love Lucentio.

  LUCENTIO.
 Sirrah, where have you been?
  BIONDELLO.
 Where have I been! Nay, how now! where are you?
    Master, has my fellow Tranio stol'n your clothes?
    Or you stol'n his? or both? Pray, what's the news?
  LUCENTIO.
 Sirrah, come hither; 'tis no time to jest,
    And therefore frame your manners to the time.
  
    Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
    While I make way from hence to save my life.

    You understand me?
  BIONDELLO.
 I, sir? Ne'er a whit.

  LUCENTIO.
 And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth:
    Tranio is chang'd into Lucentio.
 The better for him; would I were so too!
  TRANIO.
 So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
    That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter.

    But, sirrah, not for my sake but your master's, I advise
    You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies.
 If thou ask me why-
    Sufficeth, my reasons are both good and weighty.
 My lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.
 Yes, by Saint Anne do I.
 A good matter, surely; comes there
    any more of it?
  PAGE.
 'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady
    Would 'twere done!                        [They sit and mark]




SCENE II.
 Before HORTENSIO'S house

Enter PETRUCHIO and his man GRUMIO

  PETRUCHIO.

    Here, sirrah Grumio, knock, I say.

 GRUMIO.
 Knock, sir! Whom should I knock?
    Is there any man has rebus'd your worship?
  PETRUCHIO.

  GRUMIO.
 Knock you here, sir? Why, sir, what am I, sir, that I
    should knock you here, sir?
  PETRUCHIO.
 Villain, I say, knock me at this gate,
    And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate.

  GRUMIO.
 My master is grown quarrelsome.
 I should knock you first,
    And then I know after who comes by the worst.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Will it not be?
    Faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock I'll ring it;
    I'll try how you can sol-fa, and sing it.

                                     [He wrings him by the ears]  
  GRUMIO.
 Help, masters, help! My master is mad.
 How now! what's the matter? My old friend Grumio and my
    good friend Petruchio! How do you all at Verona?
  PETRUCHIO.
 Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
    'Con tutto il cuore ben trovato' may I say.

  HORTENSIO.
 Alla nostra casa ben venuto,
    Molto honorato signor mio Petruchio.

    Rise, Grumio, rise; we will compound this quarrel.

  GRUMIO.
 Nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin.
 If this
    be not a lawful cause for me to leave his service- look you, sir:
    he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir.
 Well, was it fit
    for a servant to use his master so; being, perhaps, for aught I
    see, two and thirty, a pip out?
    Whom would to God I had well knock'd at first,
    Then had not Grumio come by the worst.

  PETRUCHIO.

  HORTENSIO.
 Petruchio, patience; I am Grumio's pledge;
    Why, this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you,
    Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.
 Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee
    And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favour'd wife?
    Thou'dst thank me but a little for my counsel,
    And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich,
    And very rich; but th'art too much my friend,
    And I'll not wish thee to her.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Signior Hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we
    Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
    One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife,
    As wealth is burden of my wooing dance,
    Be she as foul as was Florentius' love,
    As old as Sibyl, and as curst and shrewd
    As Socrates' Xanthippe or a worse-
    She moves me not, or not removes, at least,
    Affection's edge in me, were she as rough
    As are the swelling Adriatic seas.

    I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;
    If wealthily, then happily in Padua.

  HORTENSIO.
 Petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in,
    I will continue that I broach'd in jest.

    I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
    With wealth enough, and young and beauteous;
    Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman;
    Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
    Is- that she is intolerable curst,
    And shrewd and froward so beyond all measure
    That, were my state far worser than it is,
    I would not wed her for a mine of gold.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect.

  HORTENSIO.
 Her father is Baptista Minola,
    An affable and courteous gentleman;
    Her name is Katherina Minola,  
    Renown'd in Padua for her scolding tongue.

  PETRUCHIO.

    I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her;
    And therefore let me be thus bold with you
    To give you over at this first encounter,
    Unless you will accompany me thither.

  GRUMIO.
 I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts.
 O' my
    word, and she knew him as well as I do, she would think scolding
    would do little good upon him.
 She may perhaps call him half a
    score knaves or so.
 Why, that's nothing; and he begin once, he'll
    rail in his rope-tricks.
 I'll tell you what, sir: an she stand
    him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face, and so
    disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see
    withal than a cat.
 You know him not, sir.

  HORTENSIO.
 Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
    For in Baptista's keep my treasure is.

    He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
    His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca;
    And her withholds from me, and other more,  
    Suitors to her and rivals in my love;
    Supposing it a thing impossible-
    For those defects I have before rehears'd-
    That ever Katherina will be woo'd.

  GRUMIO.
 Katherine the curst!
    A title for a maid of all titles the worst.

  HORTENSIO.
 Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
    And offer me disguis'd in sober robes
    To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
    Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca;
    That so I may by this device at least
    Have leave and leisure to make love to her,
    And unsuspected court her by herself.
 Here's no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks, how the  
    young folks lay their heads together! Master, master, look about
    you.
 Who goes there, ha?
  HORTENSIO.

  GRUMIO.
 A proper stripling, and an amorous!
                                              [They stand aside]
  GREMIO.
 O, very well; I have perus'd the note.

    Hark you, sir; I'll have them very fairly bound-
    All books of love, see that at any hand;
    And see you read no other lectures to her.
 Take your paper too,
    And let me have them very well perfum'd;
    For she is sweeter than perfume itself
    To whom they go to.

  GREMIO.
 O this learning, what a thing it is!
  GRUMIO.
 And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.

    Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.

  GREMIO.
 Beloved of me- and that my deeds shall prove.
  
  GRUMIO.
 And that his bags shall prove.

  HORTENSIO.

    Listen to me, and if you speak me fair
    I'll tell you news indifferent good for either.

    Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
    Upon agreement from us to his liking,
    Will undertake to woo curst Katherine;
    Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.

  GREMIO.
 Born in Verona, old Antonio's son.

  GREMIO.
 Will I live?
  GRUMIO.
 Will he woo her? Ay, or I'll hang her.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Why came I hither but to that intent?
    Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
    Have I not in my time heard lions roar?
    Have I not heard the sea, puff'd up with winds,
    Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
    Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
    And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
    Have I not in a pitched battle heard
    Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
    And do you tell me of a woman's tongue,
    That gives not half so great a blow to hear
    As will a chestnut in a fariner's fire?
    Tush! tush! fear boys with bugs.

  GRUMIO.
 For he fears none.

  GREMIO.
 Hortensio, hark:
    This gentleman is happily arriv'd,
    My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
 I promis'd we would be contributors  
    And bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er.

  GREMIO.
 And so we will- provided that he win her.

  GRUMIO.


    Enter TRANIO, bravely apparelled as LUCENTIO, and BIONDELLO

  TRANIO.
 He that has the two fair daughters; is't he you mean?
  TRANIO.
 Even he, Biondello.

  GREMIO.

  TRANIO.
 Biondello, let's away.

  LUCENTIO.

  HORTENSIO.
 And if I be, sir, is it any offence?
  GREMIO.
  
  TRANIO.
 Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
    For me as for you?
  GREMIO.
 But so is not she.


  TRANIO.
 For what reason, I beseech you?
  GREMIO.
 For this reason, if you'll know,
    That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.

  TRANIO.
 Softly, my masters! If you be gentlemen,
    Do me this right- hear me with patience.

    Baptista is a noble gentleman,
    To whom my father is not all unknown,
    And, were his daughter fairer than she is,
    She may more suitors have, and me for one.

    Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;
    Then well one more may fair Bianca have;
    And so she shall: Lucentio shall make one,
    Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
 What, this gentleman will out-talk us all!
  LUCENTIO.
 Sir, give him head; I know he'll prove a jade.
  
  PETRUCHIO.
 Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
  HORTENSIO.
 No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two:
    The one as famous for a scolding tongue
    As is the other for beauteous modesty.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Sir, sir, the first's for me; let her go by.

  GREMIO.
 Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules,
    And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.
 Sir, understand you this of me, in sooth:
    The youngest daughter, whom you hearken for,
    Her father keeps from all access of suitors,
    And will not promise her to any man
    Until the elder sister first be wed.

    The younger then is free, and not before.

  TRANIO.
 If it be so, sir, that you are the man
    Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest;
    And if you break the ice, and do this feat,
    Achieve the elder, set the younger free
    For our access- whose hap shall be to have her  
    Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.

  TRANIO.

  GRUMIO, BIONDELLO.
 O excellent motion! Fellows, let's be gone.

    Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

Padua.
 BAPTISTA'S house

Enter KATHERINA and BIANCA

  BIANCA.
 Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
    To make a bondmaid and a slave of me-
    That I disdain; but for these other gawds,
    Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
    Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat;
    Or what you will command me will I do,
    So well I know my duty to my elders.
 Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tell
    Whom thou lov'st best.
 See thou dissemble not.
 Minion, thou liest.
 If you affect him, sister, here I swear
    I'll plead for you myself but you shall have him.

  KATHERINA.
 O then, belike, you fancy riches more:
    You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
  
  BIANCA.
 Is it for him you do envy me so?
    Nay, then you jest; and now I well perceive
    You have but jested with me all this while.
 Why, how now, dame! Whence grows this insolence?
    Bianca, stand aside- poor girl! she weeps.

                                                [He unbinds her]
    Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.

    For shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit,
    Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
    When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
  KATHERINA.
 Her silence flouts me, and I'll be reveng'd.

                                            [Flies after BIANCA]
  BAPTISTA.

                                                     Exit BIANCA
  KATHERINA.

    Talk not to me; I will go sit and weep,
    Till I can find occasion of revenge.
 Was ever gentleman thus griev'd as I?
    But who comes here?

        Enter GREMIO, with LUCENTIO in the habit of a mean man;
         PETRUCHIO, with HORTENSIO as a musician; and TRANIO,
    as LUCENTIO, with his boy, BIONDELLO, bearing a lute and books

  GREMIO.
 Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.
 Good morrow, neighbour Gremio.
 And you, good sir! Pray, have you not a daughter
    Call'd Katherina, fair and virtuous?
  BAPTISTA.

    And, for an entrance to my entertainment,
    I do present you with a man of mine,
                                          [Presenting HORTENSIO]
    Cunning in music and the mathematics,
    To instruct her fully in those sciences,
    Whereof I know she is not ignorant.

  PETRUCHIO.
 I see you do not mean to part with her;
    Or else you like not of my company.

    Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?
  PETRUCHIO.
 Petruchio is my name, Antonio's son,
    A man well known throughout all Italy.
 I know him well; you are welcome for his sake.

  GREMIO.
 Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray,
    Let us that are poor petitioners speak too.

    Bacare! you are marvellous forward.

  PETRUCHIO.
 O, pardon me, Signior Gremio! I would fain be doing.
 I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your wooing.
 To
    express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly
    beholding to you than any, freely give unto you this young
    scholar  [Presenting LUCENTIO]  that hath been long studying at
    Rheims; as cunning in Greek, Latin, and other languages, as the
    other in music and mathematics.
 Pray accept
    his service.
 A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio.
 Welcome, good Cambio.

    Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me
    In the preferment of the eldest sister.

    This liberty is all that I request-
    That, upon knowledge of my parentage,
    I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo,
    And free access and favour as the rest.

    And toward the education of your daughters
    I here bestow a simple instrument,
    And this small packet of Greek and Latin books.

    If you accept them, then their worth is great.
 Lucentio is your name? Of whence, I pray?
  TRANIO.
 Of Pisa, sir; son to Vincentio.
 You are very welcome, sir.

    Take you the lute, and you the set of books;
    You shall go see your pupils presently.
  
    Holla, within!

                         Enter a SERVANT

    Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
    To my daughters; and tell them both
    These are their tutors.


                Exit SERVANT leading HORTENSIO carrying the lute
                                     and LUCENTIO with the books

    We will go walk a little in the orchard,
    And then to dinner.
 You are passing welcome,
    And so I pray you all to think yourselves.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
    And every day I cannot come to woo.

    You knew my father well, and in him me,
    Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
    Which I have bettered rather than decreas'd.

    Then tell me, if I get your daughter's love,  
    What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
  BAPTISTA.
 After my death, the one half of my lands
    And, in possession, twenty thousand crowns.
 And for that dowry, I'll assure her of
    Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,
    In all my lands and leases whatsoever.

    Let specialities be therefore drawn between us,
    That covenants may be kept on either hand.

  BAPTISTA.
 Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd,
    That is, her love; for that is all in all.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Why, that is nothing; for I tell you, father,
    I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
    And where two raging fires meet together,
    They do consume the thing that feeds their fury.

    So I to her, and so she yields to me;
    For I am rough, and woo not like a babe.

  BAPTISTA.
 Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed
    But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words.
  
  PETRUCHIO.


             Re-enter HORTENSIO, with his head broke

  BAPTISTA.
 How now, my friend! Why dost thou look so pale?
  HORTENSIO.
 For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.

  BAPTISTA.
 What, will my daughter prove a good musician?
  HORTENSIO.
 Why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me.

    I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
    And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering,
    When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
    'Frets, call you these?' quoth she 'I'll fume with them.
'
    And with that word she struck me on the head,
    And through the instrument my pate made way;
    And there I stood amazed for a while,
    As on a pillory, looking through the lute,  
    While she did call me rascal fiddler
    And twangling Jack, with twenty such vile terms,
    As she had studied to misuse me so.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Well, go with me, and be not so discomfited;
    Proceed in practice with my younger daughter;
    She's apt to learn, and thankful for good turns.
 I pray you do.

    If she do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks,
    As though she bid me stay by her a week;
    If she deny to wed, I'll crave the day
    When I shall ask the banns, and when be married.


                        Enter KATHERINA

    Good morrow, Kate- for that's your name, I hear.

  KATHERINA.
 Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing:
    They call me Katherine that do talk of me.
 You lie, in faith, for you are call'd plain Kate,
    And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst;
    But, Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom,
    Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate,
    For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
    Take this of me, Kate of my consolation-
    Hearing thy mildness prais'd in every town,
    Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,  
    Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
    Myself am mov'd to woo thee for my wife.
 Mov'd! in good time! Let him that mov'd you hither
    Remove you hence.
 I knew you at the first
    You were a moveable.

  PETRUCHIO.
 A join'd-stool.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Thou hast hit it.
 Come, sit on me.

  KATHERINA.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Women are made to bear, and so are you.

  KATHERINA.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Alas, good Kate, I will not burden thee!
    For, knowing thee to be but young and light-
  KATHERINA.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Should be! should- buzz!
  KATHERINA.
 Well ta'en, and like a buzzard.
 O, slow-wing'd turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?
  KATHERINA.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Come, come, you wasp; i' faith, you are too angry.
  
  KATHERINA.
 If I be waspish, best beware my sting.

  PETRUCHIO.
 My remedy is then to pluck it out.
 In his tongue.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Whose tongue?
  KATHERINA.
 Yours, if you talk of tales; and so farewell.
                    [She strikes him]
  PETRUCHIO.

  KATHERINA.
 So may you lose your arms.

  PETRUCHIO.
 What is your crest- a coxcomb?
  PETRUCHIO.

  KATHERINA.
 No cock of mine: you crow too like a craven.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so sour.
 Why, here's no crab; and therefore look not sour.

  KATHERINA.
 There is, there is.

  KATHERINA.
 Had I a glass I would.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Well aim'd of such a young one.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.

  KATHERINA.

  PETRUCHIO.
 I care not.

  PETRUCHIO.

  KATHERINA.
 I chafe you, if I tarry; let me go.

  PETRUCHIO.

    'Twas told me you were rough, and coy, and sullen,
    And now I find report a very liar;
    For thou art pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
    But slow in speech, yet sweet as springtime flowers.
 Thou dost not halt.

  KATHERINA.
 Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Did ever Dian so become a grove
    As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
    O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate;
    And then let Kate be chaste, and Dian sportful!
  KATHERINA.
 Where did you study all this goodly speech?
  PETRUCHIO.
 It is extempore, from my mother wit.

  KATHERINA.
 A witty mother! witless else her son.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Am I not wise?
  KATHERINA.
 Yes, keep you warm.

  PETRUCHIO.


               Re-enter BAPTISTA, GREMIO, and TRANIO

    Here comes your father.
 How but well, sir? how but well?
    It were impossible I should speed amiss.
 Why, how now, daughter Katherine, in your dumps?
  KATHERINA.

  PETRUCHIO.

    If she be curst, it is for policy,
    For,she's not froward, but modest as the dove;
    She is not hot, but temperate as the morn;
    For patience she will prove a second Grissel,
    And Roman Lucrece for her chastity.

    And, to conclude, we have 'greed so well together
    That upon Sunday is the wedding-day.

  KATHERINA.
 I'll see thee hang'd on Sunday first.

  GREMIO.
 Hark, Petruchio; she says she'll see thee hang'd first.

  TRANIO.
 Be patient, gentlemen.
  
    I tell you 'tis incredible to believe.

    How much she loves me- O, the kindest Kate!
    She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
    She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
    That in a twink she won me to her love.

    O, you are novices! 'Tis a world to see,
    How tame, when men and women are alone,
    A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.

    Give me thy hand, Kate; I will unto Venice,
    To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.

    Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests;
    I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine.

    God send you joy, Petruchio! 'Tis a match.

  GREMIO, TRANIO.
 Amen, say we; we will be witnesses.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly?
  BAPTISTA.

  BAPTISTA.

    But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter:
    Now is the day we long have looked for;
    I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.

  TRANIO.

  TRANIO.
 Greybeard, thy love doth freeze.

  GREMIO.
 But thine doth fry.

    Skipper, stand back; 'tis age that nourisheth.

  TRANIO.
 But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.

  BAPTISTA.
 Content you, gentlemen; I will compound this strife.

    Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her?
  GREMIO.
 First, as you know, my house within the city
    Is richly furnished with plate and gold,
    Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
    My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
    In ivory coffers I have stuff'd my crowns;
    In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
    Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
    Fine linen, Turkey cushions boss'd with pearl,
    Valance of Venice gold in needle-work;
    Pewter and brass, and all things that belongs
    To house or housekeeping.
 Then at my farm
    I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,
    Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls,
    And all things answerable to this portion.

    Myself am struck in years, I must confess;
    And if I die to-morrow this is hers,
    If whilst I live she will be only mine.
 That 'only' came well in.
-
    That she shall have, besides an argosy
    That now is lying in Marseilles road.
 These I will assure her,
    And twice as much whate'er thou off'rest next.

  BAPTISTA.
 I must confess your offer is the best;
    And let your father make her the assurance,
    She is your own.

  GREMIO.
 And may not young men die as well as old?
  BAPTISTA.
 Adieu, good neighbour.
                   Exit BAPTISTA
    Now, I fear thee not.

    Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
    To give thee all, and in his waning age
    Set foot under thy table.
 Tut, a toy!  
    An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.
              Exit
  TRANIO.
 A vengeance on your crafty withered hide!
    Yet I have fac'd it with a card of ten.

    'Tis in my head to do my master good:
    I see no reason but suppos'd Lucentio
    Must get a father, call'd suppos'd Vincentio;
    And that's a wonder- fathers commonly
    Do get their children; but in this case of wooing
    A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.

 Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT III.
 BAPTISTA'S house

Enter LUCENTIO as CAMBIO, HORTENSIO as LICIO, and BIANCA

  LUCENTIO.
 Fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir.

    Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
    Her sister Katherine welcome'd you withal?
  HORTENSIO.

    Then give me leave to have prerogative;
    And when in music we have spent an hour,
    Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.

  LUCENTIO.
 Preposterous ass, that never read so far
    To know the cause why music was ordain'd!
    Was it not to refresh the mind of man
    After his studies or his usual pain?
    Then give me leave to read philosophy,
    And while I pause serve in your harmony.
 Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
 Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong
    To strive for that which resteth in my choice.
  
    I arn no breeching scholar in the schools,
    I'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times,
    But learn my lessons as I please myself.

    And to cut off all strife: here sit we down;
    Take you your instrument, play you the whiles!
    His lecture will be done ere you have tun'd.
 That will be never- tune your instrument.

  BIANCA.
 Construe them.
 'Hic ibat' as I told you before- 'Simois' I am Lucentio-
    'hic est' son unto Vincentio of Pisa- 'Sigeia tellus' disguised
    thus to get your love- 'Hic steterat' and that Lucentio that
    comes a-wooing- 'Priami' is my man Tranio- 'regia' bearing my
    port- 'celsa senis' that we might beguile the old pantaloon.

  BIANCA.
 Let's hear.
 O fie! the treble jars.
  
  LUCENTIO.
 Now let me see if I can construe it: 'Hic ibat Simois' I
    know you not- 'hic est Sigeia tellus' I trust you not- 'Hic
    steterat Priami' take heed he hear us not- 'regia' presume not-
   'celsa senis' despair not.
 Madam, 'tis now in tune.
 All but the bass.

    [Aside]  How fiery and forward our pedant is!
    Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love.

  BIANCA.
 In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.

  LUCENTIO.
 Mistrust it not- for sure, AEacides
    Was Ajax, call'd so from his grandfather.

  HORTENSIO.

  LUCENTIO.
 Are you so formal, sir? Well, I must wait,
    [Aside]  And watch withal; for, but I be deceiv'd,
    Our fine musician groweth amorous.

  HORTENSIO.
 Madam, before you touch the instrument
    To learn the order of my fingering,
    I must begin with rudiments of art,
    To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
    More pleasant, pithy, and effectual,
    Than hath been taught by any of my trade;
    And there it is in writing fairly drawn.

  BIANCA.
 Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.

  BIANCA.
'
    Call you this gamut? Tut, I like it not!
    Old fashions please me best; I am not so nice
    To change true rules for odd inventions.
 Mistress, your father prays you leave your books
    And help to dress your sister's chamber up.

  BIANCA.
 Farewell, sweet masters, both; I must be gone.
 Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.

 Exit
  HORTENSIO.
 But I have cause to pry into this pedant;
    Methinks he looks as though he were in love.
             Exit




SCENE II.
 Before BAPTISTA'So house

Enter BAPTISTA, GREMIO, TRANIO as LUCENTIO, KATHERINA, BIANCA,
LUCENTIO as CAMBIO, and ATTENDANTS

  BAPTISTA.

    What will be said? What mockery will it be
    To want the bridegroom when the priest attends
    To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage!
    What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
  KATHERINA.
 No shame but mine; I must, forsooth, be forc'd
    To give my hand, oppos'd against my heart,
    Unto a mad-brain rudesby, full of spleen,
    Who woo'd in haste and means to wed at leisure.

    Now must the world point at poor Katherine,
    And say 'Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
    If it would please him come and marry her!'
  TRANIO.

    Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
    Whatever fortune stays him from his word.

    Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;
    Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.


                           Enter BIONDELLO

    Master, master! News, and such old news as you never heard of!
  BAPTISTA.
 Why, is it not news to hear of Petruchio's coming?  
  BAPTISTA.
 Why, no, sir.

  BAPTISTA.
 What then?
  BIONDELLO.
 He is coming.

  BAPTISTA.
 When he stands where I am and sees you there.
 Why, Petruchio is coming- in a new hat and an old
    jerkin; a pair of old breeches thrice turn'd; a pair of boots
    that have been candle-cases, one buckled, another lac'd; an old
    rusty sword ta'en out of the town armoury, with a broken hilt,
    and chapeless; with two broken points; his horse hipp'd, with an
    old motley saddle and stirrups of no kindred; besides, possess'd
    with the glanders and like to mose in the chine, troubled with
    the lampass, infected with the fashions, full of windgalls, sped
    with spavins, rayed with the yellows, past cure of the fives,
    stark spoil'd with the staggers, begnawn with the bots, sway'd in
    the back and shoulder-shotten, near-legg'd before, and with a
    half-cheek'd bit, and a head-stall of sheep's leather which,
    being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been often  
    burst, and now repaired with knots; one girth six times piec'd,
    and a woman's crupper of velure, which hath two letters for her
    name fairly set down in studs, and here and there piec'd with
    pack-thread.

  BAPTISTA.
 Who comes with him?
  BIONDELLO.
 'Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;
    Yet oftentimes lie goes but mean-apparell'd.

  BAPTISTA.

  BIONDELLO.
 Why, sir, he comes not.

  BAPTISTA.
 Who? that Petruchio came?
  BAPTISTA.

  BAPTISTA.
 Why, that's all one.
  
  BIONDELLO.


                  Enter PETRUCHIO and GRUMIO

  PETRUCHIO.
 Come, where be these gallants? Who's at home?
  BAPTISTA.
 You are welcome, sir.

  PETRUCHIO.
 And yet I come not well.

  BAPTISTA.
 And yet you halt not.
 Were it better, I should rush in thus.
 Why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day.

    First were we sad, fearing you would not come;
    Now sadder, that you come so unprovided.

    Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
    An eye-sore to our solemn festival!
  TRANIO.
 And tell us what occasion of import
    Hath all so long detain'd you from your wife,
    And sent you hither so unlike yourself?
  PETRUCHIO.

    But where is Kate? I stay too long from her;
    The morning wears, 'tis time we were at church.
 See not your bride in these unreverent robes;
    Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.

  BAPTISTA.
 But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with words;  
    To me she's married, not unto my clothes.

    Could I repair what she will wear in me
    As I can change these poor accoutrements,
    'Twere well for Kate and better for myself.

    But what a fool am I to chat with you,
    When I should bid good-morrow to my bride
    And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
                                  Exeunt PETRUCHIO and PETRUCHIO
  TRANIO.
 He hath some meaning in his mad attire.

    We will persuade him, be it possible,
    To put on better ere he go to church.
 I'll after him and see the event of this.
 But to her love concerneth us to ad
    Her father's liking; which to bring to pass,
    As I before imparted to your worship,
    I am to get a man- whate'er he be
    It skills not much; we'll fit him to our turn-
    And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa,
    And make assurance here in Padua  
    Of greater sums than I have promised.

    So shall you quietly enjoy your hope
    And marry sweet Bianca with consent.

  TRANIO.
 That by degrees we mean to look into
    And watch our vantage in this business;
    We'll over-reach the greybeard, Gremio,
    The narrow-prying father, Minola,
    The quaint musician, amorous Licio-
    All for my master's sake, Lucentio.
 As willingly as e'er I came from school.
 A bridegroom, say you? 'Tis a groom indeed,
    A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
 Curster than she? Why, 'tis impossible.

  GREMIO.

  TRANIO.

  GREMIO.

    'Now take them up,' quoth he 'if any list.
'
  TRANIO.
 What said the wench, when he rose again?
  GREMIO.

    This done, he took the bride about the neck,
    And kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
    That at the parting all the church did echo.

    Such a mad marriage never was before.
 Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains.
 Is't possible you will away to-night?
  PETRUCHIO.
 I must away to-day before night come.

    Make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
    You would entreat me rather go than stay.

    For I must hence; and farewell to you all.
 Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.

  PETRUCHIO.
 It may not be.

  GREMIO.
 Let me entreat you.

  PETRUCHIO.
 I am content.
 I am content you shall entreat me stay;
    But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
  
  PETRUCHIO.
 Grumio, my horse.

  GRUMIO.
 Ay, sir, they be ready; the oats have eaten the horses.
 O Kate, content thee; prithee be not angry.

  GREMIO.
 They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.

    Obey the bride, you that attend on her;
    Go to the feast, revel and domineer,  
    Carouse full measure to her maidenhead;
    Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves.

    But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.

    Fear not, sweet wench; they shall not touch thee, Kate;
    I'll buckler thee against a million.

                         Exeunt PETRUCHIO, KATHERINA, and GRUMIO
  BAPTISTA.
 Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.

  GREMIO.
 Of all mad matches, never was the like.
 Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?  
  BIANCA.
 That, being mad herself, she's madly mated.

  GREMIO.
 I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.

  BAPTISTA.
 Neighbours and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants
    For to supply the places at the table,
    You know there wants no junkets at the feast.

    Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place;
    And let Bianca take her sister's room.

  TRANIO.

                                                          Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.

PETRUCHIO'S country house

Enter GRUMIO

  GRUMIO.
 Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and all
    foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? Was ever man so ray'd? Was
    ever man so weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and they are
    coming after to warm them.
 Now were not I a little pot and soon
    hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof
    of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere I should come by a fire to
    thaw me.
 But I with blowing the fire shall warm myself; for,
    considering the weather, a taller man than I will take cold.
 Who is that calls so coldly?
  GRUMIO.
 A fire, good Curtis.

  CURTIS.
 Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?  
  GRUMIO.
 O, ay, Curtis, ay; and therefore fire, fire; cast on no
    water.
 Is she so hot a shrew as she's reported?
  GRUMIO.

  CURTIS.
 Am I but three inches? Why, thy horn is a foot, and so long
    am I at the least.
 I prithee, good Grumio, tell me how goes the world?
  GRUMIO.
 A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine; and
    therefore fire.
 Do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master and
    mistress are almost frozen to death.
 There's fire ready; and therefore, good Grumio, the news?
  GRUMIO.
 Why, 'Jack boy! ho, boy!' and as much news as thou wilt.

  CURTIS.
 Come, you are so full of cony-catching!
  GRUMIO.
 Why, therefore, fire; for I have caught extreme cold.
  
    Where's the cook? Is supper ready, the house trimm'd, rushes
    strew'd, cobwebs swept, the serving-men in their new fustian,
    their white stockings, and every officer his wedding-garment on?
    Be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without, the carpets
    laid, and everything in order?
  CURTIS.

  CURTIS.
 Out of their saddles into the dirt; and thereby hangs a
    tale.
 Let's ha't, good Grumio.

  CURTIS.
 Here.
 There.
 This 'tis to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.
 Both of one horse?
  GRUMIO.
 Why, a horse.

  GRUMIO.
 Tell thou the tale.
 But hadst thou not cross'd me, thou
    shouldst have heard how her horse fell and she under her horse;
    thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place, how she was
    bemoil'd, how he left her with the horse upon her, how he beat me
    because her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt to
    pluck him off me, how he swore, how she pray'd that never pray'd
    before, how I cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was
    burst, how I lost my crupper- with many things of worthy memory,
    which now shall die in oblivion, and thou return unexperienc'd to
    thy grave.
 By this reck'ning he is more shrew than she.
 Ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find
    when he comes home.
 But what talk I of this? Call forth
    Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the
    rest; let their heads be sleekly comb'd, their blue coats brush'd
    and their garters of an indifferent knit; let them curtsy with
    their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my mastcr's  
    horse-tail till they kiss their hands.

  CURTIS.
 Do you hear, ho? You must meet my master, to countenance my
    mistress.

  GRUMIO.

  CURTIS.

  CURTIS.

  GRUMIO.


                     Enter four or five SERVINGMEN

  NATHANIEL.
 Welcome home, Grumio!
  PHILIP.
 How now, Grumio!
  JOSEPH.
 What, Grumio!
  NICHOLAS.
 Fellow Grumio!
  NATHANIEL.
 How now, old lad!
  GRUMIO.
 Welcome, you!- how now, you!- what, you!- fellow, you!- and
    thus much for greeting.
 Now, my spruce companions, is all ready,  
    and all things neat?
  NATHANIEL.
 All things is ready.


                     Enter PETRUCHIO and KATHERINA

  PETRUCHIO.
 Where be these knaves? What, no man at door
    To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse!
    Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?
  ALL SERVANTS.
 Here, sir; as foolish as I was before.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,  
    And Gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' th' heel;
    There was no link to colour Peter's hat,
    And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing;
    There were none fine but Adam, Ralph, and Gregory;
    The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly;
    Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Go, rascals, go and fetch my supper in.
 Soud, soud, soud, soud!

                 Re-enter SERVANTS with supper

    Why, when, I say? Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.

    Off with my boots, you rogues! you villains, when?

    [Sings]  It was the friar of orders grey,  
             As he forth walked on his way-

    Out, you rogue! you pluck my foot awry;
    Take that, and mend the plucking off the other.

    Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?
    Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.

    You whoreson villain! will you let it fall?    [Strikes him]
  KATHERINA.

  PETRUCHIO.

    Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?  
    What's this? Mutton?
  FIRST SERVANT.
 Ay.
 Who brought it?
  PETER.
 'Tis burnt; and so is all the meat.

    What dogs are these? Where is the rascal cook?
    How durst you villains bring it from the dresser
    And serve it thus to me that love it not?
    There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all;
                                [Throws the meat, etc.

                                                 Exeunt SERVANTS
  KATHERINA.
 I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet;
    The meat was well, if you were so contented.

  PETRUCHIO.
 I tell thee, Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away,
    And I expressly am forbid to touch it;
    For it engenders choler, planteth anger;
    And better 'twere that both of us did fast,
    Since, of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,  
    Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.

    Be patient; to-morrow 't shall be mended.

    And for this night we'll fast for company.

    Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
        Exeunt

                     Re-enter SERVANTS severally

  NATHANIEL.
 He kills her in her own humour.


                            Re-enter CURTIS

  GRUMIO.
 In her chamber.
 Making a sermon of continency to her,
    And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,
    Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak.

    And sits as one new risen from a dream.

    Away, away! for he is coming hither.
 Thus have I politicly begun my reign,
    And 'tis my hope to end successfully.

    And till she stoop she must not be full-gorg'd,
    For then she never looks upon her lure.

    She eat no meat to-day, nor none shall eat;
    Last night she slept not, nor to-night she shall not;
    As with the meat, some undeserved fault
    I'll find about the making of the bed;
    And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,
    This way the coverlet, another way the sheets;
    Ay, and amid this hurly I intend
    That all is done in reverend care of her-
    And, in conclusion, she shall watch all night;
    And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl  
    And with the clamour keep her still awake.

    This is a way to kill a wife with kindness,
    And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humour.

    He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
    Now let him speak; 'tis charity to show.
                Exit




SCENE II.

Padua.
 Before BAPTISTA'S house

Enter TRANIO as LUCENTIO, and HORTENSIO as LICIO

  TRANIO.
 Is 't possible, friend Licio, that Mistress Bianca
    Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
    I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
 Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
    Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.
 Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
  BIANCA.
 What, master, read you, First resolve me that.
'
  BIANCA.
 And may you prove, sir, master of your art!
  LUCENTIO.

                                                   [They retire]
  HORTENSIO.

  HORTENSIO.
 Mistake no more; I am not Licio.

    Know, sir, that I am call'd Hortensio.

  TRANIO.

  HORTENSIO.
 See, how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio,
    Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
    Never to woo her more, but do forswear her,
    As one unworthy all the former favours
    That I have fondly flatter'd her withal.
 And here I take the like unfeigned oath,  
    Never to marry with her though she would entreat;
    Fie on her! See how beastly she doth court him!
  HORTENSIO.
 Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
    For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,
    I will be married to a wealtlly widow
    Ere three days pass, which hath as long lov'd me
    As I have lov'd this proud disdainful haggard.

    And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.

    Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
    Shall win my love; and so I take my leave,
    In resolution as I swore before.
                        Exit
  TRANIO.
 Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
    As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
    Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
    And have forsworn you with Hortensio.

  BIANCA.
 Tranio, you jest; but have you both forsworn me?
  TRANIO.
 Mistress, we have.

  LUCENTIO.
 Then we are rid of Licio.

  TRANIO.
 I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
    That shall be woo'd and wedded in a day.
  
  BIANCA.
 God give him joy!
  TRANIO.

  BIANCA.
 He says so, Tranio.
 The taming-school! What, is there such a place?
  TRANIO.


                       Enter BIONDELLO

  BIONDELLO.
 O master, master, have watch'd so long
    That I am dog-weary; but at last I spied
    An ancient angel coming down the hill
    Will serve the turn.
 Master, a mercatante or a pedant,
    I know not what; but formal in apparel,
    In gait and countenance surely like a father.
 And what of him, Tranio?  
  TRANIO.
 If he be credulous and trust my tale,
    I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio,
    And give assurance to Baptista Minola
    As if he were the right Vincentio.

                                      Exeunt LUCENTIO and BIANCA

                         Enter a PEDANT

  PEDANT.
 And you, sir; you are welcome.

    Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
  PEDANT.
 Sir, at the farthest for a week or two;
    But then up farther, and as far as Rome;
    And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.
 What countryman, I pray?
  PEDANT.
 Of Mantua.

  TRANIO.
 My life, sir! How, I pray? For that goes hard.
 'Tis death for any one in Mantua
    To come to Padua.
 Know you not the cause?
    Your ships are stay'd at Venice; and the Duke,
    For private quarrel 'twixt your Duke and him,
    Hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly.

  TRANIO.
 Well, sir, to do you courtesy,
    This will I do, and this I will advise you-
    First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
  PEDANT.
 Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,
    Pisa renowned for grave citizens.

  TRANIO.
 Among them know you one Vincentio?
  PEDANT.
 I know him not, but I have heard of him,
    A merchant of incomparable wealth.

  TRANIO.
 He is my father, sir; and, sooth to say,
    In count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.
  
  BIONDELLO.
 To save your life in this extremity,
    This favour will I do you for his sake;
    And think it not the worst of all your fortunes
    That you are like to Sir Vincentio.

    You understand me, sir.
 So shall you stay
    Till you have done your business in the city.

    If this be court'sy, sir, accept of it.

  PEDANT.

  TRANIO.
 Then go with me to make the matter good.

    In all these circumstances I'll instruct you.
  
    Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.
              Exeunt




SCENE III.

PETRUCHIO'S house

Enter KATHERINA and GRUMIO

  GRUMIO.
 The more my wrong, the more his spite appears.

    I prithee go and get me some repast;
    I care not what, so it be wholesome food.

  GRUMIO.

  GRUMIO.
 I fear it is too choleric a meat.
 I like it well; good Grumio, fetch it me.

  GRUMIO.

  GRUMIO.

  KATHERINA.

  GRUMIO.
 Why then the mustard without the beef.

  KATHERINA.

  
               Enter PETRUCHIO, and HORTENSIO with meat

  PETRUCHIO.
 How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?
  HORTENSIO.
 Mistress, what cheer?
  KATHERINA.
 Faith, as cold as can be.

    Here, love, thou seest how diligent I am,
    To dress thy meat myself, and bring it thee.

    I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.

    Here, take away this dish.

  PETRUCHIO.

  KATHERINA.
 I thank you, sir.

  HORTENSIO.

    Come, Mistress Kate, I'll bear you company.

  PETRUCHIO.
  [Aside]  Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me.
 And now, my honey love,
    Will we return unto thy father's house
    And revel it as bravely as the best,
    With silken coats and caps, and golden rings,
    With ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things,
    With scarfs and fans and double change of brav'ry.

    With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry.


                        Enter HABERDASHER

    What news with you, sir?
  HABERDASHER.
 Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Why, this was moulded on a porringer;  
    A velvet dish.
 Fie, fie! 'tis lewd and filthy;
    Why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell,
    A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap.

    Away with it.
  [Aside]  That will not be in haste.
 Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak;
    And speak I will.

    My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
    Or else my heart, concealing it, will break;
    And rather than it shall, I will be free
    Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Love me or love me not, I like the cap;
    And it I will have, or I will have none.
    Exit HABERDASHER
  PETRUCHIO.
 Thy gown? Why, ay.

    O mercy, God! what masquing stuff is here?
    What's this? A sleeve? 'Tis like a demi-cannon.

    Why, what a devil's name, tailor, call'st thou this?
  HORTENSIO.

  TAILOR.

    Go, hop me over every kennel home,
    For you shall hop without my custom, sir.

    I'll none of it; hence! make your best of it.

  KATHERINA.
  
  PETRUCHIO.
 Why, true; he means to make a puppet of thee.

  TAILOR.
 She says your worship means to make a puppet of her.

  PETRUCHIO.
 O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread, thou
      thimble,
    Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail,
    Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou-
    Brav'd in mine own house with a skein of thread!
    Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant;
    Or I shall so bemete thee with thy yard
    As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv'st!
    I tell thee, I, that thou hast marr'd her gown.

    Grumio gave order how it should be done.
 I gave him no order; I gave him the stuff.

  TAILOR.
 But how did you desire it should be made?
  GRUMIO.

  TAILOR.
 But did you not request to have it cut?
  GRUMIO.
 Thou hast fac'd many things.
 I have.
  
  GRUMIO.
 Face not me.
 Thou hast brav'd many men; brave not me.
 I
    will neither be fac'd nor brav'd.
 I say unto thee, I bid thy
    master cut out the gown; but I did not bid him cut it to pieces.

    Ergo, thou liest.
 Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify.
 Read it.

  GRUMIO.
 Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in the
    skirts of it and beat me to death with a bottom of brown bread; I
    said a gown.

  PETRUCHIO.
 I confess two sleeves.
'
  PETRUCHIO.

  GRUMIO.
 Error i' th' bill, sir; error i' th' bill! I commanded the
    sleeves should be cut out, and sew'd up again; and that I'll  
    prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.
 This is true that I say; an I had thee in place where, thou
    shouldst know it.
 I am for thee straight; take thou the bill, give me thy
    meteyard, and spare not me.

  HORTENSIO.
 God-a-mercy, Grumio! Then he shall have no odds.

  PETRUCHIO.
 You are i' th' right, sir; 'tis for my mistress.

  PETRUCHIO.

  GRUMIO.
 Villain, not for thy life! Take up my mistress' gown for
    thy master's use!
  PETRUCHIO.
 Why, sir, what's your conceit in that?
  GRUMIO.
 O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for.
  [Aside]  Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid.

    Away, I say; commend me to thy master.
 Well, come, my Kate; we will unto your father's
    Even in these honest mean habiliments;
    Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor;
    For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich;
    And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
    So honour peereth in the meanest habit.

    What, is the jay more precious than the lark
    Because his feathers are more beautiful?
    Or is the adder better than the eel
    Because his painted skin contents the eye?
    O no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse
    For this poor furniture and mean array.

    Go call my men, and let us straight to him;
    And bring our horses unto Long-lane end;
    There will we mount, and thither walk on foot.
  
  KATHERINA.
 I dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two,
    And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.
 It shall be seven ere I go to horse.

    Look what I speak, or do, or think to do,
    You are still crossing it.
 Sirs, let 't alone;
    I will not go to-day; and ere I do,
    It shall be what o'clock I say it is.
 Why, so this gallant will command the sun.

Padua.
 Before BAPTISTA'S house

Enter TRANIO as LUCENTIO, and the PEDANT dressed like VINCENTIO

  TRANIO.
 Sir, this is the house; please it you that I call?
  PEDANT.

  TRANIO.
 'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,
    With such austerity as longeth to a father.
 I warrant you.
 But, sir, here comes your boy;
    'Twere good he were school'd.

  TRANIO.
 Sirrah Biondello,
    Now do your duty throughly, I advise you.

    Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.

  BIONDELLO.
 Tut, fear not me.
  
  TRANIO.
 But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
  BIONDELLO.
 I told him that your father was at Venice,
    And that you look'd for him this day in Padua.

  TRANIO.
 Th'art a tall fellow; hold thee that to drink.

    Here comes Baptista.


                 Enter BAPTISTA, and LUCENTIO as CAMBIO

    Signior Baptista, you are happily met.

    [To To the PEDANT] Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of;
    I pray you stand good father to me now;
    Give me Bianca for my patrimony.

  PEDANT.
 Soft, son!
    Sir, by your leave: having come to Padua
    To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
    Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
    Of love between your daughter and himself;
    And- for the good report I hear of you,
    And for the love he beareth to your daughter,
    And she to him- to stay him not too long,  
    I am content, in a good father's care,
    To have him match'd; and, if you please to like
    No worse than I, upon some agreement
    Me shall you find ready and willing
    With one consent to have her so bestow'd;
    For curious I cannot be with you,
    Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.

  BAPTISTA.
 Sir, pardon me in what I have to say.

    Your plainness and your shortness please me well.

  TRANIO.
 I thank you, sir.
 Where then do you know best
    We be affied, and such assurance ta'en
    As shall with either part's agreement stand?  
  BAPTISTA.
 Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know
    Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants;
    Besides, old Gremio is heark'ning still,
    And happily we might be interrupted.

  TRANIO.
 Then at my lodging, an it like you.

    Send for your daughter by your servant here;
    My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.

    The worst is this, that at so slender warning
    You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
 Cambio, hie you home,
    And bid Bianca make her ready straight;
    And, if you will, tell what hath happened-
    Lucentio's father is arriv'd in Padua,
    And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife.

                                                  Exit BIONDELLO
    Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?  
    Welcome! One mess is like to be your cheer;
    Come, sir; we will better it in Pisa.
 I follow you.

  LUCENTIO.
 You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
  LUCENTIO.
 Faith, nothing; but has left me here behind to expound
    the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.

  LUCENTIO.
 I pray thee moralize them.

  BIONDELLO.

  LUCENTIO.

  LUCENTIO.
 And then?
  BIONDELLO.
 I cannot tell, except they are busied about a
    counterfeit assurance.

  LUCENTIO.
 I knew a wench married in an afternoon
    as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit; and so
    may you, sir; and so adieu, sir.

 Exit
  LUCENTIO.
 I may and will, if she be so contented.

    She will be pleas'd; then wherefore should I doubt?
    Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her;
    It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.
              Exit




SCENE V.

A public road

Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHERINA, HORTENSIO, and SERVANTS

  PETRUCHIO.
 Come on, a God's name; once more toward our father's.

    Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
  KATHERINA.

  PETRUCHIO.

  KATHERINA.
 Now by my mother's son, and that's myself,
    It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
    Or ere I journey to your father's house.

    Go on and fetch our horses back again.

    Evermore cross'd and cross'd; nothing but cross'd!
  HORTENSIO.
 Say as he says, or we shall never go.

  KATHERINA.
 Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,
    And be it moon, or sun, or what you please;
    And if you please to call it a rush-candle,
    Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.

  PETRUCHIO.

  KATHERINA.
  
  PETRUCHIO.
 Nay, then you lie; it is the blessed sun.

  KATHERINA.
 Then, God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun;
    But sun it is not, when you say it is not;
    And the moon changes even as your mind.

    What you will have it nam'd, even that it is,
    And so it shall be so for Katherine.
 Petruchio, go thy ways, the field is won.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run,
    And not unluckily against the bias.

    But, soft! Company is coming here.
 'A will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.
 Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,
    Whither away, or where is thy abode?
    Happy the parents of so fair a child;
    Happier the man whom favourable stars
    Allots thee for his lovely bed-fellow.

  KATHERINA.

    Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Do, good old grandsire, and withal make known
    Which way thou travellest- if along with us,
    We shall be joyful of thy company.

  VINCENTIO.
 What is his name?
  VINCENTIO.
 Lucentio, gentle sir.
 Happily met; the happier for thy son.

    And now by law, as well as reverend age,
    I may entitle thee my loving father:
    The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
    Thy son by this hath married.
 Wonder not,
    Nor be not grieved- she is of good esteem,
    Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth;
    Beside, so qualified as may beseem
    The spouse of any noble gentleman.

  VINCENTIO.
 But is this true; or is it else your pleasure,
    Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest
    Upon the company you overtake?  
  HORTENSIO.
 Come, go along, and see the truth hereof;
    For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.

                                        Exeunt all but HORTENSIO
  HORTENSIO.
 Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.

    Have to my widow; and if she be froward,
    Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.
 SCENE I.

Padua.
 Before LUCENTIO'S house

Enter BIONDELLO, LUCENTIO, and BIANCA; GREMIO is out before

  BIONDELLO.

  BIONDELLO.
 Nay, faith, I'll see the church a your back, and then
    come back to my master's as soon as I can.

                          Exeunt LUCENTIO, BIANCA, and BIONDELLO
  GREMIO.


           Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHERINA, VINCENTIO, GRUMIO,
                          and ATTENDANTS

  PETRUCHIO.

  VINCENTIO.
 They're busy within; you were best knock louder.

                                [PEDANT looks out of the window]
  PEDANT.
 What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
  VINCENTIO.
 Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?
  PEDANT.

  VINCENTIO.
 What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make
    merry withal?
  PEDANT.
 Keep your hundred pounds to yourself; he shall need none so
    long as I live.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua.

  PEDANT.
 Thou liest: his father is come from Padua, and here looking
    out at the window.
 Ay, sir; so his mother says, if I may believe her.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Lay hands on the villain; I believe 'a means to cozen
    somebody in this city under my countenance.


                       Re-enter BIONDELLO

  BIONDELLO.
 I have seen them in the church together.
 God send 'em
    good shipping! But who is here? Mine old master, Vicentio! Now we
    are undone and brought to nothing.

  VINCENTIO.

  BIONDELLO.
 I hope I may choose, sir.
 Forgot you! No, sir.
 What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see thy
    master's father, Vincentio?
  BIONDELLO.

  VINCENTIO.
 Is't so, indeed?               [He beats BIONDELLO]
  BIONDELLO.
 Help, help, help! Here's a madman will murder me.
 Help, son! help, Signior Baptista!     Exit from above
  PETRUCHIO.
 What am I, sir? Nay, what are you, sir? O immortal gods!
    O fine villain! A silken doublet, a velvet hose, a scarlet cloak,
    and a copatain hat! O, I am undone! I am undone! While I play the
    good husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at the
    university.

  VINCENTIO.
 Thy father! O villain! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.
 You mistake, sir; you mistake, sir.
 His name! As if I knew not his name! I have brought him
    up ever since he was three years old, and his name is Tranio.

  PEDANT.

  VINCENTIO.
 Lucentio! O, he hath murd'red his master! Lay hold on
    him, I charge you, in the Duke's name.
 O, my son, my son! Tell
    me, thou villain, where is my son, Lucentio?
  TRANIO.


                      Enter one with an OFFICER

    Carry this mad knave to the gaol.

  VINCENTIO.
 Carry me to the gaol!
  GREMIO.
 Talk not, Signior Gremio; I say he shall go to prison.

  GREMIO.
 Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be cony-catch'd in
    this business; I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.

  PEDANT.
 Swear if thou dar'st.
  
  GREMIO.
 Nay, I dare not swear it.
 Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio.

  BAPTISTA.
 Thus strangers may be hal'd and abus'd.
 O monstrous
    villain!

          Re-enter BIONDELLO, with LUCENTIO and BIANCA

  BIONDELLO.
 O, we are spoil'd; and yonder he is! Deny him, forswear
    him, or else we are all undone.

         Exeunt BIONDELLO, TRANIO, and PEDANT, as fast as may be
  LUCENTIO.
  [Kneeling]  Pardon, sweet father.

  VINCENTIO.
 Lives my sweet son?
  BIANCA.
 Pardon, dear father.
 How hast thou offended?
    Where is Lucentio?
  LUCENTIO.
 Here's Lucentio,
    Right son to the right Vincentio,
    That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,  
    While counterfeit supposes blear'd thine eyne.

  LUCENTIO.
 Love wrought these miracles.

  VINCENTIO.
 I'll slit the villain's nose that would have sent me to
    the gaol.

  BAPTISTA.
  [To LUCENTIO]  But do you hear, sir? Have you married my
    daughter without asking my good will?
  VINCENTIO.
 And I to sound the depth of this knavery.
       Exit  
  LUCENTIO.
           Exit
  KATHERINA.

  PETRUCHIO.
 What, art thou asham'd of me?
  KATHERINA.
 No, sir; God forbid; but asham'd to kiss.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Why, then, let's home again.
 Nay, I will give thee a kiss; now pray thee, love, stay.

  PETRUCHIO.
 The SERVINGMEN with TRANIO,
BIONDELLO, and GRUMIO, bringing in a banquet

  LUCENTIO.
 At last, though long, our jarring notes agree;
    And time it is when raging war is done
    To smile at scapes and perils overblown.

    My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,
    While I with self-same kindness welcome thine.

    My banquet is to close our stomachs up
    After our great good cheer.
 Pray you, sit down;
    For now we sit to chat as well as eat.
 Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
  BAPTISTA.
 Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
 Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
 For both our sakes I would that word were true.

  PETRUCHIO.

  WIDOW.
 Then never trust me if I be afeard.

  WIDOW.
 He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Thus I conceive by him.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that?
  HORTENSIO.
 My widow says thus she conceives her tale.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Very well mended.
 Kiss him for that, good widow.

  KATHERINA.
 'He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
'
    I pray you tell me what you meant by that.

  KATHERINA.
 A very mean meaning.
  
  PETRUCHIO.
 To her, widow!
  PETRUCHIO.
 A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.

  HORTENSIO.
 That's my office.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Spoke like an officer- ha' to thee, lad.

                                           [Drinks to HORTENSIO]
  BAPTISTA.
 Head and butt! An hasty-witted body
    Would say your head and butt were head and horn.

  VINCENTIO.
 Ay, but not frighted me; therefore I'll sleep again.

  BIANCA.
 Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,
    And then pursue me as you draw your bow.

    You are welcome all.

                             Exeunt BIANCA, KATHERINA, and WIDOW
  PETRUCHIO.
 Here, Signior Tranio,
    This bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not;  
    Therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.
 O, sir, Lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound,
    Which runs himself, and catches for his master.

  PETRUCHIO.

  TRANIO.

  BAPTISTA.
 O, O, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.

  LUCENTIO.
 I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.

  HORTENSIO.
 Confess, confess; hath he not hit you here?
  PETRUCHIO.
 'A has a little gall'd me, I confess;
    And, as the jest did glance away from me,
    'Tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.
 Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,
    I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Well, I say no; and therefore, for assurance,
    Let's each one send unto his wife,
    And he whose wife is most obedient,
    To come at first when he doth send for her,
    Shall win the wager which we will propose.
 What's the wager?  
  LUCENTIO.
 Twenty crowns.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Twenty crowns?
    I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
    But twenty times so much upon my wife.
 A hundred then.

  PETRUCHIO.
 A match! 'tis done.
 Who shall begin?
  LUCENTIO.

    Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.

  BIONDELLO.
 I go.
                                          Exit
  BAPTISTA.

  LUCENTIO.
 I'll have no halves; I'll bear it all myself.


                          Re-enter BIONDELLO

    How now! what news?
  BIONDELLO.
 Sir, my mistress sends you word
    That she is busy and she cannot come.
 How! She's busy, and she cannot come!  
    Is that an answer?
  GREMIO.
 I hope better.

  HORTENSIO.
                      Exit BIONDELLO
  PETRUCHIO.
 O, ho! entreat her!
    Nay, then she must needs come.

  HORTENSIO.
 I am afraid, sir,
    Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.
 She says you have some goodly jest in hand:
    She will not come; she bids you come to her.

  PETRUCHIO.
                    Exit GRUMIO  
  HORTENSIO.

  PETRUCHIO.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Now, by my holidame, here comes Katherina!
  KATHERINA.
 They sit conferring by the parlour fire.

  PETRUCHIO.

    Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
 Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.

  HORTENSIO.
 I wonder what it bodes.
 Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,
    An awful rule, and right supremacy;
    And, to be short, what not that's sweet and happy.
  
  BAPTISTA.
 Now fair befall thee, good Petruchio!
    The wager thou hast won; and I will ad
    Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
    Another dowry to another daughter,
    For she is chang'd, as she had never been.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Nay, I will win my wager better yet,
    And show more sign of her obedience,
    Her new-built virtue and obedience.

    Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not:
    Off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.

                                            [KATHERINA complies]
  WIDOW.
 Fie! what a foolish duty call you this?
  LUCENTIO.
 I would your duty were as foolish too;  
    The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,
    Hath cost me a hundred crowns since supper-time!
  BIANCA.

  WIDOW.
 Come, come, you're mocking; we will have no telling.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Come on, I say; and first begin with her.
 She shall not.
 I say she shall.
 Fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind brow,
    And dart not scornful glances from those eyes
    To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor.

    It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,
    Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,
    And in no sense is meet or amiable.
 Why, there's a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.

  LUCENTIO.

  LUCENTIO.

  PETRUCHIO.
 Come, Kate, we'll to bed.

    We three are married, but you two are sped.

    [To LUCENTIO]  'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white;  
    And being a winner, God give you good night!
                                  Exeunt PETRUCHIO and KATHERINA
  HORTENSIO.
 Now go thy ways; thou hast tam'd a curst shrow.

  LUCENTIO.
 'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tam'd so.

                                                          Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>





1612

THE TEMPEST

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  ALONSO, King of Naples
  SEBASTIAN, his brother
  PROSPERO, the right Duke of Milan
  ANTONIO, his brother, the usurping Duke of Milan
  FERDINAND, son to the King of Naples
  GONZALO, an honest old counsellor

    Lords
  ADRIAN
  FRANCISCO
  CALIBAN, a savage and deformed slave
  TRINCULO, a jester
  STEPHANO, a drunken butler
  MASTER OF A SHIP
  BOATSWAIN
  MARINERS

  MIRANDA, daughter to Prospero

  ARIEL, an airy spirit  

    Spirits
  IRIS
  CERES
  JUNO
  NYMPHS
  REAPERS
  Other Spirits attending on Prospero




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
 SCENE 1

On a ship at sea; a tempestuous noise of thunder and lightning heard

Enter a SHIPMASTER and a BOATSWAIN

  MASTER.
               Exit

                       Enter MARINERS

  BOATSWAIN.
 Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts!
    yare, yare! Take in the topsail.
 Blow till thou burst thy wind, if room enough.


          Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, FERDINAND
                     GONZALO, and OTHERS

  ALONSO.
 Good boatswain, have care.
 Where's the master?  
    Play the men.
 I pray now, keep below.

  ANTONIO.
 Where is the master, boson?
  BOATSWAIN.
 Do you not hear him? You mar our labour;
    keep your cabins; you do assist the storm.
 Nay, good, be patient.
 When the sea is.
 Hence! What cares these
    roarers for the name of king? To cabin! silence! Trouble
    us not.
 Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.

  BOATSWAIN.
 None that I more love than myself.
 You are
    counsellor; if you can command these elements to
    silence, and work the peace of the present, we will not
    hand a rope more.
-Cheerly, good hearts!-Out of our way, I say.
 Methinks
    he hath no drowning mark upon him; his complexion is  
    perfect gallows.
                                    Exeunt

                     Re-enter BOATSWAIN

  BOATSWAIN.
 Yare, lower, lower!
    Bring her to try wi' th' maincourse.
  [A cry within]  A
    plague upon this howling! They are louder than the
    weather or our office.
 Work you, then.

  ANTONIO.
 Hang, cur; hang, you whoreson, insolent noisemaker;  
    we are less afraid to be drown'd than thou art.

  BOATSWAIN.
 Lay her a-hold, a-hold; set her two courses; off
    to sea again; lay her off.
 The King and Prince at prayers!
    Let's assist them,
    For our case is as theirs.

  SEBASTIAN.
 I am out of patience.
 We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards.

    This wide-chopp'd rascal-would thou mightst lie drowning
    The washing of ten tides!
  GONZALO.

    [A confused noise within: Mercy on us!
    We split, we split! Farewell, my wife and children!
    Farewell, brother! We split, we split, we split!]
  ANTONIO.
 Let's all sink wi' th' King.

                                    Exeunt ANTONIO and SEBASTIAN
  GONZALO.
 Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for
    an acre of barren ground-long heath, brown furze, any
    thing.
 The wills above be done, but I would fain die
    dry death.
                                            Exeunt




SCENE 2

The Island.

    The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch,
    But that the sea, mounting to th' welkin's cheek,
    Dashes the fire out.
 O, I have suffered
    With those that I saw suffer! A brave vessel,
    Who had no doubt some noble creature in her,
    Dash'd all to pieces! O, the cry did knock
    Against my very heart! Poor souls, they perish'd.

    Had I been any god of power, I would
    Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere
    It should the good ship so have swallow'd and
    The fraughting souls within her.

  PROSPERO.
 Be conected;
    No more amazement; tell your piteous heart
    There's no harm done.

  MIRANDA.

    I have done nothing but in care of thee,
    Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter, who
    Art ignorant of what thou art, nought knowing
    Of whence I am, nor that I am more better
    Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell,
    And thy no greater father.

  MIRANDA.
 More to know
    Did never meddle with my thoughts.

  PROSPERO.
 'Tis time
    I should inform thee farther.
 Lend thy hand,
    And pluck my magic garment from me.
 Wipe thou thine eyes; have comfort.

    The direful spectacle of the wreck, which touch'd
    The very virtue of compassion in thee,
    I have with such provision in mine art
    So safely ordered that there is no soul-
    No, not so much perdition as an hair
    Betid to any creature in the vessel  
    Which thou heard'st cry, which thou saw'st sink.
 The hour's now come;
    The very minute bids thee ope thine ear.

  MIRANDA.
 Certainly, sir, I can.

  PROSPERO.
 By what? By any other house, or person?
    Of any thing the image, tell me, that
    Hath kept with thy remembrance?
  MIRANDA.
 'Tis far off,
    And rather like a dream than an assurance
    That my remembrance warrants.
 Had I not
    Four, or five, women once, that tended me?  
  PROSPERO.
 Thou hadst, and more, Miranda.
 But how is it
    That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else
    In the dark backward and abysm of time?
    If thou rememb'rest aught, ere thou cam'st here,
    How thou cam'st here thou mayst.
 Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,
    Thy father was the Duke of Milan, and
    A prince of power.

  MIRANDA.
 Sir, are not you my father?
  PROSPERO.

  MIRANDA.
 O, the heavens!
    What foul play had we that we came from thence?
    Or blessed was't we did?
  PROSPERO.
 Both, both, my girl.
  
  MIRANDA.
 O, my heart bleeds
    To think o' th' teen that I have turn'd you to,
    Which is from my remembrance.
 Please you, farther.
 My brother and thy uncle, call'd Antonio-
    I pray thee, mark me that a brother should
    Be so perfidious.
 He, whom next thyself
    Of all the world I lov'd, and to him put
    The manage of my state; as at that time
    Through all the signories it was the first,
    And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed
    In dignity, and for the liberal arts
    Without a parallel, those being all my study-
    The government I cast upon my brother
    And to my state grew stranger, being transported
    And rapt in secret studies.
 Thy false uncle-
    Dost thou attend me?
  MIRANDA.
 Sir, most heedfully.

  MIRANDA.
 O, good sir, I do!
  PROSPERO.
 Hence his ambition growing-
    Dost thou hear?
  MIRANDA.
 Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.

  PROSPERO.
 To have no screen between this part he play'd
    And him he play'd it for, he needs will be
    Absolute Milan.
 Me, poor man-my library
    Was dukedom large enough-of temporal royalties
    He thinks me now incapable; confederates,
    So dry he was for sway, wi' th' King of Naples,
    To give him annual tribute, do him homage,
    Subject his coronet to his crown, and bend
    The dukedom, yet unbow'd-alas, poor Milan!-
    To most ignoble stooping.

  MIRANDA.
 O the heavens!
  PROSPERO.
 Mark his condition, and th' event, then tell me
    If this might be a brother.
  
  MIRANDA.
 Now the condition:
    This King of Naples, being an enemy
    To me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit;
    Which was, that he, in lieu o' th' premises,
    Of homage, and I know not how much tribute,
    Should presently extirpate me and mine
    Out of the dukedom, and confer fair Milan
    With all the honours on my brother.

  MIRANDA.
 Alack, for pity!
    I, not rememb'ring how I cried out then,
    Will cry it o'er again; it is a hint
    That wrings mine eyes to't.
  
  PROSPERO.
 Well demanded, wench!
    My tale provokes that question.
 Dear, they durst not,
    So dear the love my people bore me; nor set
    A mark so bloody on the business; but
    With colours fairer painted their foul ends.

    In few, they hurried us aboard a bark;
    Bore us some leagues to sea, where they prepared
    A rotten carcass of a butt, not rigg'd,
    Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats
    Instinctively have quit it.
 O, a cherubin
    Thou wast that did preserve me! Thou didst smile,
    Infused with a fortitude from heaven,
    When I have deck'd the sea with drops full salt,
    Under my burden groan'd; which rais'd in me
    An undergoing stomach, to bear up
    Against what should ensue.

  MIRANDA.
 How came we ashore?
  PROSPERO.

    Some food we had and some fresh water that
    A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo,
    Out of his charity, who being then appointed
    Master of this design, did give us, with
    Rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries,
    Which since have steaded much; so, of his gentleness,
    Knowing I lov'd my books, he furnish'd me
    From mine own library with volumes that
    I prize above my dukedom.

  MIRANDA.
 Would I might  
    But ever see that man!
  PROSPERO.

    Here in this island we arriv'd; and here
    Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
    Than other princess' can, that have more time
    For vainer hours, and tutors not so careful.
 Know thus far forth:
    By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune,
    Now my dear lady, hath mine enemies
    Brought to this shore; and by my prescience
    I find my zenith doth depend upon
    A most auspicious star, whose influence
    If now I court not, but omit, my fortunes
    Will ever after droop.
 I know thou canst not choose.

    Approach, my Ariel.
 Come.


                        Enter ARIEL

  ARIEL.
 All hail, great master! grave sir, hail! I come
    To answer thy best pleasure; be't to fly,
    To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
    On the curl'd clouds.
 To thy strong bidding task
    Ariel and all his quality.

  PROSPERO.
 Hast thou, spirit,
    Perform'd to point the tempest that I bade thee?
  ARIEL.
 To every article.

  PROSPERO.
 All but mariners
    Plung'd in the foaming brine, and quit the vessel,
    Then all afire with me; the King's son, Ferdinand,
    With hair up-staring-then like reeds, not hair-
    Was the first man that leapt; cried 'Hell is empty,
    And all the devils are here.
'
  PROSPERO.
 Why, that's my spirit!
    But was not this nigh shore?
  ARIEL.
 But are they, Ariel, safe?
  ARIEL.

    The King's son have I landed by himself,
    Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs
    In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting,
    His arms in this sad knot.

  PROSPERO.

  PROSPERO.
 Ariel, thy charge
    Exactly is perform'd; but there's more work.
 Past the mid season.

  PROSPERO.
 The time 'twixt six and now
    Must by us both be spent most preciously.

  PROSPERO.

  PROSPERO.
 Before the time be out? No more!
  ARIEL.
 I prithee,
    Remember I have done thee worthy service,
    Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings, serv'd  
    Without or grudge or grumblings.

  PROSPERO.
 No.

  ARIEL.

  PROSPERO.
 Thou liest, malignant thing.
 Hast thou forgot
    The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy
    Was grown into a hoop? Hast thou forgot her?
  ARIEL.
 No, sir.

  PROSPERO.
 Thou hast.
 Is not this true?
  ARIEL.

  PROSPERO.
 This blue-ey'd hag was hither brought with child,
    And here was left by th'sailors.
 Then was this island-
    Save for the son that she did litter here,  
    A freckl'd whelp, hag-born-not honour'd with
    A human shape.

  ARIEL.
 Yes, Caliban her son.
 Dull thing, I say so; he, that Caliban
    Whom now I keep in service.
 Thou best know'st
    What torment I did find thee in; thy groans
    Did make wolves howl, and penetrate the breasts
    Of ever-angry bears; it was a torment
    To lay upon the damn'd, which Sycorax
    Could not again undo.

  PROSPERO.

  ARIEL.

  PROSPERO.
 Do so; and after two days  
    I will discharge thee.
 What shall I do?
  PROSPERO.
 Go take this shape,
    And hither come in 't.
 Go, hence with diligence!
                                                      Exit ARIEL
    Awake, dear heart, awake; thou hast slept well;
    Awake.

  MIRANDA.
 The strangeness of your story put
    Heaviness in me.

  PROSPERO.
 Come on,
    We'll visit Caliban, my slave, who never
    Yields us kind answer.
 'Tis a villain, sir,
    I do not love to look on.
 But as 'tis,
    We cannot miss him: he does make our fire,
    Fetch in our wood, and serves in offices  
    That profit us.
 What ho! slave! Caliban!
    Thou earth, thou! Speak.

  PROSPERO.
 Come forth, I say; there's other business for thee.

    Come, thou tortoise! when?

             Re-enter ARIEL like a water-nymph

    Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,
    Hark in thine ear.
 As wicked dew as e'er my mother brush'd
    With raven's feather from unwholesome fen
    Drop on you both! A south-west blow on ye
    And blister you all o'er!  
  PROSPERO.
 I must eat my dinner.
 When thou cam'st first,
    Thou strok'st me and made much of me, wouldst give me
    Water with berries in't, and teach me how
    To name the bigger light, and how the less,
    That burn by day and night; and then I lov'd thee,
    And show'd thee all the qualities o' th' isle,
    The fresh springs, brine-pits, barren place and fertile.

  PROSPERO.

  CALIBAN.

    Thou didst prevent me; I had peopl'd else
    This isle with Calibans.

  MIRANDA.

  CALIBAN.
 The red plague rid you
    For learning me your language!
  PROSPERO.
 Hag-seed, hence!
    Fetch us in fuel.
 And be quick, thou 'rt best,
    To answer other business.
 Shrug'st thou, malice?
    If thou neglect'st, or dost unwillingly
    What I command, I'll rack thee with old cramps,
    Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar,
    That beasts shall tremble at thy din.

    [Aside]  I must obey.

  PROSPERO.
 So, slave; hence!                       Exit CALIBAN

         Re-enter ARIEL invisible, playing ad singing;
                     FERDINAND following
  
                          ARIEL'S SONG.

            Come unto these yellow sands,
              And then take hands;
            Curtsied when you have and kiss'd,
              The wild waves whist,
            Foot it featly here and there,
            And, sweet sprites, the burden bear.

              Hark, hark!
            [Burden dispersedly: Bow-wow.
]
              The watch dogs bark.

            [Burden dispersedly: Bow-wow.
]
              Hark, hark! I hear
            The strain of strutting chanticleer
              Cry, Cock-a-diddle-dow.

  FERDINAND.

    No, it begins again.


                   ARIEL'S SONG
         Full fathom five thy father lies;
           Of his bones are coral made;
         Those are pearls that were his eyes;
           Nothing of him that doth fade
         But doth suffer a sea-change
         Into something rich and strange.
]
         Hark! now I hear them-Ding-dong bell.


  FERDINAND.

    This is no mortal business, nor no sound
    That the earth owes.
 I hear it now above me.

  PROSPERO.

  MIRANDA.
 But 'tis a spirit.

  PROSPERO.
 No, wench; it eats and sleeps and hath such senses
    As we have, such.
 He hath lost his fellows,
    And strays about to find 'em.

  MIRANDA.

  PROSPERO.
  [Aside]  It goes on, I see,
    As my soul prompts it.
 Spirit, fine spirit! I'll free thee
    Within two days for this.

  FERDINAND.
 Most sure, the goddess
    On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my pray'r
    May know if you remain upon this island;
    And that you will some good instruction give  
    How I may bear me here.
 No wonder, sir;
    But certainly a maid.

  FERDINAND.
 A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
    To hear thee speak of Naples.
 Myself am Naples,
    Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld
    The King my father wreck'd.

  MIRANDA.
 Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of Milan
    And his brave son being twain.
  [Aside]  The Duke of Milan
    And his more braver daughter could control thee,  
    If now 'twere fit to do't.
 At the first sight
    They have chang'd eyes.
 Delicate Ariel,
    I'll set thee free for this.
  [To FERDINAND]  A word, good
    sir;
    I fear you have done yourself some wrong; a word.

  MIRANDA.
 Why speaks my father so ungently? This
    Is the third man that e'er I saw; the first
    That e'er I sigh'd for.
 Pity move my father
    To be inclin'd my way!
  FERDINAND.

  PROSPERO.
  [To FERDINAND]  One word more; I
    charge thee
    That thou attend me; thou dost here usurp
    The name thou ow'st not; and hast put thyself  
    Upon this island as a spy, to win it
    From me, the lord on't.

  FERDINAND.
 No, as I am a man.
 There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple.

    If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
    Good things will strive to dwell with't.

  PROSPERO.

    Speak not you for him; he's a traitor.

    Sea-water shalt thou drink; thy food shall be
    The fresh-brook mussels, wither'd roots, and husks
    Wherein the acorn cradled.

  FERDINAND.
 No;
    I will resist such entertainment till
    Mine enemy has more power.

                          [He draws, and is charmed from moving]
  MIRANDA.
 O dear father,
    Make not too rash a trial of him, for
    He's gentle, and not fearful.
 Come from thy ward;
    For I can here disarm thee with this stick
    And make thy weapon drop.

  MIRANDA.
 Beseech you, father!
  PROSPERO.

  MIRANDA.
 Sir, have pity;
    I'll be his surety.
 Silence! One word more
    Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee.
 My affections
    Are then most humble; I have no ambition
    To see a goodlier man.

  PROSPERO.

    My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
    The wreck of all my friends, nor this man's threats
    To whom I am subdu'd, are but light to me,
    Might I but through my prison once a day
    Behold this maid.
  [Aside]  It works.
  [To FERDINAND]  Come on.

  MIRANDA.
 Be of comfort;
    My father's of a better nature, sir,
    Than he appears by speech; this is unwonted
    Which now came from him.

  PROSPERO.
  [To ARIEL]  Thou shalt be as free  
    As mountain winds; but then exactly do
    All points of my command.
  [To FERDINAND]  Come, follow.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.
 Our hint of woe
    Is common; every day, some sailor's wife,
    The masters of some merchant, and the merchant,
    Have just our theme of woe; but for the miracle,
    I mean our preservation, few in millions
    Can speak like us.

  ALONSO.
 Prithee, peace.

  ANTONIO.
 The visitor will not give him o'er so.
 Look, he's winding up the watch of his wit; by
    and by it will strike.

  GONZALO.
 One-Tell.
 Dolour comes to him, indeed; you have spoken
    truer than you purpos'd.

  GONZALO.
 Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!
  ALONSO.
 I prithee, spare.

  GONZALO.
 He will be talking.

  ANTONIO.
 Which, of he or Adrian, for a good wager, first
    begins to crow?
  SEBASTIAN.
 The old cock.

  ANTONIO.
 The cock'rel.

  SEBASTIAN.
 The wager?
  ANTONIO.
 A laughter.

  SEBASTIAN.
 A match!
  ADRIAN.
 Though this island seem to be desert-  
  ANTONIO.
 So, you're paid.

  ADRIAN.
 Uninhabitable, and almost inaccessible-
  SEBASTIAN.

  ADRIAN.
 It must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate
    temperance.

  ANTONIO.

  SEBASTIAN.

  SEBASTIAN.

  ANTONIO.

  GONZALO.
 Here is everything advantageous to life.

  ANTONIO.
 Of that there's none, or little.
 With an eye of green in't.
  
  ANTONIO.
 He misses not much.

  SEBASTIAN.
 No; he doth but mistake the truth totally.

  GONZALO.
 But the rarity of it is, which is indeed almost
    beyond credit-
  SEBASTIAN.
 As many vouch'd rarities are.

  GONZALO.

  ANTONIO.
 If but one of his pockets could speak, would it
    not say he lies?
  SEBASTIAN.
 Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report.

  GONZALO.
 Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when
    we put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of the
    King's fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.
 'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in
    our return.
 Tunis was never grac'd before with such a paragon
    to their queen.

  GONZALO.
 Not since widow Dido's time.
  
  ANTONIO.
 What if he had said 'widower Aeneas' too?
    Good Lord, how you take it!
  ADRIAN.
 'Widow Dido' said you? You make me study of
    that.

  GONZALO.
 This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.

  ADRIAN.
 Carthage?
  GONZALO.

  SEBASTIAN.
 He hath rais'd the wall, and houses too.
 What impossible matter will he make easy next?
  SEBASTIAN.
 And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring
    forth more islands.

  GONZALO.
 Ay.
 Why, in good time.

  GONZALO.
 And the rarest that e'er came there.

  SEBASTIAN.
 Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.

  GONZALO.
 Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I
    wore it? I mean, in a sort.
 You cram these words into mine ears against
    The stomach of my sense.
 Would I had never
    Married my daughter there; for, coming thence,
    My son is lost; and, in my rate, she too,
    Who is so far from Italy removed
    I ne'er again shall see her.
 O thou mine heir
    Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
    Hath made his meal on thee?
  FRANCISCO.
 Sir, he may live;
    I saw him beat the surges under him,
    And ride upon their backs; he trod the water,
    Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted  
    The surge most swoln that met him; his bold head
    'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oared
    Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
    To th' shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bowed,
    As stooping to relieve him.
 I not doubt
    He came alive to land.

  SEBASTIAN.

  ALONSO.
 Prithee, peace.

  SEBASTIAN.
 You were kneel'd to, and importun'd otherwise
    By all of us; and the fair soul herself
    Weigh'd between loathness and obedience at
    Which end o' th' beam should bow.
 Milan and Naples have
    Moe widows in them of this business' making,
    Than we bring men to comfort them;  
    The fault's your own.
 So is the dear'st o' th' loss.
 My lord Sebastian,
    The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness,
    And time to speak it in; you rub the sore,
    When you should bring the plaster.

  SEBASTIAN.
 Very well.
 And most chirurgeonly.

  GONZALO.
 It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
    When you are cloudy.
 Foul weather?
  ANTONIO.
 Very foul.

  GONZALO.
 Had I plantation of this isle, my lord-
  ANTONIO.
 He'd sow 't with nettle-seed.

  GONZALO.
 Yet he would be king on't.

  ANTONIO.
 The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the
    beginning.
 Treason, felony,
    Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,
    Would I not have; but nature should bring forth,
    Of it own kind, all foison, all abundance,
    To feed my innocent people.

  SEBASTIAN.

  GONZALO.
 I would with such perfection govern, sir,
    T' excel the golden age.
  
  SEBASTIAN.
 Save his Majesty!
  ANTONIO.
 Long live Gonzalo!
  GONZALO.
 And-do you mark me, sir?
  ALONSO.
 Prithee, no more; thou dost talk nothing to me.

  ANTONIO.
 'Twas you we laugh'd at.

  GONZALO.
 What a blow was there given!
  SEBASTIAN.
 You are gentlemen of brave mettle; you would
    lift the moon out of her sphere, if she would continue
    in it five weeks without changing.
 Nay, good my lord, be not angry.

  GONZALO.
 No, I warrant you; I will not adventure my
    discretion so weakly.
 Will you laugh me asleep, for I am
    very heavy?
  ANTONIO.

  SEBASTIAN.

  ANTONIO.
 We two, my lord,
    Will guard your person while you take your rest,
    And watch your safety.

  ALONSO.
 Thank you-wondrous heavy!
                                     [ALONSO sleeps.
 Exit ARIEL]
  SEBASTIAN.

  ANTONIO.

    They fell together all, as by consent;
    They dropp'd, as by a thunder-stroke.

  SEBASTIAN.
 What, art thou waking?
  ANTONIO.
 What is it thou didst say?
    This is a strange repose, to be asleep
    With eyes wide open; standing, speaking, moving,
    And yet so fast asleep.
 Thou dost snore distinctly;
    There's meaning in thy snores.

  ANTONIO.

  SEBASTIAN.
 I'll teach you how to flow.

  SEBASTIAN.

  ANTONIO.
 O,
    If you but knew how you the purpose cherish,
    Whiles thus you mock it! how, in stripping it,
    You more invest it! Ebbing men indeed,
    Most often, do so near the bottom run
    By their own fear or sloth.

  SEBASTIAN.
 Prithee say on.
 Thus, sir:
    Although this lord of weak remembrance, this
    Who shall be of as little memory
    When he is earth'd, hath here almost persuaded-
    For he's a spirit of persuasion, only
    Professes to persuade-the King his son's alive,
    'Tis as impossible that he's undrown'd
    As he that sleeps here swims.

  SEBASTIAN.

  ANTONIO.
 O, out of that 'no hope'
    What great hope have you! No hope that way is
    Another way so high a hope, that even
    Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond,
    But doubt discovery there.
 Then tell me,
    Who's the next heir of Naples?  
  SEBASTIAN.
 Claribel.

  SEBASTIAN.
 What stuff is this! How say you?
    'Tis true, my brother's daughter's Queen of Tunis;
    So is she heir of Naples; 'twixt which regions
    There is some space.
' Say this were death
    That now hath seiz'd them; why, they were no worse
    Than now they are.
 There be that can rule Naples  
    As well as he that sleeps; lords that can prate
    As amply and unnecessarily
    As this Gonzalo; I myself could make
    A chough of as deep chat.
 Methinks I do.
 And how does your content
    Tender your own good fortune?
  SEBASTIAN.
 I remember
    You did supplant your brother Prospero.

  ANTONIO.
 True.

    And look how well my garments sit upon me,
    Much feater than before.
 My brother's servants
    Were then my fellows; now they are my men.
 But, for your conscience-
  ANTONIO.
 For all the rest,
    They'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk;
    They'll tell the clock to any business that
    We say befits the hour.

  SEBASTIAN.
 Thy case, dear friend,
    Shall be my precedent; as thou got'st Milan,
    I'll come by Naples.
 Draw thy sword.
 One stroke
    Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest;
    And I the King shall love thee.

  ANTONIO.
 Draw together;
    And when I rear my hand, do you the like,
    To fall it on Gonzalo.

  SEBASTIAN.
 My master through his art foresees the danger
    That you, his friend, are in; and sends me forth-
    For else his project dies-to keep them living.

                                        [Sings in GONZALO'S ear]
    While you here do snoring lie,
    Open-ey'd conspiracy
    His time doth take.

    If of life you keep a care,
    Shake off slumber, and beware.

    Awake, awake!

  ANTONIO.

  GONZALO.
 Why, how now?-Ho, awake!-Why are you drawn?
    Wherefore this ghastly looking?
  GONZALO.
 I heard nothing.

  ANTONIO.

  ALONSO.
 'Tis best we stand upon our guard,
    Or that we quit this place.
 Let's draw our weapons.

  ALONSO.

  ARIEL.
 Prospero my lord shall know what I have done;
    So, King, go safely on to seek thy son.
               Exeunt




SCENE 2

Another part of the island

Enter CALIBAN, with a burden of wood.
 A noise of thunder heard

  CALIBAN.
 All the infections that the sun sucks up
    From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall, and make him
    By inch-meal a disease! His spirits hear me,
    And yet I needs must curse.
 But they'll nor pinch,
    Fright me with urchin-shows, pitch me i' th' mire,
    Nor lead me, like a firebrand, in the dark
    Out of my way, unless he bid 'em; but
    For every trifle are they set upon me;
    Sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me,
    And after bite me; then like hedgehogs which
    Lie tumbling in my barefoot way, and mount
    Their pricks at my footfall; sometime am I
    All wound with adders, who with cloven tongues
    Do hiss me into madness.

  TRINCULO.
 Yond same black cloud, yond huge one,
    looks like a foul bombard that would shed his liquor.
 If
    it should thunder as it did before, I know not where to
    hide my head.
 Yond same cloud cannot choose but fall by
    pailfuls.
 A
    strange fish! Were I in England now, as once I was, and
    had but this fish painted, not a holiday fool there but
    would give a piece of silver.
 I shall no more to sea, to sea,
    Here shall I die ashore-
    This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's funeral;
    well, here's my comfort.
                            [Drinks]

    The master, the swabber, the boatswain, and I,
    The gunner, and his mate,
    Lov'd Mall, Meg, and Marian, and Margery,
    But none of us car'd for Kate;  
    For she had a tongue with a tang,
    Would cry to a sailor 'Go hang!'
    She lov'd not the savour of tar nor of pitch,
    Yet a tailor might scratch her where'er she did itch.
 Do not torment me.
 What's the matter? Have we devils here? Do you
    put tricks upon 's with savages and men of Ind? Ha! I
    have not scap'd drowning to be afeard now of your four
    legs; for it hath been said: As proper a man as ever
    went on four legs cannot make him give ground; and it
    shall be said so again, while Stephano breathes at
    nostrils.

  CALIBAN.
 O!
  STEPHANO.
 This is some monster of the isle with four legs,
    who hath got, as I take it, an ague.
 Where the devil
    should he learn our language? I will give him some  
    relief, if it be but for that.
 If I can recover him, and
    keep him tame, and get to Naples with him, he's a
    present for any emperor that ever trod on neat's
    leather.
 Do not torment me, prithee; I'll bring my wood
    home faster.

  STEPHANO.
 If
    I can recover him, and keep him tame, I will not take
    too much for him; he shall pay for him that hath him,
    and that soundly.

  CALIBAN.

  STEPHANO.
 Come on your ways; open your mouth; here is
    that which will give language to you, cat.

  TRINCULO.
 O, defend me!
  STEPHANO.
 Stephano!
  STEPHANO.

  TRINCULO.

  STEPHANO.
 If thou beest Trinculo, come forth; I'll pull
    the by the lesser legs; if any be Trinculo's legs, these
    are they.
 Thou art very Trinculo indeed! How cam'st thou
    to be the siege of this moon-calf? Can he vent
    Trinculos?
  TRINCULO.
 I took him to be kill'd with a thunderstroke.
  
    But art thou not drown'd, Stephano? I hope now thou are
    not drown'd.
 Is the storm overblown? I hid me under the
    dead moon-calf's gaberdine for fear of the storm.
  [Aside]  These be fine things, an if they be not
    sprites.

    I will kneel to him.
 How didst thou scape? How cam'st thou hither?
    Swear by this bottle how thou cam'st hither-I escap'd
    upon a butt of sack, which the sailors heaved o'erboard-
    by this bottle, which I made of the bark of a tree, with
    mine own hands, since I was cast ashore.
 I'll swear upon that bottle to be thy true
    subject, for the liquor is not earthly.
 Here; swear then how thou escap'dst.

  TRINCULO.
 Swum ashore, man, like a duck; I can swim like  
    a duck, I'll be sworn.
 O Stephano, hast any more of this?
  STEPHANO.
 How now, moon-calf!
    How does thine ague?
  CALIBAN.
 Hast thou not dropp'd from heaven?
  STEPHANO.

  CALIBAN.
 Come, swear to that; kiss the book.
 Swear.

                                                [CALIBAN drinks]
  TRINCULO.
 By this good light, this is a very shallow
    monster!
    I afeard of him! A very weak monster! The Man i' th'
    Moon! A most poor credulous monster! Well drawn,  
    monster, in good sooth!
  CALIBAN.

  TRINCULO.
 By this light, a most perfidious and drunken
    monster! When's god's asleep he'll rob his bottle.
 I'll kiss thy foot; I'll swear myself thy
    subject.

  STEPHANO.
 Come on, then; down, and swear.

  TRINCULO.
 I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-
    headed monster.
 A most scurvy monster! I could find in
    my heart to beat him-
  STEPHANO.
 Come, kiss.
 But that the poor monster's in drink.
 An
    abominable monster!
  CALIBAN.
 I'll show thee the best springs; I'll pluck thee
    berries;
    I'll fish for thee, and get thee wood enough.

    A plague upon the tyrant that I serve!
    I'll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,
    Thou wondrous man.
  
  TRINCULO.
 A most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of
    a poor drunkard!
  CALIBAN.
 I prithee let me bring thee where crabs grow;
    And I with my long nails will dig thee pig-nuts;
    Show thee a jay's nest, and instruct thee how
    To snare the nimble marmoset; I'll bring thee
    To clust'ring filberts, and sometimes I'll get thee
    Young scamels from the rock.
 Wilt thou go with me?
  STEPHANO.
 I prithee now, lead the way without any more
    talking.
 Trinculo, the King and all our company else
    being drown'd, we will inherit here.

    Fellow Trinculo, we'll fill him by and by again.

  CALIBAN.

    'Ban 'Ban, Ca-Caliban,  
    Has a new master-Get a new man.
 SCENE 1

Before PROSPERO'S cell

Enter FERDINAND, hearing a log

  FERDINAND.
 There be some sports are painful, and their
    labour
    Delight in them sets off; some kinds of baseness
    Are nobly undergone, and most poor matters
    Point to rich ends.
 This my mean task
    Would be as heavy to me as odious, but
    The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead,
    And makes my labours pleasures.
 O, she is
    Ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed;
    And he's compos'd of harshness.
 I forget;
    But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours,
    Most busy, least when I do it.
 Alas, now; pray you,
    Work not so hard; I would the lightning had
    Burnt up those logs that you are enjoin'd to pile.

    Pray, set it down and rest you; when this burns,
    'Twill weep for having wearied you.
 My father
    Is hard at study; pray, now, rest yourself;
    He's safe for these three hours.

  FERDINAND.
 O most dear mistress,
    The sun will set before I shall discharge
    What I must strive to do.

  MIRANDA.
 If you'll sit down,
    I'll bear your logs the while; pray give me that;
    I'll carry it to the pile.

  FERDINAND.
 No, precious creature;
    I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,
    Than you should such dishonour undergo,
    While I sit lazy by.

  MIRANDA.
 It would become me  
    As well as it does you; and I should do it
    With much more ease; for my good will is to it,
    And yours it is against.

  PROSPERO.
  [Aside]  Poor worm, thou art infected!
    This visitation shows it.

  MIRANDA.
 You look wearily.
 No, noble mistress; 'tis fresh morning with me
    When you are by at night.
 I do beseech you,
    Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers,
    What is your name?
  MIRANDA.
 I do not know
    One of my sex; no woman's face remember,
    Save, from my glass, mine own; nor have I seen
    More that I may call men than you, good friend,
    And my dear father.
 But I prattle
    Something too wildly, and my father's precepts
    I therein do forget.
 I am, in my condition,
    A prince, Miranda; I do think, a king-
    I would not so!-and would no more endure
    This wooden slavery than to suffer
    The flesh-fly blow my mouth.
 Hear my soul speak:  
    The very instant that I saw you, did
    My heart fly to your service; there resides
    To make me slave to it; and for your sake
    Am I this patient log-man.
 Do you love me?
  FERDINAND.
 O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound,
    And crown what I profess with kind event,
    If I speak true! If hollowly, invert
    What best is boded me to mischief! I,
    Beyond all limit of what else i' th' world,
    Do love, prize, honour you.

  MIRANDA.
 I am a fool
    To weep at what I am glad of.

  PROSPERO.
 Wherefore weep you?
  MIRANDA.
 At mine unworthiness, that dare not offer
    What I desire to give, and much less take
    What I shall die to want.

  FERDINAND.
 My husband, then?
  FERDINAND.
 Ay, with a heart as willing
    As bondage e'er of freedom.

  MIRANDA.
 And mine, with my heart in't.

  FERDINAND.
 A thousand thousand!
                          Exeunt FERDINAND and MIRANDA severally
  PROSPERO.
 So glad of this as they I cannot be,
    Who are surpris'd withal; but my rejoicing
    At nothing can be more.
 Servant-monster, drink to me.

  TRINCULO.

  STEPHANO.
 My man-monster hath drown'd his tongue in
    sack.
 For my part, the sea cannot drown me; I swam, ere
    I could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues, off
    and on.

  TRINCULO.
  
  STEPHANO.
 We'll not run, Monsieur Monster.

  TRINCULO.

  STEPHANO.
 Moon-calf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest
    a good moon-calf.
 How does thy honour? Let me lick thy shoe.

    I'll not serve him; he is not valiant.
 Thou liest, most ignorant monster: I am in case
    to justle a constable.
 Why, thou debosh'd fish, thou,
    was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack
    as I to-day? Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being but
    half fish and half a monster?
  CALIBAN.
 Lo, how he mocks me! Wilt thou let him, my
    lord?
  TRINCULO.
 Lo, lo again! Bite him to death, I prithee.
 Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head; if
    you prove a mutineer-the next tree! The poor monster's
    my subject, and he shall not suffer indignity.
 I thank my noble lord.
 Wilt thou be pleas'd to
    hearken once again to the suit I made to thee?
  STEPHANO.


                     Enter ARIEL, invisible

  CALIBAN.
 As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant,
    sorcerer, that by his cunning hath cheated me of the
    island.

  ARIEL.

  CALIBAN.
 Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou;
    I would my valiant master would destroy thee.

    I do not lie.

  TRINCULO.
 Why, I said nothing.
 Proceed.
 I say, by sorcery he got this isle;
    From me he got it.
 If thy greatness will  
    Revenge it on him-for I know thou dar'st,
    But this thing dare not-
  STEPHANO.
 That's most certain.
 Thou shalt be lord of it, and I'll serve thee.
 How now shall this be compass'd? Canst thou
    bring me to the party?
  CALIBAN.
 Yea, yea, my lord; I'll yield him thee asleep,
    Where thou mayst knock a nail into his head.

  ARIEL.
 Thou liest; thou canst not.
 When that's gone
    He shall drink nought but brine; for I'll not show him
    Where the quick freshes are.
 Why, what did I? I did nothing.
 I'll go farther
    off.
 Didst thou not say he lied?  
  ARIEL.
 Thou liest.
 Do I so? Take thou that.
 I did not give the lie.
 A murrain on your monster, and the devil
    take your fingers!
  CALIBAN.
 Ha, ha, ha!
  STEPHANO.
-Prithee stand
    further off.

  CALIBAN.

  STEPHANO.
 Stand farther.

  CALIBAN.
 Why, as I told thee, 'tis a custom with him
    I' th' afternoon to sleep; there thou mayst brain him,
    Having first seiz'd his books; or with a log
    Batter his skull, or paunch him with a stake,
    Or cut his wezand with thy knife.
 Remember
    First to possess his books; for without them
    He's but a sot, as I am, nor hath not  
    One spirit to command; they all do hate him
    As rootedly as I.

    He has brave utensils-for so he calls them-
    Which, when he has a house, he'll deck withal.
 I never saw a woman
    But only Sycorax my dam and she;
    But she as far surpasseth Sycorax
    As great'st does least.

  STEPHANO.
 Is it so brave a lass?
  CALIBAN.
 Ay, lord; she will become thy bed, I warrant,
    And bring thee forth brave brood.
 Monster, I will kill this man; his daughter and I
    will be King and Queen-save our Graces!-and Trinculo
    and thyself shall be viceroys.
 Dost thou like the plot,
    Trinculo?
  TRINCULO.

  STEPHANO.
  
  CALIBAN.
 Within this half hour will he be asleep.

  ARIEL.

  CALIBAN.

    Let us be jocund; will you troll the catch
    You taught me but while-ere?
  STEPHANO.
 Come on, Trinculo, let us sing.
              [Sings]

    Flout 'em and scout 'em,
    And scout 'em and flout 'em;
    Thought is free.


  CALIBAN.

                      [ARIEL plays the tune on a tabor and pipe]
  STEPHANO.
 What is this same?
  TRINCULO.

  STEPHANO.
 He that dies pays all debts.
 I defy thee.
 Art thou afeard?
  STEPHANO.

  CALIBAN.
 The isle is full of noises,
    Sounds, and sweet airs, that give delight, and hurt not.

    Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments
    Will hum about mine ears; and sometimes voices,
    That, if I then had wak'd after long sleep,
    Will make me sleep again; and then, in dreaming,
    The clouds methought would open and show riches
    Ready to drop upon me, that, when I wak'd,
    I cried to dream again.

  STEPHANO.

  CALIBAN.
 When Prospero is destroy'd.

  TRINCULO.
 The sound is going away; let's follow it, and  
    after do our work.

  STEPHANO.
 I would I could see
    this taborer; he lays it on.

  TRINCULO.
             Exeunt




SCENE 3

Another part of the island

Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, GONZALO, ADRIAN, FRANCISCO, and OTHERS

  GONZALO.
 By'r lakin, I can go no further, sir;
    My old bones ache.
 Here's a maze trod, indeed,
    Through forth-rights and meanders! By your patience,
    I needs must rest me.

    Even here I will put off my hope, and keep it
    No longer for my flatterer; he is drown'd
    Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks
    Our frustrate search on land.
 Well, let him go.
  [Aside to SEBASTIAN]  I am right glad that he's
    so out of hope.

    Do not, for one repulse, forgo the purpose
    That you resolv'd t' effect.

  SEBASTIAN.

  SEBASTIAN.


           Solemn and strange music; and PROSPERO on the
           top, invisible.
 Enter several strange SHAPES,
           bringing in a banquet; and dance about it with
           gentle actions of salutations; and inviting the
           KING, etc.
, to eat, they depart

  ALONSO.
 Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?
  SEBASTIAN.
  
  ANTONIO.
 I'll believe both;
    And what does else want credit, come to me,
    And I'll be sworn 'tis true; travellers ne'er did lie,
    Though fools at home condemn 'em.
 If in Naples
    I should report this now, would they believe me?
    If I should say, I saw such islanders,
    For certes these are people of the island,
    Who though they are of monstrous shape yet, note,
    Their manners are more gentle-kind than of
    Our human generation you shall find
    Many, nay, almost any.

  PROSPERO.
  [Aside]  Honest lord,
    Thou hast said well; for some of you there present
    Are worse than devils.
 I cannot too much muse
    Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound, expressing,
    Although they want the use of tongue, a kind
    Of excellent dumb discourse.

  PROSPERO.
  [Aside]  Praise in departing.
 They vanish'd strangely.

  SEBASTIAN.
 No matter, since
    They have left their viands behind; for we have stomachs.
 Not I.
 Faith, sir, you need not fear.
 When we were boys,
    Who would believe that there were mountaineers,
    Dewlapp'd like bulls, whose throats had hanging at 'em
    Wallets of flesh? or that there were such men
    Whose heads stood in their breasts? which now we find
    Each putter-out of five for one will bring us
    Good warrant of.
 Brother, my lord the Duke,
    Stand to, and do as we.
 I have made you mad;
    And even with such-like valour men hang and drown
    Their proper selves.

                     [ALONSO, SEBASTIAN etc.
, draw their swords]
    You fools! I and my fellows
    Are ministers of Fate; the elements
    Of whom your swords are temper'd may as well
    Wound the loud winds, or with bemock'd-at stabs
    Kill the still-closing waters, as diminish
    One dowle that's in my plume; my fellow-ministers
    Are like invulnerable.
 But remember-
    For that's my business to you-that you three  
    From Milan did supplant good Prospero;
    Expos'd unto the sea, which hath requit it,
    Him, and his innocent child; for which foul deed
    The pow'rs, delaying, not forgetting, have
    Incens'd the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures,
    Against your peace.
 Thee of thy son, Alonso,
    They have bereft; and do pronounce by me
    Ling'ring perdition, worse than any death
    Can be at once, shall step by step attend
    You and your ways; whose wraths to guard you from-
    Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls
    Upon your heads-is nothing but heart's sorrow,
    And a clear life ensuing.
                   Exit above
  GONZALO.
 I' th' name of something holy, sir, why stand you
    In this strange stare?
  ALONSO.
 O, it is monstrous, monstrous!
    Methought the billows spoke, and told me of it;
    The winds did sing it to me; and the thunder,
    That deep and dreadful organ-pipe, pronounc'd
    The name of Prosper; it did bass my trespass.

    Therefore my son i' th' ooze is bedded; and
    I'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded,
    And with him there lie mudded.
                          Exit
  SEBASTIAN.
 But one fiend at a time,  
    I'll fight their legions o'er.
 I'll be thy second.
      Exeunt SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO
  GONZALO.
 All three of them are desperate; their great guilt,
    Like poison given to work a great time after,
    Now gins to bite the spirits.
 I do beseech you,
    That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly,
    And hinder them from what this ecstasy
    May now provoke them to.

  ADRIAN.
                             Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
 SCENE 1

Before PROSPERO'S cell

Enter PROSPERO, FERDINAND, and MIRANDA

  PROSPERO.
 If I have too austerely punish'd you,
    Your compensation makes amends; for
    Have given you here a third of mine own life,
    Or that for which I live; who once again
    I tender to thy hand.
 All thy vexations
    Were but my trials of thy love, and thou
    Hast strangely stood the test; here, afore heaven,
    I ratify this my rich gift.
 I do believe it
    Against an oracle.
 Then, as my gift, and thine own acquisition
    Wort'hily purchas'd, take my daughter.
 Therefore take heed,
    As Hymen's lamps shall light you.
 As I hope
    For quiet days, fair issue, and long life,
    With such love as 'tis now, the murkiest den,
    The most opportune place, the strong'st suggestion
    Our worser genius can, shall never melt
    Mine honour into lust, to take away
    The edge of that day's celebration,
    When I shall think or Phoebus' steeds are founder'd
    Or Night kept chain'd below.

  PROSPERO.
 Fairly spoke.

    Sit, then, and talk with her; she is thine own.
 Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service
    Did worthily perform; and I must use you
    In such another trick.
 Go bring the rabble,
    O'er whom I give thee pow'r, here to this place.

  ARIEL.
 Presently?
  PROSPERO.
 Ay, with a twink.
 Before you can say 'come' and 'go,'
    And breathe twice, and cry 'so, so,'
    Each one, tripping on his toe,
    Will be here with mop and mow.

    Do you love me, master? No?
  PROSPERO.
 Dearly, my delicate Ariel.
 Do not approach
    Till thou dost hear me call.
  
  ARIEL.
 Well! I conceive.
                                  Exit
  PROSPERO.
 Look thou be true; do not give dalliance
    Too much the rein; the strongest oaths are straw
    To th' fire i' th' blood.
 Be more abstemious,
    Or else good night your vow!
  FERDINAND.
 I warrant you, sir,
    The white cold virgin snow upon my heart
    Abates the ardour of my liver.
 Well!
    Now come, my Ariel, bring a corollary,
    Rather than want a spirit; appear, and pertly.

    No tongue! All eyes! Be silent.
                 [Soft music]

                         Enter IRIS

  IRIS.

                                      [JUNO descends in her car]
    Approach, rich Ceres, her to entertain.


                        Enter CERES

  CERES.
 A contract of true love to celebrate,
    And some donation freely to estate
    On the blest lovers.
 Tell me, heavenly bow,
    If Venus or her son, as thou dost know,
    Do now attend the Queen? Since they did plot
    The means that dusky Dis my daughter got,
    Her and her blind boy's scandal'd company
    I have forsworn.
 Of her society
    Be not afraid.
 I met her Deity
    Cutting the clouds towards Paphos, and her son
    Dove-drawn with her.
 Here thought they to have done
    Some wanton charm upon this man and maid,
    Whose vows are that no bed-rite shall be paid
    Till Hymen's torch be lighted; but in vain.

    Mars's hot minion is return'd again;  
    Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows,
    Swears he will shoot no more, but play with sparrows,
    And be a boy right out.
                       [JUNO alights]
  CERES.
 Highest Queen of State,
    Great Juno, comes; I know her by her gait.
 How does my bounteous sister? Go with me
    To bless this twain, that they may prosperous be,
    And honour'd in their issue.
                     [They sing]
  JUNO.
 Honour, riches, marriage-blessing,
    Long continuance, and increasing,
    Hourly joys be still upon you!
    Juno sings her blessings on you.

  CERES.
 Spirits, which by mine art
    I have from their confines call'd to enact
    My present fancies.

  FERDINAND.
 Let me live here ever;
    So rare a wond'red father and a wise
    Makes this place Paradise.

           [JUNO and CERES whisper, and send IRIS on employment]
  PROSPERO.
 You nymphs, call'd Naiads, of the wind'ring brooks,
    With your sedg'd crowns and ever harmless looks,
    Leave your crisp channels, and on this green land
    Answer your summons; Juno does command.

    Come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate
    A contract of true love; be not too late.


        Enter certain REAPERS, properly habited; they join
         with the NYMPHS in a graceful dance; towards the
         end whereof PROSPERO starts suddenly, and speaks,
          after which, to a strange, hollow, and confused
                  noise, they heavily vanish

  PROSPERO.
 This is strange; your father's in some passion
    That works him strongly.

  MIRANDA.
 You do look, my son, in a mov'd sort,
    As if you were dismay'd; be cheerful, sir.

    Our revels now are ended.
 These our actors,
    As I foretold you, were all spirits, and
    Are melted into air, into thin air;
    And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
    The cloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous palaces,
    The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
    Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,
    And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
    Leave not a rack behind.
 Sir, I am vex'd;
    Bear with my weakness; my old brain is troubled;
    Be not disturb'd with my infirmity.

  FERDINAND, MIRANDA.
 We wish your peace.
                 Exeunt
  PROSPERO.
 Come, with a thought.
 I thank thee, Ariel; come.


                       Enter ARIEL

  ARIEL.
 Thy thoughts I cleave to.
 What's thy pleasure?
  PROSPERO.
 Spirit,
    We must prepare to meet with Caliban.

  ARIEL.
 Ay, my commander.
 When I presented 'Ceres.
'
    I thought to have told thee of it; but I fear'd
    Lest I might anger thee.

  PROSPERO.
 Say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?
  ARIEL.
 Then I beat my tabor,
    At which like unback'd colts they prick'd their ears,  
    Advanc'd their eyelids, lifted up their noses
    As they smelt music; so I charm'd their cars,
    That calf-like they my lowing follow'd through
    Tooth'd briers, sharp furzes, pricking goss, and thorns,
    Which ent'red their frail shins.
 At last I left them
    I' th' filthy mantled pool beyond your cell,
    There dancing up to th' chins, that the foul lake
    O'erstunk their feet.

    Thy shape invisible retain thou still.

    The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither
    For stale to catch these thieves.
 I go, I go.
 A devil, a born devil, on whose nature
    Nurture can never stick; on whom my pains,
    Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost;
    And as with age his body uglier grows,
    So his mind cankers.


    Come, hang them on this line.

  STEPHANO.
 Monster, your fairy, which you say is a harmless
    fairy, has done little better than play'd the Jack with us.

  TRINCULO.
 Monster, I do smell all horse-piss at which my
    nose is in great indignation.
 So is mine.
 Do you hear, monster? If I should
    take a displeasure against you, look you-
  TRINCULO.
 Good my lord, give me thy favour still.

    All's hush'd as midnight yet.
 Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool!
  STEPHANO.

  TRINCULO.

  STEPHANO.
 Prithee, my king, be quiet.
 Seest thou here,
    This is the mouth o' th' cell; no noise, and enter.

  STEPHANO.
 Give me thy hand.

  TRINCULO.

  TRINCULO.
 Thy Grace shall have it.
 The dropsy drown this fool! What do you mean
    To dote thus on such luggage? Let 't alone,
    And do the murder first.
 If he awake,
    From toe to crown he'll fill our skins with pinches;
    Make us strange stuff.

  STEPHANO.
 Be you quiet, monster.
 Mistress line, is not
    this my jerkin? Now is the jerkin under the line; now,
    jerkin, you are like to lose your hair, and prove a bald
    jerkin.

  TRINCULO.
 Do, do.
 We steal by line and level, an't like
    your Grace.

  STEPHANO.
 Wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king of
    this country.
 'Steal by line and level' is an excellent
    pass of pate; there's another garmet for't.

  TRINCULO.
 Monster, come, put some lime upon your fingers,
    and away with the rest.

  CALIBAN.
 We shall lose our time,  
    And all be turn'd to barnacles, or to apes
    With foreheads villainous low.
 Go to, carry this.
 And this.

  STEPHANO.
 Ay, and this.
 Silver! there it goes, Silver!
  PROSPERO.
 Fury, Fury! There, Tyrant, there! Hark, hark!
                [CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO are driven out]
    Go charge my goblins that they grind their joints
    With dry convulsions, shorten up their sinews
    With aged cramps, and more pinch-spotted make them
    Than pard or cat o' mountain.
  
  ARIEL.
 Hark, they roar.

  PROSPERO.
 Let them be hunted soundly.

    Shortly shall all my labours end, and thou
    Shalt have the air at freedom; for a little
    Follow, and do me service.
                            Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE 1

Before PROSPERO'S cell

Enter PROSPERO in his magic robes, and ARIEL

  PROSPERO.
 Now does my project gather to a head;
    My charms crack not, my spirits obey; and time
    Goes upright with his carriage.
 How's the day?
  ARIEL.
 On the sixth hour; at which time, my lord,
    You said our work should cease.

  PROSPERO.
 Say, my spirit,
    How fares the King and 's followers?
  ARIEL.
 The King,
    His brother, and yours, abide all three distracted,
    And the remainder mourning over them,
    Brim full of sorrow and dismay; but chiefly
    Him you term'd, sir, 'the good old lord, Gonzalo';  
    His tears run down his beard, like winter's drops
    From eaves of reeds.
 Your charm so strongly works 'em
    That if you now beheld them your affections
    Would become tender.
 Dost thou think so, spirit?
  ARIEL.

    Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling
    Of their afflictions, and shall not myself,
    One of their kind, that relish all as sharply,
    Passion as they, be kindlier mov'd than thou art?
    Though with their high wrongs I am struck to th' quick,
    Yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury
    Do I take part; the rarer action is
    In virtue than in vengeance; they being penitent,
    The sole drift of my purpose doth extend
    Not a frown further.
 Go release them, Ariel;
    My charms I'll break, their senses I'll restore,
    And they shall be themselves.

  ARIEL.
                              Exit  
  PROSPERO.
 Graves at my command
    Have wak'd their sleepers, op'd, and let 'em forth,
    By my so potent art.
                            [Solem music]

            Here enters ARIEL before; then ALONSO, with
          frantic gesture, attended by GONZALO; SEBASTIAN
           and ANTONIO in like manner, attended by ADRIAN
           and FRANCISCO.
 They all enter the circle which
          PROSPERO had made, and there stand charm'd; which
                    PROSPERO observing, speaks

    A solemn air, and the best comforter
    To an unsettled fancy, cure thy brains,
    Now useless, boil'd within thy skull! There stand,
    For you are spell-stopp'd.

    Holy Gonzalo, honourable man,
    Mine eyes, ev'n sociable to the show of thine,  
    Fall fellowly drops.
 O good Gonzalo,
    My true preserver, and a loyal sir
    To him thou follow'st! I will pay thy graces
    Home both in word and deed.
 Flesh and blood,
    You, brother mine, that entertain'd ambition,
    Expell'd remorse and nature, who, with Sebastian-
    Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong-
    Would here have kill'd your king, I do forgive thee,
    Unnatural though thou art.
 Their understanding
    Begins to swell, and the approaching tide
    Will shortly fill the reasonable shore
    That now lies foul and muddy.
 Not one of them
    That yet looks on me, or would know me.


        ARIEL, on returning, sings and helps to attire him

    Where the bee sucks, there suck I;
    In a cowslip's bell I lie;
    There I couch when owls do cry.

    On the bat's back I do fly
    After summer merrily.


  PROSPERO.
 So, so, so.

  ARIEL.
 I drink the air before me, and return
    Or ere your pulse twice beat.
                           Exit
  GONZALO.
 Some heavenly power guide us
    Out of this fearful country!
  PROSPERO.

    For more assurance that a living prince
    Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body;
    And to thee and thy company I bid
    A hearty welcome.

  ALONSO.
 This must crave-
    An if this be at all-a most strange story.
 But how should Prospero
    Be living and be here?
  PROSPERO.
 First, noble friend,
    Let me embrace thine age, whose honour cannot
    Be measur'd or confin'd.
 Whether this be
    Or be not, I'll not swear.
 You do yet taste
    Some subtleties o' th' isle, that will not let you
    Believe things certain.
  [Aside]  The devil speaks in him.

  PROSPERO.

  ALONSO.
 If thou beest Prospero,
    Give us particulars of thy preservation;
    How thou hast met us here, whom three hours since
    Were wreck'd upon this shore; where I have lost-
    How sharp the point of this remembrance is!-
    My dear son Ferdinand.
 I am woe for't, sir.

  ALONSO.
 Irreparable is the loss; and patience
    Says it is past her cure.
 I rather think
    You have not sought her help, of whose soft grace
    For the like loss I have her sovereign aid,
    And rest myself content.

  ALONSO.
 You the like loss!
  PROSPERO.
 As great to me as late; and, supportable
    To make the dear loss, have I means much weaker
    Than you may call to comfort you, for I  
    Have lost my daughter.

  ALONSO.
 When did you lose your daughter?
  PROSPERO.
 No more yet of this;
    For 'tis a chronicle of day by day,
    Not a relation for a breakfast, nor
    Befitting this first meeting.

  MIRANDA.
 Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle
    And I would call it fair play.

  ALONSO.
 If this prove
    A vision of the island, one dear son
    Shall I twice lose.

  SEBASTIAN.
 A most high miracle!
  FERDINAND.
 Though the seas threaten, they are merciful;
    I have curs'd them without cause.
                   [Kneels]  
  ALONSO.
 O, wonder!
    How many goodly creatures are there here!
    How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world
    That has such people in't!
  PROSPERO.
 'Tis new to thee.

  ALONSO.
 What is this maid with whom thou wast at play?
    Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours;
    Is she the goddess that hath sever'd us,
    And brought us thus together?
  FERDINAND.
 Sir, she is mortal;
    But by immortal Providence she's mine.
 She
    Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan,
    Of whom so often I have heard renown
    But never saw before; of whom I have
    Receiv'd a second life; and second father  
    This lady makes him to me.

  ALONSO.
 I am hers.

    But, O, how oddly will it sound that I
    Must ask my child forgiveness!
  PROSPERO.
 There, sir, stop;
    Let us not burden our remembrances with
    A heaviness that's gone.
 Look down, you gods,
    And on this couple drop a blessed crown;
    For it is you that have chalk'd forth the way
    Which brought us hither.

  ALONSO.
 Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue
    Should become Kings of Naples? O, rejoice
    Beyond a common joy, and set it down
    With gold on lasting pillars: in one voyage
    Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis;
    And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife
    Where he himself was lost; Prospero his dukedom  
    In a poor isle; and all of us ourselves
    When no man was his own.

    Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart
    That doth not wish you joy.

  GONZALO.
 Now, blasphemy,
    That swear'st grace o'erboard, not an oath on shore?
    Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?
  BOATSWAIN.

  ARIEL.
  [Aside to PROSPERO]  Sir, all this service
    Have I done since I went.

  PROSPERO.
 If I did think, sir, I were well awake,
    I'd strive to tell you.
 We were dead of sleep,
    And-how, we know not-all clapp'd under hatches;
    Where, but even now, with strange and several noises
    Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,
    And moe diversity of sounds, all horrible,
    We were awak'd; straightway at liberty;
    Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld
    Our royal, good, and gallant ship; our master
    Cap'ring to eye her.
 On a trice, so please you,
    Even in a dream, were we divided from them,
    And were brought moping hither.
  [Aside to PROSPERO]  Was't well done?
  PROSPERO.
  [Aside to ARIEL]  Bravely, my diligence.

  ALONSO.
 This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod;
    And there is in this business more than nature
    Was ever conduct of.
 Some oracle
    Must rectify our knowledge.

  PROSPERO.
 Sir, my liege,
    Do not infest your mind with beating on
    The strangeness of this business; at pick'd leisure,
    Which shall be shortly, single I'll resolve you,
    Which to you shall seem probable, of every
    These happen'd accidents; till when, be cheerful
    And think of each thing well.
  [Exit ARIEL]  How fares my gracious sir?
    There are yet missing of your company
    Some few odd lads that you remember not.


         Re-enter ARIEL, driving in CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and
  
  TRINCULO, in their stolen apparel
  STEPHANO.
 If these be true spies which I wear in my head,
    here's a goodly sight.
 O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed!
    How fine my master is! I am afraid
    He will chastise me.

  PROSPERO.

    These three have robb'd me; and this demi-devil-  
    For he's a bastard one-had plotted with them
    To take my life.

  CALIBAN.
 I shall be pinch'd to death.

  ALONSO.
 Is not this Stephano, my drunken butler?
  SEBASTIAN.
 He is drunk now; where had he wine?
  ALONSO.
 And Trinculo is reeling ripe; where should they
    Find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em?
    How cam'st thou in this pickle?
  TRINCULO.
 I have been in such a pickle since I saw you
    last that, I fear me, will never out of my bones.

  SEBASTIAN.
 O, touch me not; I am not Stephano, but a
    cramp.

  PROSPERO.
 I should have been a sore one, then.

  ALONSO.
  [Pointing to CALIBAN]  This is as strange a thing
    as e'er I look'd on.
 He is as disproportioned in his manners
    As in his shape.

  CALIBAN.
 Ay, that I will; and I'll be wise hereafter,
    And seek for grace.
 Go to; away!
  ALONSO.

  SEBASTIAN.

                          Exeunt CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO
  PROSPERO.
 Sir, I invite your Highness and your train
    To my poor cell, where you shall take your rest
    For this one night; which, part of it, I'll waste
    With such discourse as, I not doubt, shall make it
    Go quick away-the story of my life,
    And the particular accidents gone by
    Since I came to this isle.
 And in the morn
    I'll bring you to your ship, and so to Naples,  
    Where I have hope to see the nuptial
    Of these our dear-belov'd solemnized,
    And thence retire me to my Milan, where
    Every third thought shall be my grave.
 Then to the elements
    Be free, and fare thou well!-Please you, draw near.
 Now I want
          Spirits to enforce, art to enchant;
          And my ending is despair
          Unless I be reliev'd by prayer,
          Which pierces so that it assaults
          Mercy itself, and frees all faults.

          As you from crimes would pardon'd be,  
          Let your indulgence set me free.


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>





1608

THE LIFE OF TIMON OF ATHENS

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

    TIMON of Athens

    LUCIUS
    LUCULLUS
    SEMPRONIUS
       flattering lords

    VENTIDIUS, one of Timon's false friends
    ALCIBIADES, an Athenian captain
    APEMANTUS, a churlish philosopher
    FLAVIUS, steward to Timon

    FLAMINIUS
    LUCILIUS
    SERVILIUS
       Timon's servants

    CAPHIS
    PHILOTUS
    TITUS  
    HORTENSIUS
       servants to Timon's creditors

    POET
    PAINTER
    JEWELLER
    MERCHANT
    MERCER
    AN OLD ATHENIAN
    THREE STRANGERS
    A PAGE
    A FOOL

    PHRYNIA
    TIMANDRA
       mistresses to Alcibiades

    CUPID
    AMAZONS
      in the Masque  

    Lords, Senators, Officers, Soldiers, Servants, Thieves, and
      Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



SCENE:
Athens and the neighbouring woods


ACT I.
 SCENE I.
 TIMON'S house

Enter POET, PAINTER, JEWELLER, MERCHANT, and MERCER, at several doors

  POET.
 Good day, sir.
 I am glad y'are well.

  POET.
 I have not seen you long; how goes the world?
  PAINTER.
 It wears, sir, as it grows.

    But what particular rarity? What strange,
    Which manifold record not matches? See,
    Magic of bounty, all these spirits thy power
    Hath conjur'd to attend! I know the merchant.
 I know them both; th' other's a jeweller.

  MERCHANT.
 O, 'tis a worthy lord!
  JEWELLER.
 Nay, that's most fix'd.

  MERCHANT.
 A most incomparable man; breath'd, as it were,
    To an untirable and continuate goodness.

    He passes.
 I have a jewel here-  
  MERCHANT.
 For the Lord Timon, sir?
  JEWELLER.
 [Looking at the jewel] 'Tis a good form.
 And rich.
 Here is a water, look ye.
 You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedication
    To the great lord.

    Our poesy is as a gum, which oozes
    From whence 'tis nourish'd.
 What have you there?
  PAINTER.
 A picture, sir.
 Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.

  PAINTER.
 Indifferent.

  POET.
 Admirable.
 How this grace
    Speaks his own standing! What a mental power
    This eye shoots forth! How big imagination
    Moves in this lip! To th' dumbness of the gesture
    One might interpret.

  PAINTER.
 It is a pretty mocking of the life.
 I will say of it
    It tutors nature.
 Artificial strife
    Lives in these touches, livelier than life.


              Enter certain SENATORS, and pass over

  PAINTER.
 The senators of Athens- happy man!
  PAINTER.
 My free drift
    Halts not particularly, but moves itself
    In a wide sea of tax.
 No levell'd malice
    Infects one comma in the course I hold,
    But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on,
    Leaving no tract behind.

  PAINTER.

  PAINTER.
 I saw them speak together.
  
  POET.
 Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill
    Feign'd Fortune to be thron'd.
 Amongst them all
    Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fix'd
    One do I personate of Lord Timon's frame,
    Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her;
    Whose present grace to present slaves and servants
    Translates his rivals.
 'Tis conceiv'd to scope.

  POET.
 Nay, sir, but hear me on.

    All those which were his fellows but of late-
    Some better than his value- on the moment
    Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance,  
    Rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear,
    Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him
    Drink the free air.
 Ay, marry, what of these?
  POET.

  PAINTER.

    A thousand moral paintings I can show
    That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortune's
    More pregnantly than words.
 Yet you do well
    To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen
    The foot above the head.


         Trumpets sound.
 Enter TIMON, addressing himself
          courteously to every suitor, a MESSENGER from
         VENTIDIUS talking with him; LUCILIUS and other
                       servants following  

  TIMON.
 Imprison'd is he, say you?
  MESSENGER.
 Ay, my good lord.
 Five talents is his debt;
    His means most short, his creditors most strait.

  TIMON.
 Noble Ventidius! Well.
 I do know him
    A gentleman that well deserves a help,
    Which he shall have.
 I'll pay the debt, and free him.

  MESSENGER.
 Your lordship ever binds him.

  TIMON.
 Commend me to him; I will send his ransom;
    And being enfranchis'd, bid him come to me.

    'Tis not enough to help the feeble up,
    But to support him after.

  MESSENGER.
 All happiness to your honour!                  Exit

                      Enter an OLD ATHENIAN  

  OLD ATHENIAN.
 Lord Timon, hear me speak.
 Freely, good father.

  OLD ATHENIAN.
 I have so; what of him?
  OLD ATHENIAN.
 Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.

  TIMON.
 Attends he here, or no? Lucilius!
  LUCILIUS.
 This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature,
    By night frequents my house.

  TIMON.
 Well; what further?
  OLD ATHENIAN.
 One only daughter have I, no kin else,
    On whom I may confer what I have got.

    The maid is fair, o' th' youngest for a bride,
    And I have bred her at my dearest cost
    In qualities of the best.

  TIMON.
 Therefore he will be, Timon.
 Does she love him?
  OLD ATHENIAN.
 She is young and apt:
    Our own precedent passions do instruct us
    What levity's in youth.

  TIMON.
 Love you the maid?
  LUCILIUS.
 Ay, my good lord, and she accepts of it.

  OLD ATHENIAN.
 If in her marriage my consent be missing,
    I call the gods to witness I will choose
    Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world,
    And dispossess her all.

  TIMON.
 How shall she be endow'd,
    If she be mated with an equal husband?
  OLD ATHENIAN.
 This gentleman of mine hath serv'd me long;.
 Give him thy daughter:
    What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise,
    And make him weigh with her.

  OLD ATHENIAN.
 Most noble lord,
    Pawn me to this your honour, she is his.

  TIMON.
 Humbly I thank your lordship.
 [Presenting his poem] Vouchsafe my labour, and long live your
    lordship!
  TIMON.
 I thank you; you shall hear from me anon;
    Go not away.
 What have you there, my friend?
  PAINTER.

  TIMON.
 I like your work,
    And you shall find I like it; wait attendance
    Till you hear further from me.

  PAINTER.
 Well fare you, gentleman.
 Give me your hand;
    We must needs dine together.
 Sir, your jewel
    Hath suffered under praise.
 What, my lord! Dispraise?
  TIMON.
 A mere satiety of commendations;
    If I should pay you for't as 'tis extoll'd,
    It would unclew me quite.

  JEWELLER.
 My lord, 'tis rated
    As those which sell would give; but you well know
    Things of like value, differing in the owners,
    Are prized by their masters.
 Believe't, dear lord,
    You mend the jewel by the wearing it.

  TIMON.
 Well mock'd.

  TIMON.
 He'll spare none.

  TIMON.
 Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus!
  APEMANTUS.

  TIMON.

  APEMANTUS.
 Yes.

  APEMANTUS.
 Then I repent not.

  TIMON.
 Whither art going?
  APEMANTUS.
 To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.
  
  APEMANTUS.
 Right, if doing nothing be death by th' law.

  TIMON.
 Wrought he not well that painted it?
  APEMANTUS.
 Y'are a dog.
 Wilt dine with me, Apemantus?
  APEMANTUS.

  TIMON.

  APEMANTUS.
 O, they eat lords; so they come by great bellies.

  TIMON.
 How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus?
  APEMANTUS.
 How now, poet!
  POET.
 How now, philosopher!  
  APEMANTUS.

  POET.
 Yes.

  POET.
 Then I lie not.

  APEMANTUS.
 Art not a poet?
  POET.
 Yes.

  APEMANTUS.
 Look in thy last work, where thou hast
    feign'd him a worthy fellow.
 That's not feign'd- he is so.

  APEMANTUS.
 He that loves to be flattered is worthy o' th' flatterer.

    Heavens, that I were a lord!
  TIMON.

  TIMON.
 What, thyself?
  APEMANTUS.

  TIMON.
 Wherefore?
  APEMANTUS.
- Art not thou a
    merchant?
  MERCHANT.
 Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!
  MERCHANT.
 If traffic do it, the gods do it.

  APEMANTUS.
 Traffic's thy god, and thy god confound thee!

                Trumpet sounds.
 Enter a MESSENGER

  TIMON.
 What trumpet's that?
  MESSENGER.
 'Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty horse,
    All of companionship.
 Pray entertain them; give them guide to us.

                                          Exeunt some attendants
    You must needs dine with me.
 Go not you hence
    Till I have thank'd you.


                Enter ALCIBIADES, with the rest

    Most welcome, sir!                             [They salute]
  APEMANTUS.
 So, so, there!
    Aches contract and starve your supple joints!  
    That there should be small love amongst these sweet knaves,
    And all this courtesy! The strain of man's bred out
    Into baboon and monkey.
 Sir, you have sav'd my longing, and I feed
    Most hungerly on your sight.

  TIMON.
 Pray you, let us in.

                                        Exeunt all but APEMANTUS

                        Enter two LORDS

  FIRST LORD.
 What time o' day is't, Apemantus?
  APEMANTUS.
 Time to be honest.

  FIRST LORD.
 That time serves still.

  APEMANTUS.
 The more accursed thou that still omit'st it.

  SECOND LORD.

  APEMANTUS.
 Ay; to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools.

  SECOND LORD.
 Fare thee well, fare thee well.

  APEMANTUS.
 Why, Apemantus?
  APEMANTUS.
 Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean to give
    thee none.

  FIRST LORD.

  APEMANTUS.

  SECOND LORD.
 Away, unpeaceable dog, or I'll spurn thee hence.
  Exit
  FIRST LORD.
 He's opposite to humanity.
 Come, shall we in
    And taste Lord Timon's bounty? He outgoes
    The very heart of kindness.

  SECOND LORD.

  FIRST LORD.
 The noblest mind he carries
    That ever govern'd man.

  SECOND LORD.
 Long may he live in fortunes! shall we in?
  FIRST LORD.
 I'll keep you company.
                      Exeunt




SCENE II.

A room of state in TIMON'S house

Hautboys playing loud music.
 A great banquet serv'd in;
FLAVIUS and others attending; and then enter LORD TIMON, the states,
the ATHENIAN LORDS, VENTIDIUS, which TIMON redeem'd from prison.
 Most honoured Timon,
    It hath pleas'd the gods to remember my father's age,
    And call him to long peace.

    He is gone happy, and has left me rich.

    Then, as in grateful virtue I am bound
    To your free heart, I do return those talents,
    Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help
    I deriv'd liberty.

  TIMON.

  VENTIDIUS.

    Pray, sit; more welcome are ye to my fortunes
    Than my fortunes to me.
                           [They sit]
  FIRST LORD.
 My lord, we always have confess'd it.

  APEMANTUS.
 O, Apemantus, you are welcome.
 No;
    You shall not make me welcome.

  TIMON.
 Fie, th'art a churl; ye have got a humour there
    Does not become a man; 'tis much to blame.
 Go, let him have a table by himself; for he does neither
    affect company nor is he fit for't indeed.

  APEMANTUS.
  
    I come to observe; I give thee warning on't.

  TIMON.
 I take no heed of thee.
 Th'art an Athenian, therefore
    welcome.
 I myself would have no power; prithee let my meat make
    thee silent.

  APEMANTUS.
 I scorn thy meat; 't'would choke me, for I should ne'er
    flatter thee.
 O you gods, what a number of men eats Timon, and he
    sees 'em not! It grieves me to see so many dip their meat in one
    man's blood; and all the madness is, he cheers them up too.

    I wonder men dare trust themselves with men.

    Methinks they should invite them without knives:
    Good for their meat and safer for their lives.

    There's much example for't; the fellow that sits next him now,
    parts bread with him, pledges the breath of him in a divided
    draught, is the readiest man to kill him.
 'T has been proved.

    Lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes:
    Great men should drink with harness on their throats.
 My lord, in heart! and let the health go round.

  SECOND LORD.
 Flow this way! A brave fellow! He keeps his tides well.
  
    Those healths will make thee and thy state look ill, Timon.

    Here's that which is too weak to be a sinner, honest water, which
    ne'er left man i' th' mire.
'
    Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.


                  APEMANTUS' Grace

           Immortal gods, I crave no pelf;
           I pray for no man but myself.

           Grant I may never prove so fond
           To trust man on his oath or bond,
           Or a harlot for her weeping,
           Or a dog that seems a-sleeping,
           Or a keeper with my freedom,
           Or my friends, if I should need 'em.
 So fall to't.

           Rich men sin, and I eat root.
       [Eats and drinks]

    Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus!  
  TIMON.
 Captain Alcibiades, your heart's in the field now.
 My heart is ever at your service, my lord.

  ALCIBIADES.
 So they were bleeding new, my lord, there's no meat
    like 'em; I could wish my best friend at such a feast.

  APEMANTUS.

  FIRST LORD.

  TIMON.
 O, no doubt, my good friends, but the gods themselves have
    provided that I shall have much help from you.
 We
    are born to do benefits; and what better or properer can we call
    our own than the riches of our friends? O, what a precious
    comfort 'tis to have so many like brothers commanding one
    another's fortunes! O, joy's e'en made away ere't can be born!
    Mine eyes cannot hold out water, methinks.
 Thou weep'st to make them drink, Timon.
 Joy had the like conception in our eyes,
    And at that instant like a babe sprung up.

  APEMANTUS.
 Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.
 Please you, my lord, there are certain ladies most  
    desirous of admittance.

  TIMON.

  TIMON.


                          Enter CUPID
  CUPID.
 Th' Ear,
    Taste, Touch, Smell, pleas'd from thy table rise;
    They only now come but to feast thine eyes.

  TIMON.

    Music, make their welcome.
 You see, my lord, how ample y'are belov'd.


      Music.
 Re-enter CUPID, witb a Masque of LADIES as Amazons,
          with lutes in their hands, dancing and playing
  
  APEMANTUS.

    Like madness is the glory of this life,
    As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.

    Who lives that's not depraved or depraves?
    Who dies that bears not one spurn to their graves
    Of their friends' gift?
    I should fear those that dance before me now
    Would one day stamp upon me.
 'T has been done:
    Men shut their doors against a setting sun.


         The LORDS rise from table, with much adoring of
        TIMON; and to show their loves, each single out an
          Amazon, and all dance, men witb women, a lofty
            strain or two to the hautboys, and cease
  
  TIMON.
 You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies,
    Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,
    Which was not half so beautiful and kind;
    You have added worth unto't and lustre,
    And entertain'd me with mine own device;
    I am to thank you for't.

  FIRST LADY.

  APEMANTUS.

  TIMON.
 Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you;
    Please you to dispose yourselves.
 Most thankfully, my lord.
 Flavius!
  FLAVIUS.

  FLAVIUS.
 Yes, my lord.
 [Aside] More jewels yet!
    There is no crossing him in's humour,
    Else I should tell him- well i' faith, I should-
    When all's spent, he'd be cross'd then, an he could.
  
    'Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind,
    That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.
          Exit
  FIRST LORD.
 Where be our men?
  SERVANT.

  SECOND LORD.
 Our horses!

               Re-enter FLAVIUS, with the casket

  TIMON.
 O my friends,
    I have one word to say to you.

  FIRST LORD.
 So are we all.
 My lord, there are certain nobles of the Senate newly
    alighted and come to visit you.
  
  TIMON.
 They are fairly welcome.
 I beseech your honour, vouchsafe me a word; it does
    concern you near.
 I prithee let's
    be provided to show them entertainment.
 [Aside] I scarce know how.


                     Enter another SERVANT

  SECOND SERVANT.
 May it please vour honour, Lord Lucius, out of his
    free love, hath presented to you four milk-white horses, trapp'd
    in silver.

  TIMON.
 I shall accept them fairly.
                        Exit SERVANT

                      Enter a third SERVANT

    How now! What news?
  THIRD SERVANT.
 Please you, my lord, that honourable gentleman, Lord
    Lucullus, entreats your company to-morrow to hunt with him and  
    has sent your honour two brace of greyhounds.

  TIMON.
 I'll hunt with him; and let them be receiv'd,
    Not without fair reward.

    His promises fly so beyond his state
    That what he speaks is all in debt; he owes
    For ev'ry word.
 You do yourselves much wrong;
    You bate too much of your own merits.
  
    Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.

  SECOND LORD.

  THIRD LORD.
 And now I remember, my lord, you gave good words the other
    day of a bay courser I rode on.
 'Tis yours because you lik'd it.

  THIRD LORD.

  TIMON.
 You may take my word, my lord: I know no man
    Can justly praise but what he does affect.

    I weigh my friend's affection with mine own.

    I'll tell you true; I'll call to you.

  ALL LORDS.
 O, none so welcome!
  TIMON.

  ALCIBIADES.
 Ay, defil'd land, my lord.

  SECOND LORD.
 So infinitely endear'd-
  TIMON.
 All to you.
 The best of happiness, honour, and fortunes, keep with
    you, Lord Timon!
  TIMON.
 What a coil's here!
    Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums!
    I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums
    That are given for 'em.
 Friendship's full of dregs:
    Methinks false hearts should never have sound legs.

  TIMON.
 Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen
    I would be good to thee.

  APEMANTUS.
 No, I'll nothing; for if I should be brib'd too, there
    would be none left to rail upon thee, and then thou wouldst sin
    the faster.
 Nay, an you begin to rail on society once, I am sworn not to
    give regard to you.
 Farewell; and come with better music.

 Exit
  APEMANTUS.
 So.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.

A SENATOR'S house

Enter A SENATOR, with papers in his hand

  SENATOR.
 And late, five thousand.
 Still in motion
    Of raging waste? It cannot hold; it will not.

    If I want gold, steal but a beggar's dog
    And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold.
 It cannot hold; no reason
    Can sound his state in safety.
 Get on your cloak and haste you to Lord Timon;
    Importune him for my moneys; be not ceas'd
    With slight denial, nor then silenc'd when
    'Commend me to your master' and the cap
    Plays in the right hand, thus; but tell him
    My uses cry to me, I must serve my turn
    Out of mine own; his days and times are past,
    And my reliances on his fracted dates
    Have smit my credit.
 I love and honour him,
    But must not break my back to heal his finger.

    Immediate are my needs, and my relief
    Must not be toss'd and turn'd to me in words,
    But find supply immediate.
 Get you gone.

  CAPHIS.
 I go, sir.
  
  SENATOR.
 Take the bonds along with you,
    And have the dates in compt.

  CAPHIS.

  SENATOR.
 Go.
                                            Exeunt




SCENE II.

Before TIMON'S house

Enter FLAVIUS, TIMON'S Steward, with many bills in his hand

  FLAVIUS.
 No care, no stop! So senseless of expense
    That he will neither know how to maintain it
    Nor cease his flow of riot; takes no account
    How things go from him, nor resumes no care
    Of what is to continue.

    I must be round with him.

    Fie, fie, fie, fie!

       Enter CAPHIS, and the SERVANTS Of ISIDORE and VARRO

  CAPHIS.
 Good even, Varro.
 It is.
 It is so.

  CAPHIS.


            Enter TIMON and his train, with ALCIBIADES

  TIMON.
 So soon as dinner's done we'll forth again,
    My Alcibiades.
- With me? What is your will?
  CAPHIS.
 My lord, here is a note of certain dues.

  TIMON.
 Dues! Whence are you?
  CAPHIS.

  TIMON.
 Contain thyself, good friend.

  VARRO'S SERVANT.
 From Isidore: he humbly prays your speedy
    payment-
  CAPHIS.
 If you did know, my lord, my master's wants-
  VARRO'S SERVANT.

  ISIDORE'S SERVANT.
 Your steward puts me off, my lord; and
    I am sent expressly to your lordship.
 Give me breath.

                                     Exeunt ALCIBIADES and LORDS
    [To FLAVIUS] Come hither.
 Please you, gentlemen,
    The time is unagreeable to this business.

  TIMON.
 Pray draw near.
 Stay, stay, here comes the fool with Apemantus.
 Hang him, he'll abuse us!
  ISIDORE'S SERVANT.
 I speak not to thee.

  APEMANTUS.
 [To the FOOL] Come away.

  ISIDORE'S SERVANT.
 [To VARRO'S SERVANT] There's the fool hangs on
    your back already.

  APEMANTUS.
 No, thou stand'st single; th'art not on him yet.
 Poor rogues and usurers'
    men! Bawds between gold and want!
  ALL SERVANTS.
 Asses.

  ALL SERVANTS.

  FOOL.
 How does your mistress?
  FOOL.
 Would we could see you at Corinth!
  APEMANTUS.
 Good! gramercy.


                           Enter PAGE

  FOOL.
 Look you, here comes my mistress' page.

  PAGE.
 [To the FOOL] Why, how now, Captain? What do you in this wise
    company? How dost thou, Apemantus?
  APEMANTUS.
 Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might answer thee  
    profitably!
  PAGE.
 Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription of these
    letters; I know not which is which.
 No.

  APEMANTUS.
 There will little learning die, then, that day thou art
    hang'd.
 Go; thou wast
    born a bastard, and thou't die a bawd.

    Fool, I will go with you to Lord Timon's.

  FOOL.
 Will you leave me there?
  APEMANTUS.
 You three serve three usurers?
  ALL SERVANTS.
 Ay; would they serv'd us!
  APEMANTUS.

  FOOL.
 Are you three usurers' men?
  ALL SERVANTS.
 When men come to borrow of your
    masters, they approach sadly and go away merry; but they enter my
    mistress' house merrily and go away sadly.
 The reason of this?
  VARRO'S SERVANT.
 I could render one.

  APEMANTUS.
 Do it then, that we may account thee a whoremaster and a
    knave; which notwithstanding, thou shalt be no less esteemed.
 What is a whoremaster, fool?
  FOOL.
 A fool in good clothes, and something like thee.
 'Tis a
    spirit.
 Sometime 't appears like a lord; sometime like a lawyer;
    sometime like a philosopher, with two stones moe than's
    artificial one.

  FOOL.
 Nor thou altogether a wise man.

    As much foolery as I have, so much wit thou lack'st.
 That answer might have become Apemantus.
 Aside, aside; here comes Lord Timon.


                    Re-enter TIMON and FLAVIUS  

  APEMANTUS.
 Come with me, fool, come.

  FOOL.

                                       Exeunt APEMANTUS and FOOL
  FLAVIUS.
 Pray you walk near; I'll speak with you anon.
 You make me marvel wherefore ere this time
    Had you not fully laid my state before me,
    That I might so have rated my expense
    As I had leave of means.

  FLAVIUS.
 You would not hear me
    At many leisures I propos'd.

  TIMON.

  FLAVIUS.

    When, for some trifling present, you have bid me
    Return so much, I have shook my head and wept;
    Yea, 'gainst th' authority of manners, pray'd you
    To hold your hand more close.
 I did endure
    Not seldom, nor no slight checks, when I have
    Prompted you in the ebb of your estate
    And your great flow of debts.
 My lov'd lord,
    Though you hear now- too late!- yet now's a time:
    The greatest of your having lacks a half
    To pay your present debts.
 'Tis all engag'd, some forfeited and gone;
    And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
    Of present dues.

  FLAVIUS.
 O my good lord, the world is but a word;  
    Were it all yours to give it in a breath,
    How quickly were it gone!
  TIMON.
 If you suspect my husbandry or falsehood,
    Call me before th' exactest auditors
    And set me on the proof.
 'Heavens,' have I said 'the bounty of this lord!
    How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants
    This night englutted! Who is not Lord Timon's?
    What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is Lord Timon's?
    Great Timon, noble, worthy, royal Timon!'
    Ah! when the means are gone that buy this praise,
    The breath is gone whereof this praise is made.
  
    Feast-won, fast-lost; one cloud of winter show'rs,
    These flies are couch'd.

  TIMON.
 Come, sermon me no further.
 And, in some sort, these wants of mine are crown'd
    That I account them blessings; for by these
    Shall I try friends.
 I will dispatch you severally- you to Lord Lucius; to Lord
    Lucullus you; I hunted with his honour to-day.
 You to Sempronius.

    Commend me to their loves; and I am proud, say, that my occasions
    have found time to use 'em toward a supply of money.
 Let the
    request be fifty talents.
 As you have said, my lord.
          Exeunt SERVANTS
  FLAVIUS.
 Go you, sir, to the senators,
    Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have
    Deserv'd this hearing.
 Bid 'em send o' th' instant
    A thousand talents to me.

  FLAVIUS.
 I have been bold,
    For that I knew it the most general way,
    To them to use your signet and your name;
    But they do shake their heads, and I am here
    No richer in return.
 They answer, in a joint and corporate voice,
    That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot  
    Do what they would, are sorry- you are honourable-
    But yet they could have wish'd- they know not-
    Something hath been amiss- a noble nature
    May catch a wrench- would all were well!- 'tis pity-
    And so, intending other serious matters,
    After distasteful looks, and these hard fractions,
    With certain half-caps and cold-moving nods,
    They froze me into silence.
 You gods, reward them!
    Prithee, man, look cheerly.
 These old fellows
    Have their ingratitude in them hereditary.

    Go to Ventidius.
 Prithee be not sad,
    Thou art true and honest; ingeniously I speak,
    No blame belongs to thee.
 Ventidius lately
    Buried his father, by whose death he's stepp'd
    Into a great estate.
 Greet him from me,
    Bid him suppose some good necessity
    Touches his friend, which craves to be rememb'red
    With those five talents.
 That had, give't these fellows
    To whom 'tis instant due.
 Nev'r speak or think
    That Timon's fortunes 'mong his friends can sink.
 I would I could not think it.

    That thought is bounty's foe;
    Being free itself, it thinks all others so.
           Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT III.
 SCENE I.

LUCULLUS' house

FLAMINIUS waiting to speak with LUCULLUS.
 Enter SERVANT to him

  SERVANT.
 I have told my lord of you; he is coming down to you.


                           Enter LUCULLUS

  SERVANT.
 Here's my lord.

  LUCULLUS.
 [Aside] One of Lord Timon's men? A gift, I warrant.
 His health is well, sir.
 Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir, which in my lord's  
    behalf I come to entreat your honour to supply;  who, having
    great and instant occasion to use fifty talents, hath sent to
    your lordship to furnish him, nothing doubting your present
    assistance therein.

  LUCULLIUS.
 La, la, la, la! 'Nothing doubting' says he? Alas, good
    lord! a noble gentleman 'tis, if he would not keep so good a
    house.
 Many a time and often I ha' din'd with him and told him
    on't; and come again to supper to him of purpose to have him
    spend less; and yet he would embrace no counsel, take no warning
    by my coming.

  LUCULLUS.
 Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise.

  FLAMINIUS.

  LUCULLUS.
 I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt spirit,
    give thee thy due, and one that knows what belongs to reason, and
    canst use the time well, if the time use thee well.
 Good parts in  
    thee.
 [To SERVANT] Get you gone, sirrah.
 [Exit SERVANT] Draw
    nearer, honest Flaminius.
 Thy lord's a bountiful gentleman; but
    thou art wise, and thou know'st well enough, although thou com'st
    to me, that this is no time to lend money, especially upon bare
    friendship without security.

    Good boy, wink at me, and say thou saw'st me not.
 Fare thee well.

  FLAMINIUS.
         [Throwing the money back]
  LUCULLUS.
 Ha! Now I see thou art a fool, and fit for thy master.

  FIRST STRANGER.
 We know him for no less, though we are but
    strangers to him.

  LUCIUS.
 Fie, no: do not believe it; he cannot want for money.

  SECOND STRANGER.

  LUCIUS.

  LUCIUS.
 What a strange case was that! Now, before the gods, I am
    asham'd on't.
 Denied that honourable man! There was very little
    honour show'd in't.
 For my own part, I must needs confess I have
    received some small kindnesses from him, as money, plate, jewels,  
    and such-like trifles, nothing comparing to his; yet, had he
    mistook him and sent to me, I should ne'er have denied his
    occasion so many talents.
 Fare thee well; commend
    me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my very exquisite friend.

  SERVILIUS.
 May it please your honour, my lord hath sent-
  LUCIUS.
 How shall I thank him, think'st thou? And what
    has he sent now?
  SERVILIUS.

  SERVILIUS.
  
    If his occasion were not virtuous
    I should not urge it half so faithfully.
 Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?
  SERVILIUS.
 Upon my soul, 'tis true, sir.

  LUCIUS.
 What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself against such
    a good time, when I might ha' shown myself honourable! How
    unluckily it happ'ned that I should purchase the day before for a
    little part and undo a great deal of honour! Servilius, now
    before the gods, I am not able to do- the more beast, I say! I
    was sending to use Lord Timon myself, these gentlemen can
    witness; but I would not for the wealth of Athens I had done't
    now.
 Commend me bountifully to his good lordship, and I hope his
    honour will conceive the fairest of me, because I have no power
    to be kind.
 And tell him this from me: I count it one of my
    greatest afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an
    honourable gentleman.
 Yes, sir, I shall.
 I'll look you out a good turn, Servilius.
            Exit
  FIRST STRANGER.
 He ne'er drinks
    But Timon's silver treads upon his lip;
    And yet- O, see the monstrousness of man
    When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!-
    He does deny him, in respect of his,
    What charitable men afford to beggars.

  THIRD STRANGER.
 Religion groans at it.
 For mine own part,
    I never tasted Timon in my life,  
    Nor came any of his bounties over me
    To mark me for his friend; yet I protest,
    For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue,
    And honourable carriage,
    Had his necessity made use of me,
    I would have put my wealth into donation,
    And the best half should have return'd to him,
    So much I love his heart.
                     Exeunt




SCENE III.
 All these
    Owe their estates unto him.

  SEMPRONIUS.
 How! Have they denied him?
    Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him?
    And does he send to me? Three? Humh!
    It shows but little love or judgment in him.
 Must I take th' cure upon me?
    Has much disgrac'd me in't; I'm angry at him,
    That might have known my place.

    I'd rather than the worth of thrice the sum
    Had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake;
    I'd such a courage to do him good.
 But now return,
    And with their faint reply this answer join:
    Who bates mine honour shall not know my coin.
           Exit
  SERVANT.

    This was my lord's best hope; now all are fled,
    Save only the gods.

    And this is all a liberal course allows:
    Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.

A hall in TIMON'S house

Enter two Of VARRO'S MEN, meeting LUCIUS' SERVANT, and others,
all being servants of TIMON's creditors, to wait for his coming out.

Then enter TITUS and HORTENSIUS

  FIRST VARRO'S SERVANT.
 Well met; good morrow, Titus and Hortensius.

  TITUS.
 The like to you, kind Varro.

  HORTENSIUS.
 Lucius! What, do we meet together?
  LUCIUS' SERVANT.
 Ay, and I think one business does command us all;
    for mine is money.
 So is theirs and ours.
 And Sir Philotus too!
  PHILOTUS.
 Good day at once.

  LUCIUS' SERVANT.
 Is not my lord seen yet?  
  LUCIUS' SERVANT.
 Not yet.

  PHILOTUS.

  LUCIUS' SERVANT.
 Ay, but the days are wax'd shorter with him;
    You must consider that a prodigal course
    Is like the sun's, but not like his recoverable.

    I fear
    'Tis deepest winter in Lord Timon's purse;
    That is, one may reach deep enough and yet
    Find little.

  TITUS.

    Your lord sends now for money.
 Most true, he does.
 And he wears jewels now of Timon's gift,
    For which I wait for money.
 It is against my heart.
 Mark how strange it shows
    Timon in this should pay more than he owes;
    And e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewels
    And send for money for 'em.
 I'm weary of this charge, the gods can witness;
    I know my lord hath spent of Timon's wealth,
    And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.

  FIRST VARRO'S SERVANT.
 Yes, mine's three thousand crowns; what's
    yours?
  LUCIUS' SERVANT.

  FIRST VARRO'S SERVANT.
 'Tis much deep; and it should seem by th'
      sum
    Your master's confidence was above mine,
    Else surely his had equall'd.
 One of Lord Timon's men.

  LUCIUS' SERVANT.
 Flaminius! Sir, a word.
 Pray, is my lord ready to
    come forth?
  FLAMINIUS.

  TITUS.

  FLAMINIUS.

 Exit  

                 Enter FLAVIUS, in a cloak, muffled

  LUCIUS' SERVANT.
 Ha! Is not that his steward muffled so?
    He goes away in a cloud.
 Call him, call him.
 Do you hear, sir?
  SECOND VARRO'S SERVANT.
 By your leave, sir.
 We wait for certain money here, sir.

  FLAVIUS.
 Ay,
    If money were as certain as your waiting,
    'Twere sure enough.

    Why then preferr'd you not your sums and bills
    When your false masters eat of my lord's meat?
    Then they could smile, and fawn upon his debts,
    And take down th' int'rest into their glutt'nous maws.

    You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up;
    Let me pass quietly.
  
  LUCIUS' SERVANT.
 Ay, but this answer will not serve.
                                   Exit
  FIRST VARRO'S SERVANT.
 Who can speak broader than he that has no house
    to put his head in? Such may rail against great buildings.


                          Enter SERVILIUS

  TITUS.

  SERVILIUS.
 Many do keep their chambers are not sick;
    And if it be so far beyond his health,
    Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts,
    And make a clear way to the gods.
 We cannot take this for answer, sir.
 What, are my doors oppos'd against my passage?
    Have I been ever free, and must my house
    Be my retentive enemy, my gaol?
    The place which I have feasted, does it now,
    Like all mankind, show me an iron heart?
  LUCIUS' SERVANT.
 Put in now, Titus.

  TITUS.
 My lord, here is my bill.
 Here's mine.

  HORTENSIUS.

  BOTH VARRO'S SERVANTS.
 All our bills.

  TIMON.

  LUCIUS' SERVANT.
 Cut my heart in sums.

  LUCIUS' SERVANT.
 My lord-
  TIMON.
 Faith, I perceive our masters may throw their caps at
    their money.
 They have e'en put my breath from me, the slaves.
 What if it should be so?
  FLAMINIUS.
 My steward!
  FLAVIUS.

  TIMON.
 So fitly? Go, bid all my friends again:  
    Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius- all.

  TIMON.
 Be it not in thy care.
        Exeunt




SCENE V.

    'Tis necessary he should die:
    Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.

  ALCIBIADES.
 Honour, health, and compassion, to the Senate!
  FIRST SENATOR.
 Now, Captain?
  ALCIBIADES.

    He is a man, setting his fate aside,
    Of comely virtues;
    Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice-  
    An honour in him which buys out his fault-
    But with a noble fury and fair spirit,
    Seeing his reputation touch'd to death,
    He did oppose his foe;
    And with such sober and unnoted passion
    He did behove his anger ere 'twas spent,
    As if he had but prov'd an argument.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 You undergo too strict a paradox,
    Striving to make an ugly deed look fair;
    Your words have took such pains as if they labour'd
    To bring manslaughter into form and set
    Quarrelling upon the head of valour; which, indeed,
    Is valour misbegot, and came into the world
    When sects and factions were newly born.

    He's truly valiant that can wisely suffer
    The worst that man can breathe,
    And make his wrongs his outsides,
    To wear them like his raiment, carelessly,
    And ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart,
    To bring it into danger.
 You cannot make gross sins look clear:
    To revenge is no valour, but to bear.
 O my lords,
    As you are great, be pitifully good.

  SECOND SENATOR.
 You breathe in vain.
 He has made too much plenty with 'em.

    He's a sworn rioter; he has a sin that often
    Drowns him and takes his valour prisoner.
 In that beastly fury
    He has been known to commit outrages
    And cherish factions.
 'Tis inferr'd to us  
    His days are foul and his drink dangerous.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 He dies.

  ALCIBIADES.

    My lords, if not for any parts in him-
    Though his right arm might purchase his own time,
    And be in debt to none- yet, more to move you,
    Take my deserts to his, and join 'em both;
    And, for I know your reverend ages love
    Security, I'll pawn my victories, all
    My honours to you, upon his good returns.

    If by this crime he owes the law his life,
    Why, let the war receive't in valiant gore;
    For law is strict, and war is nothing more.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 We are for law: he dies.

  ALCIBIADES.
 Must it be so? It must not be.
 My lords,
    I do beseech you, know me.

  SECOND SENATOR.
 Call me to your remembrances.
  
  THIRD SENATOR.
 What!
  ALCIBIADES.
 I cannot think but your age has forgot me;
    It could not else be I should prove so base
    To sue, and be denied such common grace.

    My wounds ache at you.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 Do you dare our anger?
    'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect:
    We banish thee for ever.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 If after two days' shine Athens contain thee,
    Attend our weightier judgment.
 And, not to swell our spirit,
    He shall be executed presently.
              Exeunt SENATORS
  ALCIBIADES.
 Now the gods keep you old enough that you may live
    Only in bone, that none may look on you!
    I'm worse than mad; I have kept back their foes,
    While they have told their money and let out
    Their coin upon large interest, I myself
    Rich only in large hurts.
 All those for this?  
    Is this the balsam that the usuring Senate
    Pours into captains' wounds? Banishment!
    It comes not ill; I hate not to be banish'd;
    It is a cause worthy my spleen and fury,
    That I may strike at Athens.
 I'll cheer up
    My discontented troops, and lay for hearts.
         Exit




SCENE VI.
 The good time of day to you, sir.
 I think this honourable lord
    did but try us this other day.

    I hope it is not so low with him as he made it seem in the trial
    of his several friends.

  SECOND LORD.
 It should not be, by the persuasion of his new
    feasting.

  FIRST LORD.
 I should think so.
 He hath sent me an earnest inviting,
    which many my near occasions did urge me to put off; but he hath
    conjur'd me beyond them, and I must needs appear.
 In like manner was I in debt to my importunate
    business, but he would not hear my excuse.

  FIRST LORD.
 I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how all
    things go.
  
  SECOND LORD.
 What would he have borrowed of
    you?
  FIRST LORD.
 A thousand pieces.

  SECOND LORD.
 Ever at the best, hearing well of your lordship.

  SECOND LORD.
 The swallow follows not summer more willing than we
    your lordship.
 I hope it remains not unkindly with your lordship that
    I return'd you an empty messenger.

  TIMON.
 My noble lord-
  TIMON.

  TIMON.

  SECOND LORD.
 Let it not cumber your better remembrance.

  SECOND LORD.
 All cover'd dishes!
  FIRST LORD.
 Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield it.

  FIRST LORD.
 Alcibiades is banish'd.
 Hear you of it?
  FIRST AND SECOND LORDS.
 'Tis so, be sure of it.

  FIRST LORD.
 How? how?
  SECOND LORD.
 I pray you, upon what?
  TIMON.
 My worthy friends, will you draw near?
  THIRD LORD.
 Here's a noble feast toward.
  
  SECOND LORD.
 Will't hold? Will't hold?
  SECOND LORD.
 I do conceive.

  TIMON.
 Make not
    a city feast of it, to let the meat cool ere we can agree upon
    the first place.
 Sit, sit.
 The gods require our thanks:

    You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with thankfulness.
 Let no assembly of
    twenty be without a score of villains.
 The rest of
    your foes, O gods, the senators of Athens, together with the
    common lag of people, what is amiss in them, you gods, make
    suitable for destruction.
 For these my present friends, as they  
    are to me nothing, so in nothing bless them, and to nothing are
    they welcome.
 What does his lordship mean?
  SOME OTHER.
 May you a better feast never behold,
    You knot of mouth-friends! Smoke and lukewarm water
    Is your perfection.
 Live loath'd and long,
    Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,
    Courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears,
    You fools of fortune, trencher friends, time's flies,
    Cap and knee slaves, vapours, and minute-lacks!
    Of man and beast the infinite malady
    Crust you quite o'er! What, dost thou go?  
    Soft, take thy physic first; thou too, and thou.
       [Throws the
                            dishes at them, and drives them out]
    What, all in motion? Henceforth be no feast
    Whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.

    Burn house! Sink Athens! Henceforth hated be
    Of Timon man and all humanity!                          Exit

                           Re-enter the LORDS

  FIRST LORD.
 How now, my lords!
  SECOND LORD.
 Know you the quality of Lord Timon's fury?
  THIRD LORD.
 He's but a mad lord, and nought but humours sways him.

    He gave me a jewel th' other day, and now he has beat it out of
    my hat.
 Did you see my jewel?
  THIRD LORD.
 Here lies my gown.
  
  FIRST LORD.

  SECOND LORD.
 I feel't upon my bones.

  FOURTH LORD.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE I.
 Let me look back upon thee.
 O thou wall
    That girdles in those wolves, dive in the earth
    And fence not Athens! Matrons, turn incontinent.

    Obedience, fail in children! Slaves and fools,
    Pluck the grave wrinkled Senate from the bench
    And minister in their steads.
 To general filths
    Convert, o' th' instant, green virginity.

    Do't in your parents' eyes.
 Bankrupts, hold fast;
    Rather than render back, out with your knives
    And cut your trusters' throats.
 Maid, to thy master's bed:
    Thy mistress is o' th' brothel.
 Son of sixteen,
    Pluck the lin'd crutch from thy old limping sire,
    With it beat out his brains.
 Plagues incident to men,
    Your potent and infectious fevers heap
    On Athens, ripe for stroke.
 Thou cold sciatica,
    Cripple our senators, that their limbs may halt
    As lamely as their manners.
 Lust and liberty,
    Creep in the minds and marrows of our youth,
    That 'gainst the stream of virtue they may strive
    And drown themselves in riot.
 Itches, blains,
    Sow all th' Athenian bosoms, and their crop
    Be general leprosy! Breath infect breath,
    That their society, as their friendship, may
    Be merely poison! Nothing I'll bear from thee
    But nakedness, thou detestable town!
    Take thou that too, with multiplying bans.

    Timon will to the woods, where he shall find
    Th' unkindest beast more kinder than mankind.
 TIMON's house

Enter FLAVIUS, with two or three SERVANTS

  FIRST SERVANT.
 Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?
    Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,
    I am as poor as you.

  FIRST SERVANT.
 Such a house broke!
    So noble a master fall'n! All gone, and not
    One friend to take his fortune by the arm
    And go along with him?
  SECOND SERVANT.
  

                     Enter other SERVANTS

  FLAVIUS.
 Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery;
    That see I by our faces.
 We are fellows still,
    Serving alike in sorrow.
 Leak'd is our bark;
    And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck,
    Hearing the surges threat.
 We must all part
    Into this sea of air.
 Good fellows all,
    The latest of my wealth I'll share amongst you.

    Wherever we shall meet, for Timon's sake,
    Let's yet be fellows; let's shake our heads and say,
    As 'twere a knell unto our master's fortune,
    'We have seen better days.

                                             [Giving them money]
    Nay, put out all your hands.

    My dearest lord- blest to be most accurst,
    Rich only to be wretched- thy great fortunes
    Are made thy chief afflictions.

    I'll follow and enquire him out.

The woods near the sea-shore.

    Raise me this beggar and deny't that lord:
    The senator shall bear contempt hereditary,
    The beggar native honour.
 Who dares, who dares,
    In purity of manhood stand upright,
    And say 'This man's a flatterer'? If one be,
    So are they all; for every grise of fortune
    Is smooth'd by that below.
 All's oblique;
    There's nothing level in our cursed natures
    But direct villainy.
 Therefore be abhorr'd
    All feasts, societies, and throngs of men!
    His semblable, yea, himself, Timon disdains.

    Destruction fang mankind! Earth, yield me roots.
 What is here?
    Gold? Yellow, glittering, precious gold? No, gods,
    I am no idle votarist.
 Roots, you clear heavens!
    Thus much of this will make black white, foul fair,
    Wrong right, base noble, old young, coward valiant.

    Ha, you gods! why this? What, this, you gods? Why, this
    Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,
    Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads-
    This yellow slave
    Will knit and break religions, bless th' accurs'd,
    Make the hoar leprosy ador'd, place thieves
    And give them title, knee, and approbation,  
    With senators on the bench.
 This is it
    That makes the wappen'd widow wed again-
    She whom the spital-house and ulcerous sores
    Would cast the gorge at this embalms and spices
    To th 'April day again.
 Come, damn'd earth,
    Thou common whore of mankind, that puts odds
    Among the rout of nations, I will make thee
    Do thy right nature.
                        [March afar off]
    Ha! a drum? Th'art quick,
    But yet I'll bury thee.

    Nay, stay thou out for earnest.
          [Keeping some gold]

          Enter ALCIBIADES, with drum and fife, in warlike
                  manner; and PHRYNIA and TIMANDRA

  ALCIBIADES.
 What art thou there? Speak.

  TIMON.
 The canker gnaw thy heart
    For showing me again the eyes of man!
  ALCIBIADES.
 What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee  
    That art thyself a man?
  TIMON.
 I am Misanthropos, and hate mankind.

  TIMON.
 I know thee too; and more than that I know thee
    I not desire to know.

  PHRYNIA.

  ALCIBIADES.
 As the moon does, by wanting light to give.
  
  ALCIBIADES.
 Promise me friendship, but perform none.

  TIMON.
 Thou saw'st them when I had prosperity.

  ALCIBIADES.
 I see them now; then was a blessed time.
 Is this th' Athenian minion whom the world
    Voic'd so regardfully?
  TIMON.

  TIMON.
 Be a whore still; they love thee not that use thee.

    Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.

    Make use of thy salt hours.
 Hang thee, monster!
  ALCIBIADES.
 Pardon him, sweet Timandra, for his wits
    Are drown'd and lost in his calamities.
 I have heard, and griev'd,
    How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth,
    Forgetting thy great deeds, when neighbour states,
    But for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them-
  TIMON.
 I prithee beat thy drum and get thee gone.

  ALCIBIADES.
 I am thy friend, and pity thee, dear Timon.

  ALCIBIADES.
 Why, fare thee well;
    Here is some gold for thee.
 Keep it: I cannot eat it.
 When I have laid proud Athens on a heap-
  TIMON.
 That by killing of villains
    Thou wast born to conquer my country.

    Put up thy gold.
 Here's gold.
 Go on.

    Be as a planetary plague, when Jove
    Will o'er some high-vic'd city hang his poison
    In the sick air; let not thy sword skip one.

    Pity not honour'd age for his white beard:
    He is an usurer.
 Strike me the counterfeit matron:
    It is her habit only that is honest,
    Herself's a bawd.
 Let not the virgin's cheek
    Make soft thy trenchant sword; for those milk paps
    That through the window bars bore at men's eyes
    Are not within the leaf of pity writ,
    But set them down horrible traitors.
 Spare not the babe
    Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy;
    Think it a bastard whom the oracle
    Hath doubtfully pronounc'd thy throat shall cut,  
    And mince it sans remorse.
 There's gold to pay thy soldiers.

    Make large confusion; and, thy fury spent,
    Confounded be thyself! Speak not, be gone.

  ALCIBIADES.
 Hast thou gold yet? I'll take the gold thou givest me,
    Not all thy counsel.
 Give us some gold, good Timon.

    Hast thou more?
  TIMON.
 Hold up, you sluts,
    Your aprons mountant; you are not oathable,
    Although I know you'll swear, terribly swear,
    Into strong shudders and to heavenly agues,
    Th' immortal gods that hear you.
 Spare your oaths;
    I'll trust to your conditions.
 Yet may your pains six months
    Be quite contrary! And thatch your poor thin roofs
    With burdens of the dead- some that were hang'd,
    No matter.
 Wear them, betray with them.
 Whore still;
    Paint till a horse may mire upon your face.

    A pox of wrinkles!
  PHRYNIA AND TIMANDRA.
 Well, more gold.

  TIMON.
 Crack the lawyer's voice,
    That he may never more false title plead,
    Nor sound his quillets shrilly.
 Make curl'd-pate ruffians bald,  
    And let the unscarr'd braggarts of the war
    Derive some pain from you.
 Plague all,
    That your activity may defeat and quell
    The source of all erection.
 There's more gold.

    Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
    And ditches grave you all!
  PHRYNIA AND TIMANDRA.
 More counsel with more money, bounteous
    Timon.

  TIMON.
 More whore, more mischief first; I have given you earnest.
 Strike up the drum towards Athens.
 If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.
 I never did thee harm.

  ALCIBIADES.
 Call'st thou that harm?
  TIMON.

  ALCIBIADES.
 We but offend him.
 Strike.

                                Drum beats.
 Exeunt all but TIMON
  TIMON.

  TIMON.
 'Tis, then, because thou dost not keep a dog,
    Whom I would imitate.
 Consumption catch thee!
  APEMANTUS.
 This is in thee a nature but infected,
    A poor unmanly melancholy sprung
    From change of fortune.
 Why this spade, this place?
    This slave-like habit and these looks of care?
    Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft,
    Hug their diseas'd perfumes, and have forgot
    That ever Timon was.
 Shame not these woods
    By putting on the cunning of a carper.
 'Tis most just
    That thou turn rascal; hadst thou wealth again
    Rascals should have't.
 Do not assume my likeness.

  TIMON.
 Were I like thee, I'd throw away myself.

  APEMANTUS.
 Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself;
    A madman so long, now a fool.
 What, think'st
    That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,
    Will put thy shirt on warm? Will these moist trees,
    That have outliv'd the eagle, page thy heels
    And skip when thou point'st out? Will the cold brook,
    Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste
    To cure thy o'ernight's surfeit? Call the creatures
    Whose naked natures live in all the spite
    Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,
    To the conflicting elements expos'd,
    Answer mere nature- bid them flatter thee.
 A fool of thee.
 Depart.
 I love thee better now than e'er I did.
 I hate thee worse.

  APEMANTUS.
 Why?
  TIMON.
 Thou flatter'st misery.
 To vex thee.

  TIMON.
 Always a villain's office or a fool's.

    Dost please thyself in't?
  APEMANTUS.
 Ay.

  TIMON.
 Willing misery
    Outlives incertain pomp, is crown'd before.
 Best state, contentless,
    Hath a distracted and most wretched being,
    Worse than the worst, content.
  
    Thou should'st desire to die, being miserable.
 Not by his breath that is more miserable.

    Thou art a slave whom Fortune's tender arm
    With favour never clasp'd, but bred a dog.

    Hadst thou, like us from our first swath, proceeded
    The sweet degrees that this brief world affords
    To such as may the passive drugs of it
    Freely command, thou wouldst have plung'd thyself
    In general riot, melted down thy youth
    In different beds of lust, and never learn'd
    The icy precepts of respect, but followed
    The sug'red game before thee.
 But myself,
    Who had the world as my confectionary;
    The mouths, the tongues, the eyes, and hearts of men
    At duty, more than I could frame employment;
    That numberless upon me stuck, as leaves
    Do on the oak, have with one winter's brush
    Fell from their boughs, and left me open, bare
    For every storm that blows- I to bear this,
    That never knew but better, is some burden.
 Why shouldst thou hate men?
    They never flatter'd thee.
 What hast thou given?
    If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,
    Must be thy subject; who, in spite, put stuff
    To some she-beggar and compounded thee
    Poor rogue hereditary.
 Hence, be gone.
 I, that I was
    No prodigal.

  TIMON.
 I, that I am one now.

    Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
    I'd give thee leave to hang it.
 Get thee gone.
                         [Eating a root]
  APEMANTUS.
 Here! I will mend thy feast.

                                             [Offering him food]  
  TIMON.

  APEMANTUS.
 So I shall mend mine own by th' lack of thine.

  TIMON.
 'Tis not well mended so; it is but botch'd.

    If not, I would it were.
 Thee thither in a whirlwind.
 Here is no use for gold.

  TIMON.
 The best and truest;
    For here it sleeps and does no hired harm.

  APEMANTUS.
 Where liest a nights, Timon?
  TIMON.

  TIMON.
 Where wouldst thou send it?
  TIMON.

  APEMANTUS.
 The middle of humanity thou never knewest, but the
    extremity of both ends.

  APEMANTUS.
 Dost hate a medlar?
  TIMON.
 Ay, though it look like thee.

  APEMANTUS.
 An th' hadst hated medlars sooner, thou shouldst have
    loved thyself better now.

  TIMON.
 I understand thee: thou hadst some means to keep a dog.
 What things in the world canst thou nearest compare to
    thy flatterers?
  TIMON.
 What
    wouldst thou do with the world, Apemantus, if it lay in thy
    power?
  APEMANTUS.

  TIMON.
 Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion of men, and
    remain a beast with the beasts?  
  APEMANTUS.
 Ay, Timon.
 A beastly ambition, which the gods grant thee t' attain to!
    If thou wert the lion, the fox would beguile thee; if thou wert
    the lamb, the fox would eat thee; if thou wert the fox, the lion
    would suspect thee, when, peradventure, thou wert accus'd by the
    ass.
 If thou wert the ass, thy dulness would torment thee; and
    still thou liv'dst but as a breakfast to the wolf.
 If thou wert
    the wolf, thy greediness would afflict thee, and oft thou
    shouldst hazard thy life for thy dinner.
 Wert thou the unicorn,
    pride and wrath would confound thee, and make thine own self the
    conquest of thy fury.
 Wert thou bear, thou wouldst be kill'd by
    the horse; wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seiz'd by the
    leopard; wert thou a leopard, thou wert german to the lion, and
    the spots of thy kindred were jurors on thy life.
 What beast couldst thou
    be that were not subject to a beast? And what beast art thou
    already, that seest not thy loss in transformation!
  APEMANTUS.
 If thou couldst please me with speaking to me, thou
    mightst have hit upon it here.
  
  TIMON.
 How has the ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the
    city?
  APEMANTUS.
 Yonder comes a poet and a painter.
 The plague of company
    light upon thee! I will fear to catch it, and give way.

  TIMON.
 When there is nothing living but thee, thou shalt be
    welcome.
 I had rather be a beggar's dog than Apemantus.

  APEMANTUS.
 Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.
 A plague on thee! thou art too bad to curse.

  TIMON.

  APEMANTUS.

  TIMON.

    I'll beat thee- but I should infect my hands.

  APEMANTUS.
 Would thou wouldst burst!
  TIMON.
                     [Throws a stone at him]
  APEMANTUS.
 Slave!
  APEMANTUS.
 Toad!
  TIMON.

    [Looks at the gold] O thou sweet king-killer, and dear divorce
    'Twixt natural son and sire! thou bright defiler
    Of Hymen's purest bed! thou valiant Mars!
    Thou ever young, fresh, lov'd, and delicate wooer,
    Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow
    That lies on Dian's lap! thou visible god,
    That sold'rest close impossibilities,
    And mak'st them kiss! that speak'st with every tongue  
    To every purpose! O thou touch of hearts!
    Think thy slave man rebels, and by thy virtue
    Set them into confounding odds, that beasts
    May have the world in empire!
  APEMANTUS.
 I'll say th' hast gold.

    Thou wilt be throng'd to shortly.

  TIMON.
 Throng'd to?
  APEMANTUS.
 Ay.

  TIMON.
 Thy back, I prithee.
 Live, and love thy misery!
  TIMON.
 Long live so, and so die! [Exit APEMANTUS] I am quit.


                       Enter the BANDITTI

  FIRST BANDIT.
 Where should he have this gold? It is some poor
    fragment, some slender ort of his remainder.
 The mere want of
    gold and the falling-from of his friends drove him into this
    melancholy.
  
  SECOND BANDIT.
 It is nois'd he hath a mass of treasure.
 True; for he bears it not about him.
 'Tis hid.
 Is not this he?
  BANDITTI.
 Where?
  SECOND BANDIT.
 'Tis his description.

  THIRD BANDIT.
 He; I know him.

  BANDITTI.
 Now, thieves?
  BANDITTI.
 Soldiers, not thieves.

  TIMON.
 Both too, and women's sons.

  BANDITTI.
 We are not thieves, but men that much do want.
 Your greatest want is, you want much of meat.
 Want! Why want?  
  FIRST BANDIT.
 Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds, and fishes;
    You must eat men.
 Yet thanks I must you con
    That you are thieves profess'd, that you work not
    In holier shapes; for there is boundless theft
    In limited professions.
 Rascal thieves,
    Here's gold.
 Trust not the physician;
    His antidotes are poison, and he slays
    Moe than you rob.

    The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
    Has uncheck'd theft.
 There's more gold.

  THIRD BANDIT.
 Has almost charm'd me from my profession by
    persuading me to it.

  FIRST BANDIT.
 'Tis in the malice of mankind that he thus advises
    us; not to have us thrive in our mystery.

  SECOND BANDIT.
 I'll believe him as an enemy, and give over my
    trade.
 Let us first see peace in Athens.
 There is no time so
    miserable but a man may be true.
 My dearest master!
  TIMON.
 Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men;
    Then, if thou grant'st th'art a man, I have forgot thee.
 An honest poor servant of yours.

    I never had honest man about me, I.

    All I kept were knaves, to serve in meat to villains.
 The gods are witness,
    Nev'r did poor steward wear a truer grief
    For his undone lord than mine eyes for you.

  TIMON.
 What, dost thou weep? Come nearer.
 Then I love thee
    Because thou art a woman and disclaim'st
    Flinty mankind, whose eyes do never give
    But thorough lust and laughter.
 Pity's sleeping.

    Strange times, that weep with laughing, not with weeping!
  FLAVIUS.

  TIMON.
 Surely, this man
    Was born of woman.

    Methinks thou art more honest now than wise;
    For by oppressing and betraying me
    Thou mightst have sooner got another service;
    For many so arrive at second masters
    Upon their first lord's neck.
 But tell me true,
    For I must ever doubt though ne'er so sure,
    Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,
    If not a usuring kindness, and as rich men deal gifts,
    Expecting in return twenty for one?
  FLAVIUS.
 No, my most worthy master, in whose breast
    Doubt and suspect, alas, are plac'd too late!
    You should have fear'd false times when you did feast:
    Suspect still comes where an estate is least.

    That which I show, heaven knows, is merely love,  
    Duty, and zeal, to your unmatched mind,
    Care of your food and living; and believe it,
    My most honour'd lord,
    For any benefit that points to me,
    Either in hope or present, I'd exchange
    For this one wish, that you had power and wealth
    To requite me by making rich yourself.

  TIMON.
 Go, live rich and happy,
    But thus condition'd; thou shalt build from men;
    Hate all, curse all, show charity to none,
    But let the famish'd flesh slide from the bone
    Ere thou relieve the beggar.
 Give to dogs
    What thou deniest to men; let prisons swallow 'em,
    Debts wither 'em to nothing.

  FLAVIUS.
  
  TIMON.

    Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT V.

The woods.

  POET.
 to be thought of him? Does the rumour hold for true that he's
    so full of gold?
  PAINTER.
 Certain.
 Alcibiades reports it; Phrynia and Timandra had
    gold of him.
 He likewise enrich'd poor straggling soldiers with
    great quantity.
 'Tis said he gave unto his steward a mighty sum.
 Then this breaking of his has been but a try for his friends?
  PAINTER.
 Nothing else.
 You shall see him a palm in Athens again,
    and flourish with the highest.
 Therefore 'tis not amiss we tender
    our loves to him in this suppos'd distress of his; it will show
    honestly in us, and is very likely to load our purposes with what
    they travail for, if it be just and true report that goes of his
    having.

  POET.
 What have you now to present unto him?
  PAINTER.

  PAINTER.
 Promising is the very air o' th' time;
    it opens the eyes of expectation.
 To promise is most
    courtly and fashionable; performance is a kind of will or
    testament which argues a great sickness in his judgment that
    makes it.


                    Enter TIMON from his cave

  TIMON.
 [Aside] Excellent workman! Thou canst not paint a man so bad
    as is thyself.
 It
    must be a personating of himself; a satire against the softness
    of prosperity, with a discovery of the infinite flatteries that
    follow youth and opulency.

  POET.

  PAINTER.

    Come.

  TIMON.
 [Aside] I'll meet you at the turn.
 What a god's gold,
    That he is worshipp'd in a baser temple
    Than where swine feed!
    'Tis thou that rig'st the bark and plough'st the foam,
    Settlest admired reverence in a slave.
 Hail, worthy Timon!
  PAINTER.
 Our late noble master!
  TIMON.
 Have I once liv'd to see two honest men?
  POET.
 Let it go naked: men may see't the better.

  PAINTER.

  TIMON.

  PAINTER.

  TIMON.
  
  TIMON.
 Y'are honest men.
 Y'have heard that I have gold;
    I am sure you have.
 Speak truth; y'are honest men.
 So it is said, my noble lord; but therefore
    Came not my friend nor I.

  TIMON.

  PAINTER.
 So, so, my lord.
 E'en so, sir, as I say.

    But for all this, my honest-natur'd friends,
    I must needs say you have a little fault.

  BOTH.
 Beseech your honour
    To make it known to us.

  TIMON.
 You'll take it ill.

  BOTH.

  TIMON.
 Will you indeed?  
  BOTH.

  TIMON.
 There's never a one of you but trusts a knave
    That mightily deceives you.
 Do we, my lord?
  TIMON.
 Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,
    Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,
    Keep in your bosom; yet remain assur'd
    That he's a made-up villain.

  PAINTER.
 Nor I.

  TIMON.

  TIMON.
 [To the POET] If thou wouldst not reside
    But where one villain is, then him abandon.
-
    Hence, pack! there's gold; you came for gold, ye slaves.
-
    Out, rascal dogs!                [Beats and drives them out]

                    Enter FLAVIUS and two SENATORS

  FLAVIUS.
 It is vain that you would speak with Timon;
    For he is set so only to himself
    That nothing but himself which looks like man
    Is friendly with him.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 Bring us to his cave.

    It is our part and promise to th' Athenians
    To speak with Timon.

  SECOND SENATOR.
 Bring us to him,
    And chance it as it may.

  FLAVIUS.
 Here is his cave.

    Speak to them, noble Timon.
 Speak and be hang'd!
    For each true word a blister, and each false
    Be as a cauterizing to the root o' th' tongue,
    Consuming it with speaking!
  FIRST SENATOR.
 Worthy Timon-
  TIMON.
 Of none but such as you, and you of Timon.
 The senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.
 I thank them; and would send them back the plague,
    Could I but catch it for them.

  FIRST SENATOR.

    The senators with one consent of love
    Entreat thee back to Athens, who have thought
    On special dignities, which vacant lie
    For thy best use and wearing.

  SECOND SENATOR.
 You witch me in it;
    Surprise me to the very brink of tears.
  
    Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes,
    And I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 Therefore so please thee to return with us,
    And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take
    The captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks,
    Allow'd with absolute power, and thy good name
    Live with authority.
 So soon we shall drive back
    Of Alcibiades th' approaches wild,
    Who, like a boar too savage, doth root up
    His country's peace.

  SECOND SENATOR.
 And shakes his threat'ning sword
    Against the walls of Athens.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 For myself,
    There's not a whittle in th' unruly camp
    But I do prize it at my love before
    The reverend'st throat in Athens.

  TIMON.
 My long sickness
    Of health and living now begins to mend,
    And nothing brings me all things.
 We speak in vain.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 That's well spoke.
 Commend me to my loving countrymen-
  FIRST SENATOR.
 These words become your lips as they pass through
    them.

  SECOND SENATOR.
 And enter in our ears like great triumphers
    In their applauding gates.

  TIMON.
 I like this well; he will return again.

  TIMON.
 I pray you do my greeting.

  FLAVIUS.
 Trouble him no further; thus you still shall find him.
 Come not to me again; but say to Athens
    Timon hath made his everlasting mansion
    Upon the beached verge of the salt flood,
    Who once a day with his embossed froth
    The turbulent surge shall cover.
 Thither come,
    And let my gravestone be your oracle.
 Timon hath done his reign.

                                        Exit TIMON into his cave
  FIRST SENATOR.

  SECOND SENATOR.
  
  FIRST SENATOR.
 It requires swift foot.
                  Exeunt




SCENE II.

Before the walls of Athens

Enter two other SENATORS with a MESSENGER

  FIRST SENATOR.

    Besides, his expedition promises
    Present approach.

  SECOND SENATOR.

  MESSENGER.
 I met a courier, one mine ancient friend,
    Whom, though in general part we were oppos'd,
    Yet our old love had a particular force,
    And made us speak like friends.


               Enter the other SENATORS, from TIMON
  
  FIRST SENATOR.
 Here come our brothers.

  THIRD SENATOR.

    The enemies' drum is heard, and fearful scouring
    Doth choke the air with dust.
 In, and prepare.

    Ours is the fall, I fear; our foes the snare.
         Exeunt




SCENE III.
 By all description this should be the place.

Before the walls of Athens

Trumpets sound.
 Sound to this coward and lascivious town
    Our terrible approach.
 Noble and young,  
    When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
    Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,
    We sent to thee, to give thy rages balm,
    To wipe out our ingratitude with loves
    Above their quantity.

  SECOND SENATOR.

    We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
    The common stroke of war.

  SECOND SENATOR.
 Nor are they living
    Who were the motives that you first went out;
    Shame, that they wanted cunning, in excess
    Hath broke their hearts.
 March, noble lord,
    Into our city with thy banners spread.
  
    By decimation and a tithed death-
    If thy revenges hunger for that food
    Which nature loathes- take thou the destin'd tenth,
    And by the hazard of the spotted die
    Let die the spotted.

  FIRST SENATOR.
 All have not offended;
    For those that were, it is not square to take,
    On those that are, revenge: crimes, like lands,
    Are not inherited.
 Then, dear countryman,
    Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage;
    Spare thy Athenian cradle, and those kin
    Which, in the bluster of thy wrath, must fall
    With those that have offended.

  SECOND SENATOR.

  FIRST SENATOR.

  SECOND SENATOR.
 Throw thy glove,
    Or any token of thine honour else,
    That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress
    And not as our confusion, all thy powers
    Shall make their harbour in our town till we
    Have seal'd thy full desire.

    Those enemies of Timon's and mine own,
    Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof,
    Fall, and no more.
 And, to atone your fears
    With my more noble meaning, not a man
    Shall pass his quarter or offend the stream
    Of regular justice in your city's bounds,
    But shall be render'd to your public laws
    At heaviest answer.
  
                       [The SENATORS descend and open the gates]

                 Enter a SOLDIER as a Messenger

  SOLDIER.
 My noble General, Timon is dead;
    Entomb'd upon the very hem o' th' sea;
    And on his grave-stone this insculpture, which
    With wax I brought away, whose soft impression
    Interprets for my poor ignorance.


                  ALCIBIADES reads the Epitaph

    'Here lies a wretched corse, of wretched soul bereft;
    Seek not my name.
 A plague consume you wicked caitiffs left!
    Here lie I, Timon, who alive all living men did hate.

    Though thou abhorr'dst in us our human griefs,
    Scorn'dst our brain's flow, and those our droplets which  
    From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit
    Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
    On thy low grave, on faults forgiven.
 Bring me into your city,
    And I will use the olive, with my sword;
    Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make each
    Prescribe to other, as each other's leech.
                                 Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



                          SCENE:
               Rome and the neighbourhood


ACT 1.
 SCENE I.

Rome.
 Before the Capitol

Flourish.
 Enter the TRIBUNES and SENATORS aloft; and then enter below
SATURNINUS and his followers at one door, and BASSIANUS and his followers
at the other, with drums and trumpets

  SATURNINUS.

  BASSIANUS.
 Romans, friends, followers, favourers of my right,
    If ever Bassianus, Caesar's son,
    Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome,
    Keep then this passage to the Capitol;
    And suffer not dishonour to approach
    The imperial seat, to virtue consecrate,  
    To justice, continence, and nobility;
    But let desert in pure election shine;
    And, Romans, fight for freedom in your choice.


        Enter MARCUS ANDRONICUS aloft, with the crown

  MARCUS.

    A nobler man, a braver warrior,
    Lives not this day within the city walls.

    Ten years are spent since first he undertook  
    This cause of Rome, and chastised with arms
    Our enemies' pride; five times he hath return'd
    Bleeding to Rome, bearing his valiant sons
    In coffins from the field; and at this day
    To the monument of that Andronici
    Done sacrifice of expiation,
    And slain the noblest prisoner of the Goths.

    And now at last, laden with honour's spoils,
    Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,
    Renowned Titus, flourishing in arms.

    Let us entreat, by honour of his name
    Whom worthily you would have now succeed,
    And in the Capitol and Senate's right,
    Whom you pretend to honour and adore,
    That you withdraw you and abate your strength,
    Dismiss your followers, and, as suitors should,
    Plead your deserts in peace and humbleness.

  BASSIANUS.
 Marcus Andronicus, so I do affy
    In thy uprightness and integrity,  
    And so I love and honour thee and thine,
    Thy noble brother Titus and his sons,
    And her to whom my thoughts are humbled all,
    Gracious Lavinia, Rome's rich ornament,
    That I will here dismiss my loving friends,
    And to my fortunes and the people's favour
    Commit my cause in balance to be weigh'd.

                                Exeunt the soldiers of BASSIANUS
  SATURNINUS.
 Friends, that have been thus forward in my right,
    I thank you all and here dismiss you all,
    And to the love and favour of my country
    Commit myself, my person, and the cause.

                               Exeunt the soldiers of SATURNINUS
    Rome, be as just and gracious unto me
    As I am confident and kind to thee.

  BASSIANUS.
 Tribunes, and me, a poor competitor.
 Romans, make way.
 The good Andronicus,
    Patron of virtue, Rome's best champion,
    Successful in the battles that he fights,
    With honour and with fortune is return'd
    From where he circumscribed with his sword
    And brought to yoke the enemies of Rome.
 Then set down
        the coffin and TITUS speaks

  TITUS.

    Here Goths have given me leave to sheathe my sword.

    Titus, unkind, and careless of thine own,
    Why suffer'st thou thy sons, unburied yet,
    To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?
    Make way to lay them by their brethren.

                                            [They open the tomb]
    There greet in silence, as the dead are wont,
    And sleep in peace, slain in your country's wars.
  
    O sacred receptacle of my joys,
    Sweet cell of virtue and nobility,
    How many sons hast thou of mine in store
    That thou wilt never render to me more!
  LUCIUS.

  TITUS.

  TAMORA.

    Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods?
    Draw near them then in being merciful.

    Sweet mercy is nobility's true badge.

  TITUS.

    These are their brethren, whom your Goths beheld
    Alive and dead; and for their brethren slain
    Religiously they ask a sacrifice.

  LUCIUS.
 Away with him, and make a fire straight;
    And with our swords, upon a pile of wood,
    Let's hew his limbs till they be clean consum'd.

                                Exeunt TITUS' SONS, with ALARBUS
  TAMORA.
 O cruel, irreligious piety!  
  CHIRON.
 Was never Scythia half so barbarous!
  DEMETRIUS.

    Then, madam, stand resolv'd, but hope withal
    The self-same gods that arm'd the Queen of Troy
    With opportunity of sharp revenge
    Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent
    May favour Tamora, the Queen of Goths-
    When Goths were Goths and Tamora was queen-
    To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.


            Re-enter LUCIUS, QUINTUS, MARTIUS, and
   MUTIUS, the sons of ANDRONICUS, with their swords bloody

  LUCIUS.

    Remaineth nought but to inter our brethren,  
    And with loud 'larums welcome them to Rome.

  TITUS.

                 [Sound trumpets and lay the coffin in the tomb]
    In peace and honour rest you here, my sons;
    Rome's readiest champions, repose you here in rest,
    Secure from worldly chances and mishaps!
    Here lurks no treason, here no envy swells,
    Here grow no damned drugs, here are no storms,
    No noise, but silence and eternal sleep.
  
    O, bless me here with thy victorious hand,
    Whose fortunes Rome's best citizens applaud!
  TITUS.
 Long live Lord Titus, my beloved brother,
    Gracious triumpher in the eyes of Rome!
  TITUS.
 Thanks, gentle Tribune, noble brother Marcus.

  TITUS.

    What should I don this robe and trouble you?
    Be chosen with proclamations to-day,
    To-morrow yield up rule, resign my life,
    And set abroad new business for you all?
    Rome, I have been thy soldier forty years,
    And led my country's strength successfully,
    And buried one and twenty valiant sons,
    Knighted in field, slain manfully in arms,
    In right and service of their noble country.

    Give me a staff of honour for mine age,  
    But not a sceptre to control the world.

    Upright he held it, lords, that held it last.
 Proud and ambitious Tribune, canst thou tell?
  TITUS.
 Patience, Prince Saturninus.

  SATURNINUS.

    Patricians, draw your swords, and sheathe them not
    Till Saturninus be Rome's Emperor.

    Andronicus, would thou were shipp'd to hell
    Rather than rob me of the people's hearts!
  LUCIUS.
 Content thee, Prince; I will restore to thee
    The people's hearts, and wean them from themselves.

  BASSIANUS.

    My faction if thou strengthen with thy friends,
    I will most thankful be; and thanks to men
    Of noble minds is honourable meed.

  TITUS.
 To gratify the good Andronicus,
    And gratulate his safe return to Rome,
    The people will accept whom he admits.

  TITUS.
 It doth, my worthy lord, and in this match
    I hold me highly honoured of your Grace,
    And here in sight of Rome, to Saturnine,
    King and commander of our commonweal,
    The wide world's Emperor, do I consecrate
    My sword, my chariot, and my prisoners,
    Presents well worthy Rome's imperious lord;
    Receive them then, the tribute that I owe,
    Mine honour's ensigns humbled at thy feet.
  [To TAMORA]  Now, madam, are you prisoner to an emperor;
    To him that for your honour and your state
    Will use you nobly and your followers.
  [Aside]  A goodly lady, trust me; of the hue
    That I would choose, were I to choose anew.

    Rest on my word, and let not discontent
    Daunt all your hopes.
 Madam, he comforts you
    Can make you greater than the Queen of Goths.
 Not I, my lord, sith true nobility
    Warrants these words in princely courtesy.
 Thanks, sweet Lavinia.
 Romans, let us go.

                                               [Seizing LAVINIA]
  TITUS.
 How, sir! Are you in earnest then, my lord?
  BASSIANUS.

  MARCUS.

  LUCIUS.
 And that he will and shall, if Lucius live.
 Surpris'd! By whom?
  BASSIANUS.

                        Exeunt BASSIANUS and MARCUS with LAVINIA
  MUTIUS.
 Brothers, help to convey her hence away,
    And with my sword I'll keep this door safe.

                             Exeunt LUCIUS, QUINTUS, and MARTIUS
  TITUS.
 Follow, my lord, and I'll soon bring her back.
 What, villain boy!  
    Bar'st me my way in Rome?
  MUTIUS.
 Help, Lucius, help!
            TITUS kills him.
 My lord, you are unjust, and more than so:
    In wrongful quarrel you have slain your son.
 Nor thou nor he are any sons of mine;
    My sons would never so dishonour me.


                 Re-enter aloft the EMPEROR
      with TAMORA and her two Sons, and AARON the Moor

    Traitor, restore Lavinia to the Emperor.

  LUCIUS.
 Dead, if you will; but not to be his wife,
    That is another's lawful promis'd love.
                 Exit
  SATURNINUS.
 No, Titus, no; the Emperor needs her not,
    Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock.
 O monstrous! What reproachful words are these?
  SATURNINUS.
 But go thy ways; go, give that changing piece
    To him that flourish'd for her with his sword.

    A valiant son-in-law thou shalt enjoy;
    One fit to bandy with thy lawless sons,
    To ruffle in the commonwealth of Rome.

  TITUS.

  SATURNINUS.

  TAMORA.
 And here in sight of heaven to Rome I swear,
    If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths,
    She will a handmaid be to his desires,
    A loving nurse, a mother to his youth.

  SATURNINUS.
 Lords, accompany
    Your noble Emperor and his lovely bride,
    Sent by the heavens for Prince Saturnine,
    Whose wisdom hath her fortune conquered;
    There shall we consummate our spousal rites.

                                            Exeunt all but TITUS
  TITUS.
 I am not bid to wait upon this bride.

  TITUS.
 No, foolish Tribune, no; no son of mine-
    Nor thou, nor these, confederates in the deed
    That hath dishonoured all our family;
    Unworthy brother and unworthy sons!
  LUCIUS.

    This monument five hundred years hath stood,
    Which I have sumptuously re-edified;
    Here none but soldiers and Rome's servitors
    Repose in fame; none basely slain in brawls.

  QUINTUS & MARTIUS.

  TITUS.
 'And shall!' What villain was it spake that word?
  QUINTUS.
 He that would vouch it in any place but here.
 What, would you bury him in my despite?
  MARCUS.
 No, noble Titus, but entreat of thee
    To pardon Mutius and to bury him.

  TITUS.

    My foes I do repute you every one;
    So trouble me no more, but get you gone.

  MARTIUS.
 He is not with himself; let us withdraw.

  QUINTUS.

                                [The BROTHER and the SONS kneel]
  MARCUS.
 Brother, for in that name doth nature plead-
  QUINTUS.
 Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed.
 Suffer thy brother Marcus to inter
    His noble nephew here in virtue's nest,
    That died in honour and Lavinia's cause.

    The Greeks upon advice did bury Ajax,
    That slew himself; and wise Laertes' son
    Did graciously plead for his funerals.

    Let not young Mutius, then, that was thy joy,
    Be barr'd his entrance here.

                                   [They put MUTIUS in the tomb]
  LUCIUS.
 There lie thy bones, sweet Mutius, with thy friends,
    Till we with trophies do adorn thy tomb.

  ALL.

  MARCUS.
 My lord- to step out of these dreary dumps-
    How comes it that the subtle Queen of Goths  
    Is of a sudden thus advanc'd in Rome?
  TITUS.
 I know not, Marcus, but I know it is-
    Whether by device or no, the heavens can tell.

    Is she not, then, beholding to the man
    That brought her for this high good turn so far?
  MARCUS.


           Flourish.
 Traitor, if Rome have law or we have power,
    Thou and thy faction shall repent this rape.
 Rape, call you it, my lord, to seize my own,
    My true betrothed love, and now my wife?
    But let the laws of Rome determine all;
    Meanwhile am I possess'd of that is mine.
  
  SATURNINUS.
 'Tis good, sir.
 You are very short with us;
    But if we live we'll be as sharp with you.

  BASSIANUS.
 My lord, what I have done, as best I may,
    Answer I must, and shall do with my life.

    Only thus much I give your Grace to know:
    By all the duties that I owe to Rome,
    This noble gentleman, Lord Titus here,
    Is in opinion and in honour wrong'd,
    That, in the rescue of Lavinia,
    With his own hand did slay his youngest son,
    In zeal to you, and highly mov'd to wrath
    To be controll'd in that he frankly gave.

    Receive him then to favour, Saturnine,
    That hath express'd himself in all his deeds
    A father and a friend to thee and Rome.

  TITUS.
 Prince Bassianus, leave to plead my deeds.

    'Tis thou and those that have dishonoured me.
 My worthy lord, if ever Tamora  
    Were gracious in those princely eyes of thine,
    Then hear me speak indifferently for all;
    And at my suit, sweet, pardon what is past.
 What, madam! be dishonoured openly,
    And basely put it up without revenge?
  TAMORA.
 Not so, my lord; the gods of Rome forfend
    I should be author to dishonour you!
    But on mine honour dare I undertake
    For good Lord Titus' innocence in all,
    Whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs.

    You are but newly planted in your throne;
    Lest, then, the people, and patricians too,
    Upon a just survey take Titus' part,
    And so supplant you for ingratitude,  
    Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin,
    Yield at entreats, and then let me alone:
    I'll find a day to massacre them all,
    And raze their faction and their family,
    The cruel father and his traitorous sons,
    To whom I sued for my dear son's life;
    And make them know what 'tis to let a queen
    Kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain.
-
    Come, come, sweet Emperor; come, Andronicus.

    Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart
    That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.

  SATURNINUS.

  TITUS.
 I thank your Majesty and her, my lord;
    These words, these looks, infuse new life in me.
 Titus, I am incorporate in Rome,
    A Roman now adopted happily,
    And must advise the Emperor for his good.

    This day all quarrels die, Andronicus;
    And let it be mine honour, good my lord,
    That I have reconcil'd your friends and you.

  MARCUS.
 Away, and talk not; trouble us no more.

  TAMORA.
 Nay, nay, sweet Emperor, we must all be friends.

    The Tribune and his nephews kneel for grace.
 Sweet heart, look back.

    Stand up.

    Come, if the Emperor's court can feast two brides,
    You are my guest, Lavinia, and your friends.

  TITUS.

  SATURNINUS.

                                          Exeunt.
 Sound trumpets




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
>>



ACT II.
 SCENE I.

Rome.
 Before the palace

Enter AARON

  AARON.
 Now climbeth Tamora Olympus' top,
    Safe out of Fortune's shot, and sits aloft,
    Secure of thunder's crack or lightning flash,
    Advanc'd above pale envy's threat'ning reach.

    Upon her wit doth earthly honour wait,
    And virtue stoops and trembles at her frown.

    Then, Aaron, arm thy heart and fit thy thoughts
    To mount aloft with thy imperial mistress,
    And mount her pitch whom thou in triumph long.

    Hast prisoner held, fett'red in amorous chains,
    And faster bound to Aaron's charming eyes
    Than is Prometheus tied to Caucasus.

    To wait, said I? To wanton with this queen,
    This goddess, this Semiramis, this nymph,
    This siren that will charm Rome's Saturnine,
    And see his shipwreck and his commonweal's.

    Hullo! what storm is this?

            Enter CHIRON and DEMETRIUS, braving

  DEMETRIUS.

  CHIRON.
 Demetrius, thou dost over-ween in all;
    And so in this, to bear me down with braves.

    'Tis not the difference of a year or two
    Makes me less gracious or thee more fortunate:
    I am as able and as fit as thou
    To serve and to deserve my mistress' grace;  
    And that my sword upon thee shall approve,
    And plead my passions for Lavinia's love.
  [Aside]  Clubs, clubs! These lovers will not keep the
    peace.

  CHIRON.
 Meanwhile, sir, with the little skill I have,
    Full well shalt thou perceive how much I dare.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Ay, boy, grow ye so brave?              [They draw]
  AARON.
  [Coming forward]  Why, how now, lords!
    So near the Emperor's palace dare ye draw
    And maintain such a quarrel openly?
    Full well I wot the ground of all this grudge:
    I would not for a million of gold
    The cause were known to them it most concerns;
    Nor would your noble mother for much more
    Be so dishonoured in the court of Rome.
  
    For shame, put up.
 Not I, till I have sheath'd
    My rapier in his bosom, and withal
    Thrust those reproachful speeches down his throat
    That he hath breath'd in my dishonour here.

  CHIRON.
 For that I am prepar'd and full resolv'd,
    Foul-spoken coward, that thund'rest with thy tongue,
    And with thy weapon nothing dar'st perform.

  AARON.
 Away, I say!
    Now, by the gods that warlike Goths adore,
    This pretty brabble will undo us all.

    Why, lords, and think you not how dangerous
    It is to jet upon a prince's right?
    What, is Lavinia then become so loose,
    Or Bassianus so degenerate,
    That for her love such quarrels may be broach'd
    Without controlment, justice, or revenge?
    Young lords, beware; an should the Empress know
    This discord's ground, the music would not please.

  CHIRON.
 I care not, I, knew she and all the world:  
    I love Lavinia more than all the world.
 Why, are ye mad, or know ye not in Rome
    How furious and impatient they be,
    And cannot brook competitors in love?
    I tell you, lords, you do but plot your deaths
    By this device.

  CHIRON.
 Aaron, a thousand deaths
    Would I propose to achieve her whom I love.

  AARON.
 To achieve her- how?
  DEMETRIUS.
 Why mak'st thou it so strange?
    She is a woman, therefore may be woo'd;
    She is a woman, therefore may be won;
    She is Lavinia, therefore must be lov'd.

    What, man! more water glideth by the mill
    Than wots the miller of; and easy it is
    Of a cut loaf to steal a shive, we know.

    Though Bassianus be the Emperor's brother,
    Better than he have worn Vulcan's badge.
  
  AARON.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Why, then, it seems some certain snatch or so
    Would serve your turns.

  CHIRON.
 Ay, so the turn were served.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Aaron, thou hast hit it.
 Would you had hit it too!
    Then should not we be tir'd with this ado.

    Why, hark ye, hark ye! and are you such fools
    To square for this? Would it offend you, then,
    That both should speed?
  CHIRON.
 Faith, not me.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Nor me, so I were one.

    A speedier course than ling'ring languishment
    Must we pursue, and I have found the path.

    My lords, a solemn hunting is in hand;
    There will the lovely Roman ladies troop;
    The forest walks are wide and spacious,
    And many unfrequented plots there are
    Fitted by kind for rape and villainy.

    Single you thither then this dainty doe,
    And strike her home by force if not by words.

    Come, come, our Empress, with her sacred wit
    To villainy and vengeance consecrate,
    Will we acquaint with all what we intend;
    And she shall file our engines with advice
    That will not suffer you to square yourselves,
    But to your wishes' height advance you both.

    The Emperor's court is like the house of Fame,  
    The palace full of tongues, of eyes, and ears;
    The woods are ruthless, dreadful, deaf, and dull.

    There speak and strike, brave boys, and take your turns;
    There serve your lust, shadowed from heaven's eye,
    And revel in Lavinia's treasury.
 Thy counsel, lad, smells of no cowardice.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Sit fas aut nefas, till I find the stream
    To cool this heat, a charm to calm these fits,
    Per Styga, per manes vehor.

A forest near Rome

Enter TITUS ANDRONICUS, and his three sons, LUCIUS, QUINTUS, MARTIUS,
making a noise with hounds and horns; and MARCUS

  TITUS.
 The hunt is up, the morn is bright and grey,
    The fields are fragrant, and the woods are green.

    Sons, let it be your charge, as it is ours,
    To attend the Emperor's person carefully.


         Here a cry of hounds, and wind horns in a peal.

       Then enter SATURNINUS, TAMORA, BASSIANUS LAVINIA,
            CHIRON, DEMETRIUS, and their attendants  
    Many good morrows to your Majesty!
    Madam, to you as many and as good!
    I promised your Grace a hunter's peal.

  SATURNINUS.
 And you have rung it lustily, my lords-
    Somewhat too early for new-married ladies.

  BASSIANUS.
 Lavinia, how say you?
  LAVINIA.
 I say no;
    I have been broad awake two hours and more.
 Come on then, horse and chariots let us have,
    And to our sport.
  [To TAMORA]  Madam, now shall ye see
    Our Roman hunting.
 I have dogs, my lord,
    Will rouse the proudest panther in the chase,
    And climb the highest promontory top.

  TITUS.
 And I have horse will follow where the game
    Makes way, and run like swallows o'er the plain.

  DEMETRIUS.
             Exeunt




SCENE III.

A lonely part of the forest

Enter AARON alone, with a bag of gold

  AARON.
 He that had wit would think that I had none,
    To bury so much gold under a tree
    And never after to inherit it.

    Let him that thinks of me so abjectly
    Know that this gold must coin a stratagem,
    Which, cunningly effected, will beget
    A very excellent piece of villainy.

    And so repose, sweet gold, for their unrest
                                                [Hides the gold]
    That have their alms out of the Empress' chest.


               Enter TAMORA alone, to the Moor

  TAMORA.

  AARON.

    What signifies my deadly-standing eye,
    My silence and my cloudy melancholy,  
    My fleece of woolly hair that now uncurls
    Even as an adder when she doth unroll
    To do some fatal execution?
    No, madam, these are no venereal signs.

    Hark, Tamora, the empress of my soul,
    Which never hopes more heaven than rests in thee-
    This is the day of doom for Bassianus;
    His Philomel must lose her tongue to-day,
    Thy sons make pillage of her chastity,
    And wash their hands in Bassianus' blood.

    Seest thou this letter? Take it up, I pray thee,
    And give the King this fatal-plotted scroll.
 No more, great Empress: Bassianus comes.

    Be cross with him; and I'll go fetch thy sons
    To back thy quarrels, whatsoe'er they be.
               Exit
  BASSIANUS.
 Who have we here? Rome's royal Emperess,
    Unfurnish'd of her well-beseeming troop?
    Or is it Dian, habited like her,
    Who hath abandoned her holy groves
    To see the general hunting in this forest?
  TAMORA.
 Under your patience, gentle Emperess,
    'Tis thought you have a goodly gift in horning,
    And to be doubted that your Moor and you
    Are singled forth to try thy experiments.
 Believe me, Queen, your swarth Cimmerian
    Doth make your honour of his body's hue,
    Spotted, detested, and abominable.

    Why are you sequest'red from all your train,
    Dismounted from your snow-white goodly steed,
    And wand'red hither to an obscure plot,
    Accompanied but with a barbarous Moor,
    If foul desire had not conducted you?
  LAVINIA.
 And, being intercepted in your sport,
    Great reason that my noble lord be rated
    For sauciness.
 I pray you let us hence,
    And let her joy her raven-coloured love;
    This valley fits the purpose passing well.

  BASSIANUS.
 Ay, for these slips have made him noted long.

    Good king, to be so mightily abused!
  TAMORA.
 Why, I have patience to endure all this.


                  Enter CHIRON and DEMETRIUS  

  DEMETRIUS.
 Have I not reason, think you, to look pale?
    These two have 'ticed me hither to this place.

    And when they show'd me this abhorred pit,
    They told me, here, at dead time of the night,
    A thousand fiends, a thousand hissing snakes,
    Ten thousand swelling toads, as many urchins,
    Would make such fearful and confused cries
    As any mortal body hearing it
    Should straight fall mad or else die suddenly.

    No sooner had they told this hellish tale
    But straight they told me they would bind me here
    Unto the body of a dismal yew,  
    And leave me to this miserable death.

    Revenge it, as you love your mother's life,
    Or be ye not henceforth call'd my children.
 This is a witness that I am thy son.
 And this for me, struck home to show my strength.

                                                    [Also stabs]
  LAVINIA.
 Ay, come, Semiramis- nay, barbarous Tamora,
    For no name fits thy nature but thy own!
  TAMORA.

    This minion stood upon her chastity,
    Upon her nuptial vow, her loyalty,  
    And with that painted hope braves your mightiness;
    And shall she carry this unto her grave?
  CHIRON.

    Drag hence her husband to some secret hole,
    And make his dead trunk pillow to our lust.

  CHIRON.

  LAVINIA.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Listen, fair madam: let it be your glory
    To see her tears; but be your heart to them
    As unrelenting flint to drops of rain.

  LAVINIA.
 When did the tiger's young ones teach the dam?
    O, do not learn her wrath- she taught it thee;
    The milk thou suck'dst from her did turn to marble,
    Even at thy teat thou hadst thy tyranny.

  CHIRON.
 'Tis true, the raven doth not hatch a lark.
 I know not what it means; away with her!
  LAVINIA.
 O, let me teach thee! For my father's sake,
    That gave thee life when well he might have slain thee,
    Be not obdurate, open thy deaf ears.

  TAMORA.

    Remember, boys, I pour'd forth tears in vain
    To save your brother from the sacrifice;
    But fierce Andronicus would not relent.
  
    Therefore away with her, and use her as you will;
    The worse to her the better lov'd of me.

  LAVINIA.

  TAMORA.
 What beg'st thou, then? Fond woman, let me go.
 'Tis present death I beg; and one thing more,
    That womanhood denies my tongue to tell:
    O, keep me from their worse than killing lust,
    And tumble me into some loathsome pit,
    Where never man's eye may behold my body;
    Do this, and be a charitable murderer.

  DEMETRIUS.

  LAVINIA.
 No grace? no womanhood? Ah, beastly creature,
    The blot and enemy to our general name!
    Confusion fall-
  CHIRON.
 Nay, then I'll stop your mouth.
 Bring thou her husband.
 Farewell, my sons; see that you make her sure.

    Ne'er let my heart know merry cheer indeed
    Till all the Andronici be made away.
          Exit

                  Re-enter AARON, with two
             of TITUS' sons, QUINTUS and MARTIUS

  AARON.
 Come on, my lords, the better foot before;
    Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit
    Where I espied the panther fast asleep.

  QUINTUS.
 My sight is very dull, whate'er it bodes.
 And mine, I promise you; were it not for shame,  
    Well could I leave our sport to sleep awhile.

                                            [Falls into the pit]
  QUINTUS.
 What, art thou fallen? What subtle hole is this,
    Whose mouth is covered with rude-growing briers,
    Upon whose leaves are drops of new-shed blood
    As fresh as morning dew distill'd on flowers?
    A very fatal place it seems to me.
 To prove thou hast a true divining heart,
    Aaron and thou look down into this den,  
    And see a fearful sight of blood and death.
 Aaron is gone, and my compassionate heart
    Will not permit mine eyes once to behold
    The thing whereat it trembles by surmise;
    O, tell me who it is, for ne'er till now
    Was I a child to fear I know not what.

  MARTIUS.
 If it be dark, how dost thou know 'tis he?
  MARTIUS.
 Upon his bloody finger he doth wear
    A precious ring that lightens all this hole,
    Which, like a taper in some monument,
    Doth shine upon the dead man's earthy cheeks,
    And shows the ragged entrails of this pit;
    So pale did shine the moon on Pyramus
    When he by night lay bath'd in maiden blood.

    O brother, help me with thy fainting hand-
    If fear hath made thee faint, as me it hath-
    Out of this fell devouring receptacle,  
    As hateful as Cocytus' misty mouth.

  QUINTUS.
 Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee out,
    Or, wanting strength to do thee so much good,
    I may be pluck'd into the swallowing womb
    Of this deep pit, poor Bassianus' grave.

    I have no strength to pluck thee to the brink.
 Nor I no strength to climb without thy help.
 Thy hand once more; I will not loose again,
    Till thou art here aloft, or I below.
        [Falls in]

            Enter the EMPEROR and AARON the Moor

  SATURNINUS.


                   Re-enter TAMORA, with
         attendants; TITUS ANDRONICUS and Lucius

  TAMORA.
 Where is my lord the King?
  SATURNINUS.
 Here, Tamora; though griev'd with killing grief.
 Now to the bottom dost thou search my wound;
    Poor Bassianus here lies murdered.

  TAMORA.
 Then all too late I bring this fatal writ,
    The complot of this timeless tragedy;
    And wonder greatly that man's face can fold
    In pleasing smiles such murderous tyranny.
  [Reads]  'An if we miss to meet him handsomely,
    Sweet huntsman- Bassianus 'tis we mean-
    Do thou so much as dig the grave for him.

    Thou know'st our meaning.
 Look for thy reward
    Among the nettles at the elder-tree
    Which overshades the mouth of that same pit
    Where we decreed to bury Bassianus.

    Do this, and purchase us thy lasting friends.
'
    O Tamora! was ever heard the like?
    This is the pit and this the elder-tree.

  SATURNINUS.
  [To TITUS]  Two of thy whelps, fell curs of bloody
      kind,
    Have here bereft my brother of his life.
 What, are they in this pit? O wondrous thing!  
    How easily murder is discovered!
  TITUS.
 Thou shalt not bail them; see thou follow me.
 Andronicus, I will entreat the King.
 Come, Lucius, come; stay not to talk with them.
 So, now go tell, an if thy tongue can speak,
    Who 'twas that cut thy tongue and ravish'd thee.

  CHIRON.

  DEMETRIUS.
 See how with signs and tokens she can scrowl.

  CHIRON.
 She hath no tongue to call, nor hands to wash;
    And so let's leave her to her silent walks.
 An 'twere my cause, I should go hang myself.

  DEMETRIUS.

                                     Exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON

           Wind horns.
 What stern ungentle hands
    Hath lopp'd, and hew'd, and made thy body bare
    Of her two branches- those sweet ornaments
    Whose circling shadows kings have sought to sleep in,
    And might not gain so great a happiness
    As half thy love? Why dost not speak to me?
    Alas, a crimson river of warm blood,
    Like to a bubbling fountain stirr'd with wind,
    Doth rise and fall between thy rosed lips,
    Coming and going with thy honey breath.

    But sure some Tereus hath deflowered thee,
    And, lest thou shouldst detect him, cut thy tongue.

    Fair Philomel, why she but lost her tongue,
    And in a tedious sampler sew'd her mind;
    But, lovely niece, that mean is cut from thee.

    A craftier Tereus, cousin, hast thou met,
    And he hath cut those pretty fingers off
    That could have better sew'd than Philomel.

    O, had the monster seen those lily hands
    Tremble like aspen leaves upon a lute
    And make the silken strings delight to kiss them,
    He would not then have touch'd them for his life!
    Or had he heard the heavenly harmony
    Which that sweet tongue hath made,
    He would have dropp'd his knife, and fell asleep,
    As Cerberus at the Thracian poet's feet.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.
 A street

Enter the JUDGES, TRIBUNES, and SENATORS, with TITUS' two sons
MARTIUS and QUINTUS bound, passing on the stage to the place of execution,
and TITUS going before, pleading

  TITUS.
 Hear me, grave fathers; noble Tribunes, stay!
    For pity of mine age, whose youth was spent
    In dangerous wars whilst you securely slept;
    For all my blood in Rome's great quarrel shed,
    For all the frosty nights that I have watch'd,
    And for these bitter tears, which now you see
    Filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks,
    Be pitiful to my condemned sons,
    Whose souls are not corrupted as 'tis thought.

    For two and twenty sons I never wept,
    Because they died in honour's lofty bed.

    Let my tears stanch the earth's dry appetite;
    My sons' sweet blood will make it shame and blush.

    O earth, I will befriend thee more with rain
    That shall distil from these two ancient urns,
    Than youthful April shall with all his show'rs.

    In summer's drought I'll drop upon thee still;
    In winter with warm tears I'll melt the snow
    And keep eternal spring-time on thy face,
    So thou refuse to drink my dear sons' blood.


             Enter Lucius with his weapon drawn

    O reverend Tribunes! O gentle aged men!
    Unbind my sons, reverse the doom of death,
    And let me say, that never wept before,
    My tears are now prevailing orators.
 Ah, Lucius, for thy brothers let me plead!
    Grave Tribunes, once more I entreat of you.

  LUCIUS.

  TITUS.
 Why, 'tis no matter, man: if they did hear,
    They would not mark me; if they did mark,
    They would not pity me; yet plead I must,
    And bootless unto them.

    Therefore I tell my sorrows to the stones;
    Who though they cannot answer my distress,
    Yet in some sort they are better than the Tribunes,
    For that they will not intercept my tale.

    When I do weep, they humbly at my feet
    Receive my tears, and seem to weep with me;
    And were they but attired in grave weeds,
    Rome could afford no tribunes like to these.

    A stone is soft as wax: tribunes more hard than stones.

    A stone is silent and offendeth not,
    And tribunes with their tongues doom men to death.
 To rescue my two brothers from their death;
    For which attempt the judges have pronounc'd
    My everlasting doom of banishment.

  TITUS.
 O happy man! they have befriended thee.

    Why, foolish Lucius, dost thou not perceive
    That Rome is but a wilderness of tigers?
    Tigers must prey, and Rome affords no prey
    But me and mine; how happy art thou then
    From these devourers to be banished!
    But who comes with our brother Marcus here?

                 Enter MARCUS with LAVINIA

  MARCUS.

    I bring consuming sorrow to thine age.
 Will it consume me? Let me see it then.

  MARCUS.

  TITUS.
 Why, Marcus, so she is.

  LUCIUS.
  
  TITUS.
 Faint-hearted boy, arise, and look upon her.

    'Tis well, Lavinia, that thou hast no hands;
    For hands to do Rome service is but vain.
 Speak, gentle sister, who hath martyr'd thee?
  MARCUS.
 O, thus I found her straying in the park,
    Seeking to hide herself as doth the deer
    That hath receiv'd some unrecuring wound.

  TITUS.

    This way to death my wretched sons are gone;
    Here stands my other son, a banish'd man,
    And here my brother, weeping at my woes.

  MARCUS.
 Perchance she weeps because they kill'd her husband;
    Perchance because she knows them innocent.

    No, no, they would not do so foul a deed;
    Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.

    Shall thy good uncle and thy brother Lucius
    And thou and I sit round about some fountain,
    Looking all downwards to behold our cheeks  
    How they are stain'd, like meadows yet not dry
    With miry slime left on them by a flood?
    And in the fountain shall we gaze so long,
    Till the fresh taste be taken from that clearness,
    And made a brine-pit with our bitter tears?
    Or shall we cut away our hands like thine?
    Or shall we bite our tongues, and in dumb shows
    Pass the remainder of our hateful days?
    What shall we do? Let us that have our tongues
    Plot some device of further misery
    To make us wonder'd at in time to come.

  LUCIUS.
 Sweet father, cease your tears; for at your grief
    See how my wretched sister sobs and weeps.

  MARCUS.
 Patience, dear niece.
 Good Titus, dry thine eyes.

  LUCIUS.
 Ah, my Lavinia, I will wipe thy cheeks.

  TITUS.

    Had she a tongue to speak, now would she say  
    That to her brother which I said to thee:
    His napkin, with his true tears all bewet,
    Can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks.

  TITUS.

  MARCUS.
 Which of your hands hath not defended Rome
    And rear'd aloft the bloody battle-axe,
    Writing destruction on the enemy's castle?
    O, none of both but are of high desert!
    My hand hath been but idle; let it serve
    To ransom my two nephews from their death;
    Then have I kept it to a worthy end.

  AARON.

  MARCUS.
 My hand shall go.

  LUCIUS.
 Sirs, strive no more; such with'red herbs as these
    Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine.
 Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son,
    Let me redeem my brothers both from death.
 And for our father's sake and mother's care,
    Now let me show a brother's love to thee.
 Agree between you; I will spare my hand.

  LUCIUS.
 But I will use the axe.

                                        Exeunt LUCIUS and MARCUS
  TITUS.
 Come hither, Aaron, I'll deceive them both;
    Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine.

  AARON.
  [Aside]  If that be call'd deceit, I will be honest,
    And never whilst I live deceive men so;
    But I'll deceive you in another sort,
    And that you'll say ere half an hour pass.

                                       [He cuts off TITUS' hand]

                 Re-enter LUCIUS and MARCUS

 TITUS.
 Now stay your strife.

    More hath it merited- that let it have.
  
    As for my sons, say I account of them
    As jewels purchas'd at an easy price;
    And yet dear too, because I bought mine own.

  AARON.
 I go, Andronicus; and for thy hand
    Look by and by to have thy sons with thee.
 O, how this villainy
    Doth fat me with the very thoughts of it!
    Let fools do good, and fair men call for grace:
    Aaron will have his soul black like his face.
           Exit
  TITUS.
 O, here I lift this one hand up to heaven,
    And bow this feeble ruin to the earth;
    If any power pities wretched tears,
    To that I call!  [To LAVINIA]  What, would'st thou kneel with me?
    Do, then, dear heart; for heaven shall hear our prayers,
    Or with our sighs we'll breathe the welkin dim
    And stain the sun with fog, as sometime clouds
    When they do hug him in their melting bosoms.

  MARCUS.
 Is not my sorrow deep, having no bottom?  
    Then be my passions bottomless with them.

  MARCUS.
 But yet let reason govern thy lament.
 If there were reason for these miseries,
    Then into limits could I bind my woes.

    Then give me leave; for losers will have leave
    To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues.


        Enter a MESSENGER, with two heads and a hand
  
  MESSENGER.
 Worthy Andronicus, ill art thou repaid
    For that good hand thou sent'st the Emperor.
 Now let hot Aetna cool in Sicily,
    And be my heart an ever-burning hell!
    These miseries are more than may be borne.

    To weep with them that weep doth ease some deal,
    But sorrow flouted at is double death.

  LUCIUS.
 Ah, that this sight should make so deep a wound,
    And yet detested life not shrink thereat!
    That ever death should let life bear his name,
    Where life hath no more interest but to breathe!
                                          [LAVINIA kisses TITUS]
  MARCUS.
 Alas, poor heart, that kiss is comfortless
    As frozen water to a starved snake.
 When will this fearful slumber have an end?  
  MARCUS.

    Thou dost not slumber: see thy two sons' heads,
    Thy warlike hand, thy mangled daughter here;
    Thy other banish'd son with this dear sight
    Struck pale and bloodless; and thy brother, I,
    Even like a stony image, cold and numb.

    Rent off thy silver hair, thy other hand
    Gnawing with thy teeth; and be this dismal sight
    The closing up of our most wretched eyes.

    Now is a time to storm; why art thou still?
  TITUS.
 Ha, ha, ha!
  MARCUS.
 Why dost thou laugh? It fits not with this hour.

  TITUS.
 Why, I have not another tear to shed;
    Besides, this sorrow is an enemy,
    And would usurp upon my wat'ry eyes
    And make them blind with tributary tears.

    Then which way shall I find Revenge's cave?
    For these two heads do seem to speak to me,
    And threat me I shall never come to bliss  
    Till all these mischiefs be return'd again
    Even in their throats that have committed them.

    Come, let me see what task I have to do.

    You heavy people, circle me about,
    That I may turn me to each one of you
    And swear unto my soul to right your wrongs.

    The vow is made.

    As for thee, boy, go, get thee from my sight;
    Thou art an exile, and thou must not stay.

    Hie to the Goths and raise an army there;
    And if ye love me, as I think you do,
    Let's kiss and part, for we have much to do.

                                           Exeunt all but Lucius
  LUCIUS.
 Farewell, Andronicus, my noble father,
    The woefull'st man that ever liv'd in Rome.

    If Lucius live, he will requite your wrongs
    And make proud Saturnine and his emperess
    Beg at the gates like Tarquin and his queen.

    Now will I to the Goths, and raise a pow'r
    To be reveng'd on Rome and Saturnine.
                   Exit




SCENE II.


Enter TITUS, MARCUS, LAVINIA, and the boy YOUNG LUCIUS

  TITUS.

    Marcus, unknit that sorrow-wreathen knot;
    Thy niece and I, poor creatures, want our hands,
    And cannot passionate our tenfold grief
    With folded arms.
 This poor right hand of mine
    Is left to tyrannize upon my breast;
    Who, when my heart, all mad with misery,
    Beats in this hollow prison of my flesh,
    Then thus I thump it down.

    [To LAVINIA]  Thou map of woe, that thus dost talk in signs!
    When thy poor heart beats with outrageous beating,
    Thou canst not strike it thus to make it still.

    Wound it with sighing, girl, kill it with groans;
    Or get some little knife between thy teeth  
    And just against thy heart make thou a hole,
    That all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall
    May run into that sink and, soaking in,
    Drown the lamenting fool in sea-salt tears.

  TITUS.

    Fie, fie, how franticly I square my talk,
    As if we should forget we had no hands,
    If Marcus did not name the word of hands!
    Come, let's fall to; and, gentle girl, eat this:
    Here is no drink.

    Speechless complainer, I will learn thy thought;
    In thy dumb action will I be as perfect
    As begging hermits in their holy prayers.

    Thou shalt not sigh, nor hold thy stumps to heaven,
    Nor wink, nor nod, nor kneel, nor make a sign,
    But I of these will wrest an alphabet,
    And by still practice learn to know thy meaning.
 Good grandsire, leave these bitter deep laments;
    Make my aunt merry with some pleasing tale.

  MARCUS.

  TITUS.
 Peace, tender sapling; thou art made of tears,
    And tears will quickly melt thy life away.

                          [MARCUS strikes the dish with a knife]
    What dost thou strike at, Marcus, with thy knife?
  MARCUS.
 At that that I have kill'd, my lord- a fly.

  TITUS.
 Out on thee, murderer, thou kill'st my heart!
    Mine eyes are cloy'd with view of tyranny;  
    A deed of death done on the innocent
    Becomes not Titus' brother.
 Get thee gone;
    I see thou art not for my company.

  MARCUS.
 Alas, my lord, I have but kill'd a fly.
 'But!' How if that fly had a father and mother?
    How would he hang his slender gilded wings
    And buzz lamenting doings in the air!
    Poor harmless fly,
    That with his pretty buzzing melody
    Came here to make us merry! And thou hast kill'd him.

  MARCUS.
 Pardon me, sir; it was a black ill-favour'd fly,
    Like to the Empress' Moor; therefore I kill'd him.
 O, O, O!
    Then pardon me for reprehending thee,
    For thou hast done a charitable deed.

  MARCUS.
 Lavinia, go with me;
    I'll to thy closet, and go read with thee
    Sad stories chanced in the times of old.

    Come, boy, and go with me; thy sight is young,
    And thou shalt read when mine begin to dazzle.
        Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE I.
 TITUS' garden

Enter YOUNG LUCIUS and LAVINIA running after him,
and the boy flies from her with his books under his arm.
 Help, grandsire, help! my aunt Lavinia
    Follows me everywhere, I know not why.

    Good uncle Marcus, see how swift she comes!
    Alas, sweet aunt, I know not what you mean.

  MARCUS.
 Stand by me, Lucius; do not fear thine aunt.

  TITUS.
 She loves thee, boy, too well to do thee harm.
 Ay, when my father was in Rome she did.
 What means my niece Lavinia by these signs?
  TITUS.
 Fear her not, Lucius; somewhat doth she mean.

    Somewhither would she have thee go with her.

    Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care
    Read to her sons than she hath read to thee
    Sweet poetry and Tully's Orator.

  MARCUS.
 Canst thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus?  
  BOY.
 That made me to fear;
    Although, my lord, I know my noble aunt
    Loves me as dear as e'er my mother did,
    And would not, but in fury, fright my youth;
    Which made me down to throw my books, and fly-
    Causeless, perhaps.
 But pardon me, sweet aunt;
    And, madam, if my uncle Marcus go,
    I will most willingly attend your ladyship.
 How now, Lavinia! Marcus, what means this?
    Some book there is that she desires to see.

    Which is it, girl, of these?- Open them, boy.

    Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus?
  MARCUS.
 Lucius, what book is that she tosseth so?
  BOY.
 Grandsire, 'tis Ovid's Metamorphoses;
    My mother gave it me.

  MARCUS.
 For love of her that's gone,
    Perhaps she cull'd it from among the rest.

  TITUS.

    What would she find? Lavinia, shall I read?
    This is the tragic tale of Philomel
    And treats of Tereus' treason and his rape;
    And rape, I fear, was root of thy annoy.
 See, brother, see! Note how she quotes the leaves.

  TITUS.
 Lavinia, wert thou thus surpris'd, sweet girl,
    Ravish'd and wrong'd as Philomela was,
    Forc'd in the ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods?  
    See, see!
    Ay, such a place there is where we did hunt-
    O, had we never, never hunted there!-
    Pattern'd by that the poet here describes,
    By nature made for murders and for rapes.

  MARCUS.
 Give signs, sweet girl, for here are none but friends,
    What Roman lord it was durst do the deed.
 Sit down, sweet niece; brother, sit down by me.

    Apollo, Pallas, Jove, or Mercury,
    Inspire me, that I may this treason find!
    My lord, look here! Look here, Lavinia!
                                    [He writes his name with his
                       staff, and guides it with feet and mouth]
    This sandy plot is plain; guide, if thou canst,
    This after me.
 I have writ my name
    Without the help of any hand at all.
'
  MARCUS.
 What, what! the lustful sons of Tamora
    Performers of this heinous bloody deed?
  TITUS.
 Magni Dominator poli,
    Tam lentus audis scelera? tam lentus vides?
  MARCUS.
 'Tis sure enough, an you knew how;
    But if you hunt these bear-whelps, then beware:
    The dam will wake; and if she wind ye once,
    She's with the lion deeply still in league,
    And lulls him whilst she playeth on her back,
    And when he sleeps will she do what she list.

    You are a young huntsman, Marcus; let alone;
    And come, I will go get a leaf of brass,
    And with a gad of steel will write these words,
    And lay it by.
  
  MARCUS.
 And, uncle, so will I, an if I live.

  TITUS.
 Come, go with me into mine armoury.

    Lucius, I'll fit thee; and withal my boy
    Shall carry from me to the Empress' sons
    Presents that I intend to send them both.
 Ay, with my dagger in their bosoms, grandsire.
 No, boy, not so; I'll teach thee another course.

    Lavinia, come.

                         Exeunt TITUS, LAVINIA, and YOUNG LUCIUS
  MARCUS.
 O heavens, can you hear a good man groan
    And not relent, or not compassion him?
    Marcus, attend him in his ecstasy,
    That hath more scars of sorrow in his heart
    Than foemen's marks upon his batt'red shield,
    But yet so just that he will not revenge.
  
    Revenge the heavens for old Andronicus!                 Exit




SCENE II.

Rome.
 The palace

Enter AARON, DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, at one door; and at the other door,
YOUNG LUCIUS and another with a bundle of weapons, and verses writ upon them

  CHIRON.
 Demetrius, here's the son of Lucius;
    He hath some message to deliver us.

  AARON.
 Ay, some mad message from his mad grandfather.

  BOY.
 My lords, with all the humbleness I may,
    I greet your honours from Andronicus-
    [Aside]  And pray the Roman gods confound you both!
  DEMETRIUS.
 Gramercy, lovely Lucius.
 What's the news?
  BOY.

                               Exeunt YOUNG LUCIUS and attendant
  DEMETRIUS.

    Let's see:
    [Reads]  'Integer vitae, scelerisque purus,
    Non eget Mauri iaculis, nec arcu.
 O, 'tis a verse in Horace, I know it well;
    I read it in the grammar long ago.

  AARON.
 Right, you have it.

    [Aside]  Now, what a thing it is to be an ass!
    Here's no sound jest! The old man hath found their guilt,
    And sends them weapons wrapp'd about with lines
    That wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick.

  AARON.
 Had he not reason, Lord Demetrius?
    Did you not use his daughter very friendly?
  DEMETRIUS.
 I would we had a thousand Roman dames
    At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.

  CHIRON.
 And that would she for twenty thousand more.

  DEMETRIUS.

  AARON.
  [Aside]  Pray to the devils; the gods have given us over.

                                                [Trumpets sound]
  DEMETRIUS.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Soft! who comes here?

            Enter NURSE, with a blackamoor CHILD  

  NURSE.
 Good morrow, lords.

    O, tell me, did you see Aaron the Moor?
  AARON.
 Well, more or less, or ne'er a whit at all,
    Here Aaron is; and what with Aaron now?
  NURSE.
 O gentle Aaron, we are all undone!
    Now help, or woe betide thee evermore!
  AARON.
 Why, what a caterwauling dost thou keep!
    What dost thou wrap and fumble in thy arms?
  NURSE.
 O, that which I would hide from heaven's eye:
    Our Empress' shame and stately Rome's disgrace!
    She is delivered, lord; she is delivered.
 To whom?
  NURSE.

  AARON.
 A devil.

  AARON.

  NURSE.
 A joyless, dismal, black, and sorrowful issue!
    Here is the babe, as loathsome as a toad  
    Amongst the fair-fac'd breeders of our clime;
    The Empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal,
    And bids thee christen it with thy dagger's point.

  AARON.
 That which thou canst not undo.
 Villain, I have done thy mother.

  DEMETRIUS.
 And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone her.
 It shall not live.

  NURSE.
 Aaron, it must; the mother wills it so.

  DEMETRIUS.
 I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point.

    Nurse, give it me; my sword shall soon dispatch it.

    I tell you, younglings, not Enceladus,
    With all his threat'ning band of Typhon's brood,
    Nor great Alcides, nor the god of war,
    Shall seize this prey out of his father's hands.

  DEMETRIUS.
 By this our mother is for ever sham'd.

  CHIRON.
 Rome will despise her for this foul escape.

  NURSE.
 The Emperor in his rage will doom her death.

  CHIRON.
 Why, there's the privilege your beauty bears:
    Fie, treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing
    The close enacts and counsels of thy heart!
    Here's a young lad fram'd of another leer.

    Look how the black slave smiles upon the father,
    As who should say 'Old lad, I am thine own.

  NURSE.
 Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done,
    And we will all subscribe to thy advice.

  AARON.
 Then sit we down and let us all consult.

    My son and I will have the wind of you:
    Keep there; now talk at pleasure of your safety.

                                                      [They sit]
  DEMETRIUS.
 How many women saw this child of his?
  AARON.
 Why, so, brave lords! When we join in league
    I am a lamb; but if you brave the Moor,
    The chafed boar, the mountain lioness,
    The ocean swells not so as Aaron storms.
 Cornelia the midwife and myself;
    And no one else but the delivered Empress.
 The Emperess, the midwife, and yourself.

    Two may keep counsel when the third's away:
    Go to the Empress, tell her this I said.

    And now be it known to you my full intent:
    Not far, one Muliteus, my countryman-
    His wife but yesternight was brought to bed;
    His child is like to her, fair as you are.

    Go pack with him, and give the mother gold,
    And tell them both the circumstance of all,
    And how by this their child shall be advanc'd,
    And be received for the Emperor's heir
    And substituted in the place of mine,
    To calm this tempest whirling in the court;
    And let the Emperor dandle him for his own.

    Hark ye, lords.

  CHIRON.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies,
    There to dispose this treasure in mine arms,
    And secretly to greet the Empress' friends.

    Come on, you thick-lipp'd slave, I'll bear you hence;
    For it is you that puts us to our shifts.

    I'll make you feed on berries and on roots,
    And feed on curds and whey, and suck the goat,
    And cabin in a cave, and bring you up  
    To be a warrior and command a camp.

Rome.
 A public place

Enter TITUS, bearing arrows with letters on the ends of them;
with him MARCUS, YOUNG LUCIUS, and other gentlemen,
PUBLIUS, SEMPRONIUS, and CAIUS, with bows

  TITUS.

    Sir boy, let me see your archery;
    Look ye draw home enough, and 'tis there straight.

    Terras Astrea reliquit,
    Be you rememb'red, Marcus; she's gone, she's fled.

    Sirs, take you to your tools.
 You, cousins, shall
    Go sound the ocean and cast your nets;
    Happily you may catch her in the sea;
    Yet there's as little justice as at land.

    No; Publius and Sempronius, you must do it;
    'Tis you must dig with mattock and with spade,
    And pierce the inmost centre of the earth;
    Then, when you come to Pluto's region,
    I pray you deliver him this petition.

    Ah, Rome! Well, well, I made thee miserable
    What time I threw the people's suffrages
    On him that thus doth tyrannize o'er me.

    This wicked Emperor may have shipp'd her hence;
    And, kinsmen, then we may go pipe for justice.

  MARCUS.
 Kinsmen, his sorrows are past remedy.

    Join with the Goths, and with revengeful war
    Take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude,
    And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine.

  TITUS.
 No, my good lord; but Pluto sends you word,
    If you will have Revenge from hell, you shall.

  TITUS.
 He doth me wrong to feed me with delays.

    Come, to this gear.
'
    'Ad Martem' that's for myself.
  
    Here, boy, 'To Pallas'; here 'To Mercury.
'
    'To Saturn,' Caius- not to Saturnine:
    You were as good to shoot against the wind.

    Of my word, I have written to effect;
    There's not a god left unsolicited.

  MARCUS.

  MARCUS.

  TITUS.
 Ha! ha!
    Publius, Publius, hast thou done?
    See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns.

  MARCUS.
 This was the sport, my lord: when Publius shot,
    The Bull, being gall'd, gave Aries such a knock
    That down fell both the Ram's horns in the court;
    And who should find them but the Empress' villain?
    She laugh'd, and told the Moor he should not choose  
    But give them to his master for a present.
 Why, there it goes! God give his lordship joy!

    Enter the CLOWN, with a basket and two pigeons in it

    News, news from heaven! Marcus, the post is come.

    Sirrah, what tidings? Have you any letters?
    Shall I have justice? What says Jupiter?
  CLOWN.
 Ho, the gibbet-maker? He says that he hath taken them down
    again, for the man must not be hang'd till the next week.

  TITUS.
 But what says Jupiter, I ask thee?
  CLOWN.
 Alas, sir, I know not Jupiter; I never drank with him in all
    my life.

  TITUS.
 Ay, of my pigeons, sir; nothing else.
 Why, didst thou not come from heaven?
  CLOWN.
 Why, I am
    going with my pigeons to the Tribunal Plebs, to take up a matter
    of brawl betwixt my uncle and one of the Emperal's men.
 Nay, truly, sir, I could never say grace in all my life.

  TITUS.
 Sirrah, come hither.
 Make no more ado,
    But give your pigeons to the Emperor;
    By me thou shalt have justice at his hands.
 Ay, sir.
 Then here is a supplication for you.
 And when you come to
    him, at the first approach you must kneel; then kiss his foot;
    then deliver up your pigeons; and then look for your reward.
 I'll
    be at hand, sir; see you do it bravely.

  CLOWN.
 I warrant you, sir; let me alone.

  TITUS.
 Sirrah, hast thou a knife? Come let me see it.
  
    And when thou hast given it to the Emperor,
    Knock at my door, and tell me what he says.

  CLOWN.
 Come, Marcus, let us go.
 Publius, follow me.
 Before the palace

Enter the EMPEROR, and the EMPRESS and her two sons, DEMETRIUS and CHIRON;
LORDS and others.
 The EMPEROR brings the arrows in his hand that TITUS
shot at him

  SATURNINUS.
 Why, lords, what wrongs are these! Was ever seen
    An emperor in Rome thus overborne,
    Troubled, confronted thus; and, for the extent
    Of egal justice, us'd in such contempt?
    My lords, you know, as know the mightful gods,
    However these disturbers of our peace
    Buzz in the people's ears, there nought hath pass'd
    But even with law against the wilful sons
    Of old Andronicus.
 And what an if
    His sorrows have so overwhelm'd his wits,
    Shall we be thus afflicted in his wreaks,
    His fits, his frenzy, and his bitterness?
    And now he writes to heaven for his redress.

    See, here's 'To Jove' and this 'To Mercury';
    This 'To Apollo'; this 'To the God of War'-  
    Sweet scrolls to fly about the streets of Rome!
    What's this but libelling against the Senate,
    And blazoning our unjustice every where?
    A goodly humour, is it not, my lords?
    As who would say in Rome no justice were.

  TAMORA.
 My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine,
    Lord of my life, commander of my thoughts,
    Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus' age,
    Th' effects of sorrow for his valiant sons
    Whose loss hath pierc'd him deep and scarr'd his heart;
    And rather comfort his distressed plight
    Than prosecute the meanest or the best
    For these contempts.
  
    But, Titus, I have touch'd thee to the quick,
    Thy life-blood out; if Aaron now be wise,
    Then is all safe, the anchor in the port.


                       Enter CLOWN

    How now, good fellow! Wouldst thou speak with us?
  CLOWN.
 Yes, forsooth, an your mistriship be Emperial.
 Empress I am, but yonder sits the Emperor.

  CLOWN.
- God and Saint Stephen give you godden.
 I have
    brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons here.
 Go take him away, and hang him presently.
 How much money must I have?
  TAMORA.
 Hang'd! by'r lady, then I have brought up a neck to a fair
    end.


                   Enter NUNTIUS AEMILIUS

    What news with thee, Aemilius?
  AEMILIUS.
 Arm, my lords! Rome never had more cause.

    The Goths have gathered head; and with a power
    Of high resolved men, bent to the spoil,
    They hither march amain, under conduct
    Of Lucius, son to old Andronicus;
    Who threats in course of this revenge to do
    As much as ever Coriolanus did.

  SATURNINUS.

    Ay, now begins our sorrows to approach.

    'Tis he the common people love so much;
    Myself hath often heard them say-
    When I have walked like a private man-
    That Lucius' banishment was wrongfully,
    And they have wish'd that Lucius were their emperor.

  TAMORA.
 Why should you fear? Is not your city strong?
  SATURNINUS.
 Ay, but the citizens favour Lucius,
    And will revolt from me to succour him.

  TAMORA.

    Then cheer thy spirit; for know thou, Emperor,
    I will enchant the old Andronicus  
    With words more sweet, and yet more dangerous,
    Than baits to fish or honey-stalks to sheep,
    When as the one is wounded with the bait,
    The other rotted with delicious feed.

  SATURNINUS.

  TAMORA.
 If Tamora entreat him, then he will;
    For I can smooth and fill his aged ears
    With golden promises, that, were his heart
    Almost impregnable, his old ears deaf,
    Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.

  SATURNINUS.
 Aemilius, do this message honourably;
    And if he stand on hostage for his safety,
    Bid him demand what pledge will please him best.

  AEMILIUS.
 Now will I to that old Andronicus,
    And temper him with all the art I have,  
    To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.

    And now, sweet Emperor, be blithe again,
    And bury all thy fear in my devices.

  SATURNINUS.

                                                          Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.
 SCENE I.

Plains near Rome

Enter LUCIUS with an army of GOTHS with drums and colours

  LUCIUS.

    Therefore, great lords, be, as your titles witness,
    Imperious and impatient of your wrongs;
    And wherein Rome hath done you any scath,
    Let him make treble satisfaction.
 Brave slip, sprung from the great Andronicus,
    Whose name was once our terror, now our comfort,
    Whose high exploits and honourable deeds
    Ingrateful Rome requites with foul contempt,
    Be bold in us: we'll follow where thou lead'st,
    Like stinging bees in hottest summer's day,
    Led by their master to the flow'red fields,
    And be aveng'd on cursed Tamora.
  
  ALL THE GOTHS.
 And as he saith, so say we all with him.

  LUCIUS.
 I humbly thank him, and I thank you all.
 Renowned Lucius, from our troops I stray'd
    To gaze upon a ruinous monastery;
    And as I earnestly did fix mine eye
    Upon the wasted building, suddenly
    I heard a child cry underneath a wall.

    I made unto the noise, when soon I heard
    The crying babe controll'd with this discourse:
    'Peace, tawny slave, half me and half thy dam!
    Did not thy hue bewray whose brat thou art,
    Had nature lent thee but thy mother's look,
    Villain, thou mightst have been an emperor;
    But where the bull and cow are both milk-white,
    They never do beget a coal-black calf.

    Peace, villain, peace!'- even thus he rates the babe-  
    'For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth,
    Who, when he knows thou art the Empress' babe,
    Will hold thee dearly for thy mother's sake.
'
    With this, my weapon drawn, I rush'd upon him,
    Surpris'd him suddenly, and brought him hither
    To use as you think needful of the man.

  AARON.
 Touch not the boy, he is of royal blood.

  LUCIUS.

    First hang the child, that he may see it sprawl-
    A sight to vex the father's soul withal.

    Get me a ladder.
  
                [A ladder brought, which AARON is made to climb]
  AARON.

    If thou do this, I'll show thee wondrous things
    That highly may advantage thee to hear;
    If thou wilt not, befall what may befall,
    I'll speak no more but 'Vengeance rot you all!'
  LUCIUS.
 Say on; an if it please me which thou speak'st,
    Thy child shall live, and I will see it nourish'd.
 An if it please thee! Why, assure thee, Lucius,
    'Twill vex thy soul to hear what I shall speak;
    For I must talk of murders, rapes, and massacres,
    Acts of black night, abominable deeds,
    Complots of mischief, treason, villainies,
    Ruthful to hear, yet piteously perform'd;
    And this shall all be buried in my death,
    Unless thou swear to me my child shall live.

  LUCIUS.

  AARON.
 What if I do not? as indeed I do not;
    Yet, for I know thou art religious
    And hast a thing within thee called conscience,
    With twenty popish tricks and ceremonies
    Which I have seen thee careful to observe,
    Therefore I urge thy oath.
 For that I know
    An idiot holds his bauble for a god,
    And keeps the oath which by that god he swears,
    To that I'll urge him.
 Therefore thou shalt vow
    By that same god- what god soe'er it be
    That thou adorest and hast in reverence-
    To save my boy, to nourish and bring him up;
    Or else I will discover nought to thee.
 Even by my god I swear to thee I will.

  AARON.
 First know thou, I begot him on the Empress.
 Tut, Lucius, this was but a deed of charity
    To that which thou shalt hear of me anon.
 Why, she was wash'd, and cut, and trimm'd, and 'twas
    Trim sport for them which had the doing of it.

  LUCIUS.
 Indeed, I was their tutor to instruct them.

    That codding spirit had they from their mother,
    As sure a card as ever won the set;
    That bloody mind, I think, they learn'd of me,
    As true a dog as ever fought at head.

    Well, let my deeds be witness of my worth.

    I train'd thy brethren to that guileful hole
    Where the dead corpse of Bassianus lay;
    I wrote the letter that thy father found,
    And hid the gold within that letter mention'd,
    Confederate with the Queen and her two sons;
    And what not done, that thou hast cause to rue,
    Wherein I had no stroke of mischief in it?
    I play'd the cheater for thy father's hand,  
    And, when I had it, drew myself apart
    And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter.
 What, canst thou say all this and never blush?
  AARON.
 Ay, like a black dog, as the saying is.

  LUCIUS.
 Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds?
  AARON.
 Ay, that I had not done a thousand more.

    Oft have I digg'd up dead men from their graves,
    And set them upright at their dear friends' door
    Even when their sorrows almost was forgot,
    And on their skins, as on the bark of trees,
    Have with my knife carved in Roman letters
    'Let not your sorrow die, though I am dead.

  LUCIUS.
 Bring down the devil, for he must not die
    So sweet a death as hanging presently.

  AARON.
 If there be devils, would I were a devil,
    To live and burn in everlasting fire,
    So I might have your company in hell
    But to torment you with my bitter tongue!
  LUCIUS.
 My lord, there is a messenger from Rome
    Desires to be admitted to your presence.

  LUCIUS.

    Welcome, Aemilius.
 What's the news from Rome?
  AEMILIUS.
 Aemilius, let the Emperor give his pledges
    Unto my father and my uncle Marcus.

    And we will come.
 March away.
                         Exeunt




SCENE II.

Rome.
 Before TITUS' house

Enter TAMORA, and her two sons, DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, disguised

  TAMORA.
 Thus, in this strange and sad habiliment,
    I will encounter with Andronicus,
    And say I am Revenge, sent from below
    To join with him and right his heinous wrongs.

    Knock at his study, where they say he keeps
    To ruminate strange plots of dire revenge;
    Tell him Revenge is come to join with him,
    And work confusion on his enemies.
 Who doth molest my contemplation?
    Is it your trick to make me ope the door,
    That so my sad decrees may fly away
    And all my study be to no effect?
    You are deceiv'd; for what I mean to do  
    See here in bloody lines I have set down;
    And what is written shall be executed.

  TAMORA.
 How can I grace my talk,
    Wanting a hand to give it that accord?
    Thou hast the odds of me; therefore no more.
 I am not mad, I know thee well enough:
    Witness this wretched stump, witness these crimson lines;
    Witness these trenches made by grief and care;
    Witness the tiring day and heavy night;
    Witness all sorrow that I know thee well
    For our proud Empress, mighty Tamora.

  TITUS.

  TITUS.
 Do me some service ere I come to thee.

    Lo, by thy side where Rape and Murder stands;
    Now give some surance that thou art Revenge-
    Stab them, or tear them on thy chariot wheels;
    And then I'll come and be thy waggoner
    And whirl along with thee about the globes.

    And day by day I'll do this heavy task,
    So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.

  TAMORA.
 These are my ministers, and come with me.
 Are they thy ministers? What are they call'd?
  TAMORA.
 Rape and Murder; therefore called so
    'Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.
 Good Lord, how like the Empress' sons they are!
    And you the Empress! But we worldly men
    Have miserable, mad, mistaking eyes.

  TAMORA.
 This closing with him fits his lunacy.


                 Enter TITUS, below

  TITUS.

    How like the Empress and her sons you are!
    Well are you fitted, had you but a Moor.

    Could not all hell afford you such a devil?
    For well I wot the Empress never wags
    But in her company there is a Moor;
    And, would you represent our queen aright,
    It were convenient you had such a devil.
 What shall we do?
  TAMORA.
 What wouldst thou have us do, Andronicus?
  DEMETRIUS.
 Show me a murderer, I'll deal with him.

  TAMORA.
 Show me a thousand that hath done thee wrong,
    And I will be revenged on them all.

  TAMORA.
 Well hast thou lesson'd us; this shall we do.
 Marcus, my brother! 'Tis sad Titus calls.


                  Enter MARCUS

    Go, gentle Marcus, to thy nephew Lucius;
    Thou shalt inquire him out among the Goths.

    Bid him repair to me, and bring with him
    Some of the chiefest princes of the Goths;
    Bid him encamp his soldiers where they are.

    Tell him the Emperor and the Empress too  
    Feast at my house, and he shall feast with them.

  TAMORA.

  TITUS.

  DEMETRIUS.
 Madam, depart at pleasure; leave us here.

  TITUS.
 I know thou dost; and, sweet Revenge, farewell.

    Publius, come hither, Caius, and Valentine.
 What is your will?
  TITUS.
 Know you these two?
  PUBLIUS.
 The Empress' sons, I take them: Chiron, Demetrius.
 Fie, Publius, fie! thou art too much deceiv'd.

    The one is Murder, and Rape is the other's name;
    And therefore bind them, gentle Publius-
    Caius and Valentine, lay hands on them.

    Oft have you heard me wish for such an hour,
    And now I find it; therefore bind them sure,
    And stop their mouths if they begin to cry.
             Exit
                         [They lay hold on CHIRON and DEMETRIUS]  
  CHIRON.

  PUBLIUS.

    Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a word.

    Is he sure bound? Look that you bind them fast.


               Re-enter TITUS ANDRONICUS
        with a knife, and LAVINIA, with a basin

  TITUS.
 Come, come, Lavinia; look, thy foes are bound.

    Sirs, stop their mouths, let them not speak to me;
    But let them hear what fearful words I utter.
  
    What would you say, if I should let you speak?
    Villains, for shame you could not beg for grace.

    Hark, wretches! how I mean to martyr you.

    This one hand yet is left to cut your throats,
    Whiles that Lavinia 'tween her stumps doth hold
    The basin that receives your guilty blood.

    You know your mother means to feast with me,
    And calls herself Revenge, and thinks me mad.

    Hark, villains! I will grind your bones to dust,
    And with your blood and it I'll make a paste;
    And of the paste a coffin I will rear,
    And make two pasties of your shameful heads;
    And bid that strumpet, your unhallowed dam,
    Like to the earth, swallow her own increase.

    This is the feast that I have bid her to,
    And this the banquet she shall surfeit on;
    For worse than Philomel you us'd my daughter,
    And worse than Progne I will be reveng'd.

    And now prepare your throats.
 Lavinia, come,
    Receive the blood; and when that they are dead,  
    Let me go grind their bones to powder small,
    And with this hateful liquor temper it;
    And in that paste let their vile heads be bak'd.

    Come, come, be every one officious
    To make this banquet, which I wish may prove
    More stern and bloody than the Centaurs' feast.

                                 Exeunt, bearing the dead bodies




SCENE III.

The court of TITUS' house

Enter Lucius, MARCUS, and the GOTHS, with AARON prisoner,
and his CHILD in the arms of an attendant

  LUCIUS.
 Uncle Marcus, since 'tis my father's mind
    That I repair to Rome, I am content.
 And ours with thine, befall what fortune will.

  LUCIUS.
 Good uncle, take you in this barbarous Moor,
    This ravenous tiger, this accursed devil;
    Let him receive no sust'nance, fetter him,
    Till he be brought unto the Empress' face
    For testimony of her foul proceedings.

    And see the ambush of our friends be strong;
    I fear the Emperor means no good to us.

  AARON.
 Some devil whisper curses in my ear,
    And prompt me that my tongue may utter forth
    The venomous malice of my swelling heart!
  LUCIUS.
 Away, inhuman dog, unhallowed slave!
    Sirs, help our uncle to convey him in.
  
                        Exeunt GOTHS with AARON.
 Enter SATURNINUS and
    TAMORA, with AEMILIUS, TRIBUNES, SENATORS, and others

  SATURNINUS.
 What boots it thee to can thyself a sun?
  MARCUS.
 Rome's Emperor, and nephew, break the parle;
    These quarrels must be quietly debated.

    The feast is ready which the careful Titus
    Hath ordain'd to an honourable end,
    For peace, for love, for league, and good to Rome.

    Please you, therefore, draw nigh and take your places.

  SATURNINUS.
 Marcus, we will.

                      [A table brought in.
 The company sit down]

               Trumpets sounding, enter TITUS
         like a cook, placing the dishes, and LAVINIA
   with a veil over her face; also YOUNG LUCIUS, and others  

  TITUS.
 Welcome, my lord; welcome, dread Queen;
    Welcome, ye warlike Goths; welcome, Lucius;
    And welcome all.

  SATURNINUS.
 Why art thou thus attir'd, Andronicus?
  TITUS.

  TAMORA.
 We are beholding to you, good Andronicus.

  TITUS.
 It was, Andronicus.

  TITUS.
 Your reason, mighty lord.

  SATURNINUS.

  TITUS.
 A reason mighty, strong, and effectual;
    A pattern, precedent, and lively warrant  
    For me, most wretched, to perform the like.

    Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee;   [He kills her]
    And with thy shame thy father's sorrow die!
  SATURNINUS.
 What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind?
  TITUS.
 Kill'd her for whom my tears have made me blind.

    I am as woeful as Virginius was,
    And have a thousand times more cause than he
    To do this outrage; and it now is done.

  SATURNINUS.

  TITUS.
 Will't please you eat?  Will't please your Highness feed?
  TAMORA.
 Why hast thou slain thine only daughter thus?
  TITUS.

    They ravish'd her, and cut away her tongue;
    And they, 'twas they, that did her all this wrong.
 Go, fetch them hither to us presently.

    'Tis true, 'tis true: witness my knife's sharp point.

                                          [He stabs the EMPRESS]  
  SATURNINUS.

                   [He stabs SATURNINUS.
 A great tumult.
 LUCIUS,
               MARCUS, and their friends go up into the balcony]
  MARCUS.

    But if my frosty signs and chaps of age,
    Grave witnesses of true experience,
    Cannot induce you to attend my words,
    [To Lucius]  Speak, Rome's dear friend, as erst our ancestor,  
    When with his solemn tongue he did discourse
    To love-sick Dido's sad attending ear
    The story of that baleful burning night,
    When subtle Greeks surpris'd King Priam's Troy.

    Tell us what Sinon hath bewitch'd our ears,
    Or who hath brought the fatal engine in
    That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound.

    Here's Rome's young Captain, let him tell the tale;
    While I stand by and weep to hear him speak.

  LUCIUS.
 Then, gracious auditory, be it known to you
    That Chiron and the damn'd Demetrius
    Were they that murd'red our Emperor's brother;
    And they it were that ravished our sister.

    Lastly, myself unkindly banished,
    The gates shut on me, and turn'd weeping out,
    To beg relief among Rome's enemies;
    Who drown'd their enmity in my true tears,
    And op'd their arms to embrace me as a friend.

    Alas! you know I am no vaunter, I;
    My scars can witness, dumb although they are,
    That my report is just and full of truth.
 O, pardon me!
    For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.

  MARCUS.
 Now is my turn to speak.
 Behold the child.

    The villain is alive in Titus' house,
    Damn'd as he is, to witness this is true.

    Now judge what cause had Titus to revenge
    These wrongs unspeakable, past patience,
    Or more than any living man could bear.

    Now have you heard the truth: what say you, Romans?
    Have we done aught amiss, show us wherein,
    And, from the place where you behold us pleading,
    The poor remainder of Andronici
    Will, hand in hand, all headlong hurl ourselves,
    And on the ragged stones beat forth our souls,
    And make a mutual closure of our house.

  AEMILIUS.
 Come, come, thou reverend man of Rome,
    And bring our Emperor gently in thy hand,
    Lucius our Emperor; for well I know  
    The common voice do cry it shall be so.
 Lucius, all hail, Rome's royal Emperor!
  MARCUS.
 LUCIUS, MARCUS, and the others descend
  ALL.
 Lucius, all hail, Rome's gracious governor!
  LUCIUS.
 Thanks, gentle Romans! May I govern so
    To heal Rome's harms and wipe away her woe!
    But, gentle people, give me aim awhile,
    For nature puts me to a heavy task.

    O, take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips.
  [Kisses TITUS]
    These sorrowful drops upon thy blood-stain'd face,
    The last true duties of thy noble son!
  MARCUS.
 Thy grandsire lov'd thee well;
    Many a time he danc'd thee on his knee,
    Sung thee asleep, his loving breast thy pillow;
    Many a story hath he told to thee,
    And bid thee bear his pretty tales in mind
    And talk of them when he was dead and gone.

  MARCUS.

  BOY.
 O grandsire, grandsire! ev'n with all my heart
    Would I were dead, so you did live again!
    O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping;
    My tears will choke me, if I ope my mouth.


            Re-enter attendants with AARON
  
  A ROMAN.
 You sad Andronici, have done with woes;
    Give sentence on the execrable wretch
    That hath been breeder of these dire events.

  LUCIUS.

    If any one relieves or pities him,
    For the offence he dies.

    Some stay to see him fast'ned in the earth.

    My father and Lavinia shall forthwith
    Be closed in our household's monument.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
 From isles of Greece
    The princes orgillous, their high blood chaf'd,
    Have to the port of Athens sent their ships
    Fraught with the ministers and instruments
    Of cruel war.
 Sixty and nine that wore
    Their crownets regal from th' Athenian bay
    Put forth toward Phrygia; and their vow is made
    To ransack Troy, within whose strong immures
    The ravish'd Helen, Menelaus' queen,
    With wanton Paris sleeps-and that's the quarrel.

    To Tenedos they come,
    And the deep-drawing barks do there disgorge
    Their war-like fraughtage.
 Now on Dardan plains
    The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch
    Their brave pavilions: Priam's six-gated city,
    Dardan, and Tymbria, Helias, Chetas, Troien,
    And Antenorides, with massy staples
    And corresponsive and fulfilling bolts,
    Sperr up the sons of Troy.
  
    Now expectation, tickling skittish spirits
    On one and other side, Troyan and Greek,
    Sets all on hazard-and hither am I come
    A Prologue arm'd, but not in confidence
    Of author's pen or actor's voice, but suited
    In like conditions as our argument,
    To tell you, fair beholders, that our play
    Leaps o'er the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,
    Beginning in the middle; starting thence away,
    To what may be digested in a play.

    Like or find fault; do as your pleasures are;
    Now good or bad, 'tis but the chance of war.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

Troy.
 Call here my varlet; I'll unarm again.
 Well, I have told you enough of this; for my part,
    I'll not meddle nor make no farther.
 He that will have a cake
    out of the wheat must needs tarry the grinding.
  
  TROILUS.
 Have I not tarried?
  PANDARUS.

  TROILUS.

  PANDARUS.
 Ay, to the leavening; but here's yet in the word
    'hereafter' the kneading, the making of the cake, the heating
    of the oven, and the baking; nay, you must stay the cooling too,
    or you may chance to burn your lips.

  TROILUS.

  PANDARUS.
 Well, she look'd yesternight fairer than ever I saw her
    look, or any woman else.

  TROILUS.
 I was about to tell thee: when my heart,
    As wedged with a sigh, would rive in twain,
    Lest Hector or my father should perceive me,
    I have, as when the sun doth light a storm,
    Buried this sigh in wrinkle of a smile.

    But sorrow that is couch'd in seeming gladness  
    Is like that mirth fate turns to sudden sadness.
 An her hair were not somewhat darker than Helen's- well,
    go to- there were no more comparison between the women.
 O Pandarus! I tell thee, Pandarus-
    When I do tell thee there my hopes lie drown'd,
    Reply not in how many fathoms deep
    They lie indrench'd.
 I speak no more than truth.

  TROILUS.
 Thou dost not speak so much.

  PANDARUS.

  TROILUS.
 Good Pandarus! How now, Pandarus!
  PANDARUS.
 What, art thou angry, Pandarus? What, with me?
  PANDARUS.
 Because she's kin to me, therefore she's not so fair as
    Helen.
 An she were not kin to me, she would be as fair a Friday
    as Helen is on Sunday.

  TROILUS.
 Say I she is not fair?
  PANDARUS.
 I do not care whether you do or no.
 She's a fool to stay
    behind her father.

  TROILUS.
 Pandarus!
  PANDARUS.
 Not I.
 Sweet Pandarus!
  PANDARUS.
 Pray you, speak no more to me: I will leave all
    as I found it, and there an end.
               Exit.
 Sound alarum
  TROILUS.
 Peace, you ungracious clamours! Peace, rude sounds!
    Fools on both sides! Helen must needs be fair,
    When with your blood you daily paint her thus.

    I cannot fight upon this argument;
    It is too starv'd a subject for my sword.

    Tell me, Apollo, for thy Daphne's love,
    What Cressid is, what Pandar, and what we?
    Her bed is India; there she lies, a pearl;
    Between our Ilium and where she resides
    Let it be call'd the wild and wand'ring flood;  
    Ourself the merchant, and this sailing Pandar
    Our doubtful hope, our convoy, and our bark.
 Enter AENEAS

  AENEAS.
 How now, Prince Troilus! Wherefore not afield?
  TROILUS.
 Because not there.
 That Paris is returned home, and hurt.
 By whom, Aeneas?
  AENEAS.
 Troilus, by Menelaus.

  TROILUS.
 Let Paris bleed: 'tis but a scar to scorn;
    Paris is gor'd with Menelaus' horn.
                      [Alarum]
  AENEAS.
 Hark what good sport is out of town to-day!
  TROILUS.
'
    But to the sport abroad.
 In all swift haste.

  TROILUS.
                          Exeunt




ACT I.

Troy.
 A street

Enter CRESSIDA and her man ALEXANDER

  CRESSIDA.
 Queen Hecuba and Helen.

  CRESSIDA.
 And whither go they?
  ALEXANDER.
 Up to the eastern tower,
    Whose height commands as subject all the vale,
    To see the battle.
 Hector, whose patience
    Is as a virtue fix'd, to-day was mov'd.

  CRESSIDA.
  
  CRESSIDA.
 Good; and what of him?
  ALEXANDER.
 They say he is a very man per se,
    And stands alone.
 There is no man hath a virtue that he hath not a
    glimpse of, nor any man an attaint but he carries some stain of
    it; he is melancholy without cause and merry against the hair; he
    hath the joints of every thing; but everything so out of joint
    that he is a gouty Briareus, many hands and no use, or purblind
    Argus, all eyes and no sight.

  CRESSIDA.
 But how should this man, that makes me smile, make Hector
      angry?
  ALEXANDER.
 Who comes here?
  ALEXANDER.
 Madam, your uncle Pandarus.
 Hector's a gallant man.
 As may be in the world, lady.

  PANDARUS.
 What's that? What's that?
  CRESSIDA.
 Good morrow, uncle Pandarus.

  PANDARUS.
 Good morrow, cousin Cressid.
 What do you talk of?- Good
    morrow, Alexander.
-How do you, cousin? When were you at Ilium?
  CRESSIDA.
 What were you talking of when I came? Was Hector arm'd
    and gone ere you came to Ilium? Helen was not up, was she?
  CRESSIDA.
 Hector was gone; but Helen was not up.

  PANDARUS.
 E'en so.
 Hector was stirring early.

  CRESSIDA.

  PANDARUS.
 Was he angry?
  CRESSIDA.

  PANDARUS.

  CRESSIDA.

  CRESSIDA.
 Well, I say Troilus is Troilus.
 Then you say as I say, for I am sure he is not Hector.

  PANDARUS.
 No, nor Hector is not Troilus in some degrees.

  CRESSIDA.
 'Tis just to each of them: he is himself.
 Himself! Alas, poor Troilus! I would he were!
  CRESSIDA.
 So he is.

  PANDARUS.
 Condition I had gone barefoot to India.

  CRESSIDA.
 Himself! no, he's not himself.
 Would 'a were himself!
    Well, the gods are above; time must friend or end.
 Well, Troilus,
    well! I would my heart were in her body! No, Hector is not a  
    better man than Troilus.
 Excuse me.

  CRESSIDA.

  PANDARUS.
 Th' other's not come to't; you shall tell me another tale
    when th' other's come to't.
 Hector shall not have his wit this
    year.
 He shall not need it if he have his own.

  PANDARUS.
 No matter.

  PANDARUS.
 Nor his beauty.

  CRESSIDA.
 'Twould not become him: his own's better.

  PANDARUS.
 YOU have no judgment, niece.

  PANDARUS.
 To say the truth, true and not true.

  PANDARUS.

  CRESSIDA.
 Why, Paris hath colour enough.
  
  PANDARUS.
 So he has.
 If she prais'd him
    above, his complexion is higher than his; he having colour
    enough, and the other higher, is too flaming praise for a good
    complexion.
 I had as lief Helen's golden tongue had commended
    Troilus for a copper nose.

  CRESSIDA.
 Then she's a merry Greek indeed.

  PANDARUS.
 She came to him th' other day
    into the compass'd window-and you know he has not past three or
    four hairs on his chin-
  CRESSIDA.
 Indeed a tapster's arithmetic may soon bring his
    particulars therein to a total.
 Why, he is very young, and yet will he within three pound
    lift as much as his brother Hector.

  CRESSIDA.
 Is he so young a man and so old a lifter?
  PANDARUS.
 Why, you know, 'tis dimpled.
 I think his smiling becomes  
    him better than any man in all Phrygia.

  CRESSIDA.
 O, he smiles valiantly!
  PANDARUS.
 Does he not?
  CRESSIDA.
 O yes, an 'twere a cloud in autumn!
  PANDARUS.
 Why, go to, then! But to prove to you that Helen loves
    Troilus-
  CRESSIDA.

  PANDARUS.
 Troilus! Why, he esteems her no more than I esteem an
    addle egg.
 If you love an addle egg as well as you love an idle
    head, you would eat chickens i' th' shell.
 Indeed, she has a marvell's white hand, I must needs
    confess.

  CRESSIDA.

  CRESSIDA.
 Alas, poor chin! Many a wart is richer.

  PANDARUS.
 But there was such laughing! Queen Hecuba laugh'd that
    her eyes ran o'er.

  CRESSIDA.
 With millstones.
  
  PANDARUS.
 And Cassandra laugh'd.

  CRESSIDA.
 And Hector laugh'd.
 At what was all this laughing?
  PANDARUS.

  CRESSIDA.
 An't had been a green hair I should have laugh'd too.

  PANDARUS.
 Quoth she 'Here's but two and fifty hairs on your chin,
    and one of them is white.
'
  CRESSIDA.

  PANDARUS.
 That's true; make no question of that.
' 'Jupiter!' quoth she 'which of
    these hairs is Paris my husband?' 'The forked one,' quoth he,
    'pluck't out and give it him.

  CRESSIDA.

  PANDARUS.

  CRESSIDA.
 I'll be sworn 'tis true; he will weep you, and 'twere a
    man born in April.
 Hark! they are coming from the field.
 Shall we stand up
    here and see them as they pass toward Ilium? Good niece, do,
    sweet niece Cressida.
 At your pleasure.
 I'll tell you them all by their names as they pass
    by; but mark Troilus above the rest.

  PANDARUS.
 That's Aeneas.
 Is not that a brave man? He's one of the  
    flowers of Troy, I can tell you.
 But mark Troilus; you shall see
    anon.


                       ANTENOR passes

  CRESSIDA.
 Who's that?
  PANDARUS.
 That's Antenor.
 Will he give you the nod?
  PANDARUS.


                     HECTOR passes

  PANDARUS.
 That's Hector, that, that, look you, that; there's a
    fellow! Go thy way, Hector! There's a brave man, niece.
 O brave
    Hector! Look how he looks.
 O, a brave man!
  PANDARUS.
 Is 'a not? It does a man's heart good.
 Look you what
    hacks are on his helmet! Look you yonder, do you see? Look you
    there.
 There's no jesting; there's laying on; take't off who
    will, as they say.

  CRESSIDA.
 By God's lid, it does one's heart good.


                       PARIS passes

    Look ye yonder, niece; is't not a gallant man too, is't not? Why,
    this is brave now.
 Who said he came hurt home to-day? He's not
    hurt.
 Why, this will do Helen's heart good now, ha! Would I could
    see Troilus now! You shall see Troilus anon.


                      HELENUS passes
  
  CRESSIDA.
 I marvel where Troilus is.
 That's
    Helenus.
 I think he went not forth to-day.
 Can Helenus fight, uncle?
  PANDARUS.
 Helenus! no.
 Yes, he'll fight indifferent well.
 I marvel
    where Troilus is.
 Hark! do you not hear the people cry 'Troilus'?
    Helenus is a priest.

  CRESSIDA.
 What sneaking fellow comes yonder?

                    TROILUS passes

  PANDARUS.
 'Tis Troilus.
 There's a
    man, niece.
 Go thy way,
    Troilus, go thy way.
 Had I a sister were a grace or a daughter a
    goddess, he should take his choice.
 O admirable man! Paris? Paris  
    is dirt to him; and, I warrant, Helen, to change, would give an
    eye to boot.

  CRESSIDA.
 Asses, fools, dolts! chaff and bran, chaff and bran!
    porridge after meat! I could live and die in the eyes of Troilus.
 There is amongst the Greeks Achilles, a better man than
    Troilus.
 Achilles? A drayman, a porter, a very camel!
  CRESSIDA.
 Well, well! Why, have you any discretion? Have you any
    eyes? Do you know what a man is? Is not birth, beauty, good
    shape, discourse, manhood, learning, gentleness, virtue, youth,
    liberality, and such like, the spice and salt that season a man?
  CRESSIDA.
 Ay, a minc'd man; and then to be bak'd with no date in  
    the pie, for then the man's date is out.
 You are such a woman! A man knows not at what ward you
    lie.
 Upon my back, to defend my belly; upon my wit, to defend
    my wiles; upon my secrecy, to defend mine honesty; my mask, to
    defend my beauty; and you, to defend all these; and at all these
    wards I lie at, at a thousand watches.
 Say one of your watches.

  CRESSIDA.
 If I cannot ward what I would not have hit,
    I can watch you for telling how I took the blow; unless it swell
    past hiding, and then it's past watching
  PANDARUS.
 You are such another!

                   Enter TROILUS' BOY

  BOY.
 Sir, my lord would instantly speak with you.

  PANDARUS.
 Where?
  BOY.
 At your own house; there he unarms him.
                       Exit Boy  
    I doubt he be hurt.
 Adieu, uncle.

  PANDARUS.
 I will be with you, niece, by and by.
 To bring, uncle.

  PANDARUS.
 Ay, a token from Troilus.

  CRESSIDA.
 By the same token, you are a bawd.

                                                        Exit PANDARUS
    Words, vows, gifts, tears, and love's full sacrifice,
    He offers in another's enterprise;
    But more in Troilus thousand-fold I see
    Than in the glass of Pandar's praise may be,
    Yet hold I off.
 Women are angels, wooing:
    Things won are done; joy's soul lies in the doing.

    That she belov'd knows nought that knows not this:
    Men prize the thing ungain'd more than it is.

    That she was never yet that ever knew
    Love got so sweet as when desire did sue;
    Therefore this maxim out of love I teach:
    Achievement is command; ungain'd, beseech.
                 Exit




ACT I.
 SCENE 3.

The Grecian camp.
 Before AGAMEMNON'S tent

Sennet.
 Enter AGAMEMNON, NESTOR, ULYSSES, DIOMEDES, MENELAUS, and others

  AGAMEMNON.
 Princes,
    What grief hath set these jaundies o'er your cheeks?
    The ample proposition that hope makes
    In all designs begun on earth below
    Fails in the promis'd largeness; checks and disasters
    Grow in the veins of actions highest rear'd,
    As knots, by the conflux of meeting sap,
    Infects the sound pine, and diverts his grain
    Tortive and errant from his course of growth.

    Nor, princes, is it matter new to us
    That we come short of our suppose so far
    That after seven years' siege yet Troy walls stand;
    Sith every action that hath gone before,
    Whereof we have record, trial did draw
    Bias and thwart, not answering the aim,
    And that unbodied figure of the thought  
    That gave't surmised shape.
 Why then, you princes,
    Do you with cheeks abash'd behold our works
    And call them shames, which are, indeed, nought else
    But the protractive trials of great Jove
    To find persistive constancy in men;
    The fineness of which metal is not found
    In fortune's love? For then the bold and coward,
    The wise and fool, the artist and unread,
    The hard and soft, seem all affin'd and kin.

    But in the wind and tempest of her frown
    Distinction, with a broad and powerful fan,
    Puffing at all, winnows the light away;
    And what hath mass or matter by itself
    Lies rich in virtue and unmingled.

  NESTOR.
 In the reproof of chance
    Lies the true proof of men.
 Where's then the saucy boat,
    Whose weak untimber'd sides but even now
    Co-rivall'd greatness? Either to harbour fled
    Or made a toast for Neptune.
 Even so
    Doth valour's show and valour's worth divide
    In storms of fortune; for in her ray and brightness
    The herd hath more annoyance by the breeze
    Than by the tiger; but when the splitting wind
    Makes flexible the knees of knotted oaks,
    And flies fled under shade-why, then the thing of courage
    As rous'd with rage, with rage doth sympathise,
    And with an accent tun'd in self-same key
    Retorts to chiding fortune.

    Besides the applause and approbation
    The which, [To AGAMEMNON] most mighty, for thy place and sway,
    [To NESTOR] And, thou most reverend, for thy stretch'd-out life,
    I give to both your speeches- which were such
    As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece
    Should hold up high in brass; and such again
    As venerable Nestor, hatch'd in silver,
    Should with a bond of air, strong as the axle-tree
    On which heaven rides, knit all the Greekish ears
    To his experienc'd tongue-yet let it please both,
    Thou great, and wise, to hear Ulysses speak.

  AGAMEMNON.
 Speak, Prince of Ithaca; and be't of less expect
    That matter needless, of importless burden,
    Divide thy lips than we are confident,
    When rank Thersites opes his mastic jaws,
    We shall hear music, wit, and oracle.

  ULYSSES.

    Then everything includes itself in power,
    Power into will, will into appetite;
    And appetite, an universal wolf,
    So doubly seconded with will and power,
    Must make perforce an universal prey,
    And last eat up himself.

    And this neglection of degree it is
    That by a pace goes backward, with a purpose
    It hath to climb.
 The general's disdain'd
    By him one step below, he by the next,
    That next by him beneath; so ever step,
    Exampl'd by the first pace that is sick
    Of his superior, grows to an envious fever
    Of pale and bloodless emulation.

    And 'tis this fever that keeps Troy on foot,  
    Not her own sinews.

  NESTOR.
 Most wisely hath Ulysses here discover'd
    The fever whereof all our power is sick.

  AGAMEMNON.
 The nature of the sickness found, Ulysses,
    What is the remedy?
  ULYSSES.
 The great Achilles, whom opinion crowns
    The sinew and the forehand of our host,
    Having his ear full of his airy fame,
    Grows dainty of his worth, and in his tent
    Lies mocking our designs; with him Patroclus
    Upon a lazy bed the livelong day
    Breaks scurril jests;
    And with ridiculous and awkward action-
    Which, slanderer, he imitation calls-
    He pageants us.
 Sometime, great Agamemnon,
    Thy topless deputation he puts on;
    And like a strutting player whose conceit
    Lies in his hamstring, and doth think it rich
    To hear the wooden dialogue and sound  
    'Twixt his stretch'd footing and the scaffoldage-
    Such to-be-pitied and o'er-wrested seeming
    He acts thy greatness in; and when he speaks
    'Tis like a chime a-mending; with terms unsquar'd,
    Which, from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropp'd,
    Would seem hyperboles.

    Now play me Nestor; hem, and stroke thy beard,
    As he being drest to some oration.
'
    That's done-as near as the extremest ends
    Of parallels, as like Vulcan and his wife;
    Yet god Achilles still cries 'Excellent!
    'Tis Nestor right.
 Now play him me, Patroclus,
    Arming to answer in a night alarm.
' And in this fashion
    All our abilities, gifts, natures, shapes,
    Severals and generals of grace exact,
    Achievements, plots, orders, preventions,
    Excitements to the field or speech for truce,
    Success or loss, what is or is not, serves
    As stuff for these two to make paradoxes.
 And in the imitation of these twain-
    Who, as Ulysses says, opinion crowns
    With an imperial voice-many are infect.

    Ajax is grown self-will'd and bears his head
    In such a rein, in full as proud a place
    As broad Achilles; keeps his tent like him;
    Makes factious feasts; rails on our state of war
    Bold as an oracle, and sets Thersites,
    A slave whose gall coins slanders like a mint,
    To match us in comparisons with dirt,
    To weaken and discredit our exposure,  
    How rank soever rounded in with danger.

  ULYSSES.
 They tax our policy and call it cowardice,
    Count wisdom as no member of the war,
    Forestall prescience, and esteem no act
    But that of hand.
 The still and mental parts
    That do contrive how many hands shall strike
    When fitness calls them on, and know, by measure
    Of their observant toil, the enemies' weight-
    Why, this hath not a finger's dignity:
    They call this bed-work, mapp'ry, closet-war;
    So that the ram that batters down the wall,
    For the great swinge and rudeness of his poise,
    They place before his hand that made the engine,
    Or those that with the fineness of their souls
    By reason guide his execution.

  NESTOR.
 What trumpet? Look, Menelaus.

  
                      Enter AENEAS

  AGAMEMNON.
 What would you fore our tent?
  AENEAS.
 Is this great Agamemnon's tent, I pray you?
  AGAMEMNON.

  AENEAS.
 May one that is a herald and a prince
    Do a fair message to his kingly eyes?
  AGAMEMNON.
 With surety stronger than Achilles' an
    Fore all the Greekish heads, which with one voice
    Call Agamemnon head and general.

  AENEAS.
 Fair leave and large security.
 How may
    A stranger to those most imperial looks
    Know them from eyes of other mortals?
  AGAMEMNON.

    Which is that god in office, guiding men?  
    Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?
  AGAMEMNON.
 This Troyan scorns us, or the men of Troy
    Are ceremonious courtiers.

  AENEAS.

    But when they would seem soldiers, they have galls,
    Good arms, strong joints, true swords; and, Jove's accord,
    Nothing so full of heart.
 But peace, Aeneas,
    Peace, Troyan; lay thy finger on thy lips.

    The worthiness of praise distains his worth,
    If that the prais'd himself bring the praise forth;
    But what the repining enemy commends,
    That breath fame blows; that praise, sole pure, transcends.
 Sir, pardon; 'tis for Agamemnon's ears.

  AGAMEMNON.
 Nor I from Troy come not to whisper with him;
    I bring a trumpet to awake his ear,  
    To set his sense on the attentive bent,
    And then to speak.

  AGAMEMNON.
 Speak frankly as the wind;
    It is not Agamemnon's sleeping hour.

    That thou shalt know, Troyan, he is awake,
    He tells thee so himself.

  AENEAS.

                                                      [Sound trumpet]
    We have, great Agamemnon, here in Troy
    A prince called Hector-Priam is his father-
    Who in this dull and long-continued truce
    Is resty grown; he bade me take a trumpet
    And to this purpose speak: Kings, princes, lords!
    If there be one among the fair'st of Greece
    That holds his honour higher than his ease,
    That seeks his praise more than he fears his peril,
    That knows his valour and knows not his fear,  
    That loves his mistress more than in confession
    With truant vows to her own lips he loves,
    And dare avow her beauty and her worth
    In other arms than hers-to him this challenge.
 Even so much.
 This shall be told our lovers, Lord Aeneas.

  NESTOR.
 Tell him of Nestor, one that was a man
    When Hector's grandsire suck'd.
 Amen.

  AGAMEMNON.
 Fair Lord Aeneas, let me touch your hand;
    To our pavilion shall I lead you, first.

    Yourself shall feast with us before you go,  
    And find the welcome of a noble foe.

                                    Exeunt all but ULYSSES and NESTOR
  ULYSSES.
 What is't?
  ULYSSES.
 The seeded pride
    That hath to this maturity blown up
    In rank Achilles must or now be cropp'd
    Or, shedding, breed a nursery of like evil
    To overbulk us all.

  NESTOR.
 This challenge that the gallant Hector sends,
    However it is spread in general name,
    Relates in purpose only to Achilles.
 True.
 The purpose is perspicuous even as substance
    Whose grossness little characters sum up;
    And, in the publication, make no strain  
    But that Achilles, were his brain as barren
    As banks of Libya-though, Apollo knows,
    'Tis dry enough-will with great speed of judgment,
    Ay, with celerity, find Hector's purpose
    Pointing on him.
 It is suppos'd  
    He that meets Hector issues from our choice;
    And choice, being mutual act of all our souls,
    Makes merit her election, and doth boil,
    As 'twere from forth us all, a man distill'd
    Out of our virtues; who miscarrying,
    What heart receives from hence a conquering part,
    To steel a strong opinion to themselves?
    Which entertain'd, limbs are his instruments,
    In no less working than are swords and bows
    Directive by the limbs.

  ULYSSES.
 Give pardon to my speech.

    Let us, like merchants, show our foulest wares
    And think perchance they'll sell; if not, the lustre
    Of the better yet to show shall show the better,
    By showing the worst first.
 What are they?  
  ULYSSES.
 What glory our Achilles shares from Hector,
    Were he not proud, we all should wear with him;
    But he already is too insolent;
    And it were better parch in Afric sun
    Than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes,
    Should he scape Hector fair.
 If he were foil'd,
    Why, then we do our main opinion crush
    In taint of our best man.
 Among ourselves
    Give him allowance for the better man;
    For that will physic the great Myrmidon,
    Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall
    His crest, that prouder than blue Iris bends.

    If the dull brainless Ajax come safe off,
    We'll dress him up in voices; if he fail,
    Yet go we under our opinion still
    That we have better men.
 But, hit or miss,
    Our project's life this shape of sense assumes-
    Ajax employ'd plucks down Achilles' plumes.
  
  NESTOR.
 Now, Ulysses, I begin to relish thy advice;
    And I will give a taste thereof forthwith
    To Agamemnon.
 Go we to him straight.

    Two curs shall tame each other: pride alone
    Must tarre the mastiffs on, as 'twere their bone.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
 SCENE 1.
 And those boils did run-say so.
 Then there would come some matter from him;
    I see none now.

  AJAX.

                                                        [Strikes him]
  THERSITES.
 Speak, then, thou whinid'st leaven, speak.

  THERSITES.
 I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness; but I
    think thy horse will sooner con an oration than thou learn a
    prayer without book.
 Thou canst strike, canst thou? A red murrain  
    o' thy jade's tricks!
  AJAX.
 Dost thou think I have no sense, thou strikest me thus?
  AJAX.
 The proclamation!
  THERSITES.
 Thou art proclaim'd, a fool, I think.
 Do not, porpentine, do not; my fingers itch.

  AJAX.
 I say, the proclamation.

  THERSITES.
 Thou grumblest and railest every hour on Achilles; and
    thou art as full of envy at his greatness as Cerberus is at
    Proserpina's beauty-ay, that thou bark'st at him.

  AJAX.
 Mistress Thersites!
  THERSITES.

  AJAX.
 Do, do.

  AJAX.
 Thou stool for a witch!
  THERSITES.
 You
    scurvy valiant ass! Thou art here but to thrash Troyans, and thou
    art bought and sold among those of any wit like a barbarian
    slave.
 You dog!
  THERSITES.
 You cur!                                        [Strikes him]
  THERSITES.


                 Enter ACHILLES and PATROCLUS

  ACHILLES.
 Why, how now, Ajax! Wherefore do you thus?
    How now, Thersites! What's the matter, man?
  THERSITES.
 Nay, look upon him.
  
  ACHILLES.
 So I do.
 Nay, but regard him well.

  ACHILLES.
 Well! why, so I do.
 But yet you look not well upon him; for who some ever
    you take him to be, he is Ajax.

  ACHILLES.

  THERSITES.

  AJAX.
 I have bobb'd his brain more than
    he has beat my bones.
 I will buy nine sparrows for a penny, and
    his pia mater is not worth the ninth part of a sparrow.
 This
    lord, Achilles, Ajax-who wears his wit in his belly and his guts
    in his head-I'll tell you what I say of him.

  ACHILLES.
 I say this Ajax-             [AJAX offers to strike him]
  ACHILLES.
 Nay, good Ajax.

  THERSITES.
 Has not so much wit-
  ACHILLES.
 As will stop the eye of Helen's needle, for whom he  
    comes to fight.
 Peace, fool.

  THERSITES.

  AJAX.
 O thou damned cur! I shall-
  ACHILLES.
 Will you set your wit to a fool's?
  THERSITES.
 No, I warrant you, the fool's will shame it.

  PATROCLUS.
 What's the quarrel?
  AJAX.

  THERSITES.

  AJAX.
 Well, go to, go to.

  THERSITES.
 I serve here voluntary.
 Your last service was suff'rance; 'twas not voluntary.
 No
    man is beaten voluntary.
 Ajax was here the voluntary, and you as
    under an impress.
 Hector shall have a great catch
    an he knock out either of your brains: 'a were as good crack a  
    fusty nut with no kernel.

  ACHILLES.
 What, with me too, Thersites?
  THERSITES.
 There's Ulysses and old Nestor-whose wit was mouldy ere
    your grandsires had nails on their toes-yoke you like draught
    oxen, and make you plough up the wars.
 What, what?
  THERSITES.
 I shall cut out your tongue.

  THERSITES.

  PATROCLUS.
 There's for you, Patroclus.

  THERSITES.
 I will see you hang'd like clotpoles ere I come any more
    to your tents.
 I will keep where there is wit stirring, and leave
    the faction of fools.
                                        Exit
  PATROCLUS.
 A good riddance.

  ACHILLES.
 Who shall answer him?
  ACHILLES.
 Otherwise.
 He knew his
    man.
 PRIAM'S palace

Enter PRIAM, HECTOR, TROILUS, PARIS, and HELENUS

  PRIAM.
 After so many hours, lives, speeches, spent,
    Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks:
    'Deliver Helen, and all damage else-
    As honour, loss of time, travail, expense,
    Wounds, friends, and what else dear that is consum'd
    In hot digestion of this cormorant war-
    Shall be struck off.
 Though no man lesser fears the Greeks than I,
    As far as toucheth my particular,
    Yet, dread Priam,
    There is no lady of more softer bowels,
    More spongy to suck in the sense of fear,
    More ready to cry out 'Who knows what follows?'
    Than Hector is.
 Let Helen go.

    If we have lost so many tenths of ours
    To guard a thing not ours, nor worth to us,
    Had it our name, the value of one ten,
    What merit's in that reason which denies
    The yielding of her up?
  TROILUS.
 Fie, fie, my brother!
    Weigh you the worth and honour of a king,
    So great as our dread father's, in a scale
    Of common ounces? Will you with counters sum
    The past-proportion of his infinite,
    And buckle in a waist most fathomless
    With spans and inches so diminutive
    As fears and reasons? Fie, for godly shame!
  HELENUS.
 No marvel though you bite so sharp at reasons,
    You are so empty of them.
 Should not our father
    Bear the great sway of his affairs with reasons,
    Because your speech hath none that tells him so?  
  TROILUS.
 You are for dreams and slumbers, brother priest;
    You fur your gloves with reason.
 Here are your reasons:
    You know an enemy intends you harm;
    You know a sword employ'd is perilous,
    And reason flies the object of all harm.
 Reason and respect
    Make livers pale and lustihood deject.

  TROILUS.
 What's aught but as 'tis valued?
  HECTOR.
 But value dwells not in particular will:
    It holds his estimate and dignity
    As well wherein 'tis precious of itself  
    As in the prizer.
 'Tis mad idolatry
    To make the service greater than the god-I
    And the will dotes that is attributive
    To what infectiously itself affects,
    Without some image of th' affected merit.

  TROILUS.

    We turn not back the silks upon the merchant
    When we have soil'd them; nor the remainder viands
    We do not throw in unrespective sieve,
    Because we now are full.
 It was thought meet
    Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks;
    Your breath with full consent benied his sails;
    The seas and winds, old wranglers, took a truce,  
    And did him service.
 He touch'd the ports desir'd;
    And for an old aunt whom the Greeks held captive
    He brought a Grecian queen, whose youth and freshness
    Wrinkles Apollo's, and makes stale the morning.

    Why keep we her? The Grecians keep our aunt.

    Is she worth keeping? Why, she is a pearl
    Whose price hath launch'd above a thousand ships,
    And turn'd crown'd kings to merchants.

    If you'll avouch 'twas wisdom Paris went-
    As you must needs, for you all cried 'Go, go'-
    If you'll confess he brought home worthy prize-
    As you must needs, for you all clapp'd your hands,
    And cried 'Inestimable!' -why do you now
    The issue of your proper wisdoms rate,
    And do a deed that never fortune did-
    Beggar the estimation which you priz'd
    Richer than sea and land? O theft most base,
    That we have stol'n what we do fear to keep!
    But thieves unworthy of a thing so stol'n
    That in their country did them that disgrace  
    We fear to warrant in our native place!
  CASSANDRA.
 [Within] Cry, Troyans, cry.

  PRIAM.
 It is Cassandra.
 Peace, sister, peace.

  CASSANDRA.
 Virgins and boys, mid-age and wrinkled eld,
    Soft infancy, that nothing canst but cry,
    Add to my clamours.
 Let us pay betimes
    A moiety of that mass of moan to come.

    Cry, Troyans, cry.
 Practise your eyes with tears.
 Troy burns, or else let Helen go.
 Why, brother Hector,
    We may not think the justness of each act
    Such and no other than event doth form it;
    Nor once deject the courage of our minds
    Because Cassandra's mad.
 For my private part,
    I am no more touch'd than all Priam's sons;
    And Jove forbid there should be done amongst us
    Such things as might offend the weakest spleen
    To fight for and maintain.

  PARIS.
 Else might the world convince of levity  
    As well my undertakings as your counsels;
    But I attest the gods, your full consent
    Gave wings to my propension, and cut of
    All fears attending on so dire a project.

    For what, alas, can these my single arms?
    What propugnation is in one man's valour
    To stand the push and enmity of those
    This quarrel would excite? Yet, I protest,
    Were I alone to pass the difficulties,
    And had as ample power as I have will,
    Paris should ne'er retract what he hath done
    Nor faint in the pursuit.

  PRIAM.
 Sir, I propose not merely to myself
    The pleasures such a beauty brings with it;
    But I would have the soil of her fair rape
    Wip'd off in honourable keeping her.
  
    What treason were it to the ransack'd queen,
    Disgrace to your great worths, and shame to me,
    Now to deliver her possession up
    On terms of base compulsion! Can it be
    That so degenerate a strain as this
    Should once set footing in your generous bosoms?
    There's not the meanest spirit on our party
    Without a heart to dare or sword to draw
    When Helen is defended; nor none so noble
    Whose life were ill bestow'd or death unfam'd
    Where Helen is the subject.
 Then, I say,
    Well may we fight for her whom we know well
    The world's large spaces cannot parallel.
 Paris and Troilus, you have both said well;
    And on the cause and question now in hand
    Have gloz'd, but superficially; not much
    Unlike young men, whom Aristode thought
    Unfit to hear moral philosophy.
 Nature craves
    All dues be rend'red to their owners.
 Now,
    What nearer debt in all humanity
    Than wife is to the husband? If this law
    Of nature be corrupted through affection;
    And that great minds, of partial indulgence
    To their benumbed wills, resist the same;
    There is a law in each well-order'd nation
    To curb those raging appetites that are
    Most disobedient and refractory.

    If Helen, then, be wife to Sparta's king-
    As it is known she is-these moral laws
    Of nature and of nations speak aloud
    To have her back return'd.
 Hector's opinion
    Is this, in way of truth.

  TROILUS.

    Were it not glory that we more affected
    Than the performance of our heaving spleens,
    I would not wish a drop of Troyan blood
    Spent more in her defence.
 But, worthy Hector,
    She is a theme of honour and renown,
    A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
    Whose present courage may beat down our foes,
    And fame in time to come canonize us;
    For I presume brave Hector would not lose
    So rich advantage of a promis'd glory
    As smiles upon the forehead of this action
    For the wide world's revenue.

    I have a roisting challenge sent amongst  
    The dull and factious nobles of the Greeks
    Will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits.

    I was advertis'd their great general slept,
    Whilst emulation in the army crept.

    This, I presume, will wake him.
 SCENE 3.
 O worthy satisfaction! Would it were otherwise: that
    I could beat him, whilst he rail'd at me! 'Sfoot, I'll learn to
    conjure and raise devils, but I'll see some issue of my spiteful
    execrations.
 I have said my prayers; and devil Envy  
    say 'Amen.

  THERSITES.
 Then if she that lays thee out says
    thou art a fair corse, I'll be sworn and sworn upon't she never
    shrouded any but lazars.
 Amen.
 What, art thou devout? Wast thou in prayer?
  THERSITES.
 Amen.
 Who's there?
  PATROCLUS.
 Thersites, my lord.
 Where, where? O, where? Art thou come? Why, my cheese, my
    digestion, why hast thou not served thyself in to my table so
    many meals? Come, what's Agamemnon?
  THERSITES.
 Thy commander, Achilles.
 Then tell me, Patroclus, what's
    Achilles?
  PATROCLUS.
 Thy lord, Thersites.
 Then tell me, I pray thee, what's
    Thersites?
  THERSITES.
 Thy knower, Patroclus.
 Thou must tell that knowest.

  ACHILLES.
 O, tell, tell,
  THERSITES.
 I'll decline the whole question.
 You rascal!
  THERSITES.
 Peace, fool! I have not done.

  ACHILLES.
 Proceed, Thersites.

  THERSITES.
 Agamemnon is a fool; Achilles is a fool; Thersites is a  
    fool; and, as aforesaid, Patroclus is a fool.

  ACHILLES.

  THERSITES.
 Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command Achilles;
    Achilles is a fool to be commanded of Agamemnon; Thersites is a
    fool to serve such a fool; and this Patroclus is a fool positive.
 Make that demand of the Creator.
 It suffices me thou
    art.
 Come, Patroclus, I'll speak with nobody.
 Come in with me,
    Thersites.
                                                   Exit
  THERSITES.
 Here is such patchery, such juggling, and such knavery.

    All the argument is a whore and a cuckold-a good quarrel to draw
    emulous factions and bleed to death upon.
 Where is Achilles?
  PATROCLUS.

    He shent our messengers; and we lay by
    Our appertainings, visiting of him.

    Let him be told so; lest, perchance, he think
    We dare not move the question of our place
    Or know not what we are.
 We saw him at the opening of his tent.

    He is not sick.

  AJAX.
 You may call it
    melancholy, if you will favour the man; but, by my head, 'tis
    pride.
 A word, my lord.
 What moves Ajax thus to bay at him?
  ULYSSES.
 Achilles hath inveigled his fool from him.

  NESTOR.
Who, Thersites?
  ULYSSES.
 He.
 No; you see he is his argument that has his argument-
    Achilles.
  
  NESTOR.
 But it was a strong composure a fool could disunite!
  ULYSSES.

  NESTOR.

  ULYSSES.

  PATROCLUS.
 Achilles bids me say he is much sorry
    If any thing more than your sport and pleasure
    Did move your greatness and this noble state
    To call upon him; he hopes it is no other
    But for your health and your digestion sake,
    An after-dinner's breath.

    We are too well acquainted with these answers;
    But his evasion, wing'd thus swift with scorn,
    Cannot outfly our apprehensions.
 Go and tell him
    We come to speak with him; and you shall not sin
    If you do say we think him over-proud
    And under-honest, in self-assumption greater
    Than in the note of judgment; and worthier than himself
    Here tend the savage strangeness he puts on,
    Disguise the holy strength of their command,
    And underwrite in an observing kind
    His humorous predominance; yea, watch
    His pettish lunes, his ebbs, his flows, as if
    The passage and whole carriage of this action
    Rode on his tide.
 Go tell him this, and ad
    That if he overhold his price so much
    We'll none of him, but let him, like an engine
    Not portable, lie under this report:  
    Bring action hither; this cannot go to war.

  PATROCLUS.
            Exit
  AGAMEMNON.
 In second voice we'll not be satisfied;
    We come to speak with him.
 Ulysses, enter you.

                                                         Exit ULYSSES
  AJAX.
 What is he more than another?
  AGAMEMNON.
 No more than what he thinks he is.
 No question.
 Will you subscribe his thought and say he is?
  AGAMEMNON.

  AJAX.
 Why should a man be proud? How doth pride grow? I know not
    what pride is.
 Your mind is the clearer, Ajax, and your virtues the
    fairer.
 He that is proud eats up himself.


                      Re-enter ULYSSES

  AJAX.

  NESTOR.
 [Aside] And yet he loves himself: is't not strange?
  ULYSSES.
 Achilles will not to the field to-morrow.
 What's his excuse?
  ULYSSES.
 He doth rely on none;
    But carries on the stream of his dispose,
    Without observance or respect of any,
    In will peculiar and in self-admission.

  AGAMEMNON.
 Why will he not, upon our fair request,
    Untent his person and share the air with us?
  ULYSSES.
 Things small as nothing, for request's sake only,
    He makes important; possess'd he is with greatness,
    And speaks not to himself but with a pride
    That quarrels at self-breath.
 Imagin'd worth
    Holds in his blood such swol'n and hot discourse
    That 'twixt his mental and his active parts  
    Kingdom'd Achilles in commotion rages,
    And batters down himself.
 What should I say?
    He is so plaguy proud that the death tokens of it
    Cry 'No recovery.
'
  AGAMEMNON.

    'Tis said he holds you well; and will be led
    At your request a little from himself.

  ULYSSES.
 Shall the proud lord
    That bastes his arrogance with his own seam
    And never suffers matter of the world
    Enter his thoughts, save such as doth revolve
    And ruminate himself-shall he be worshipp'd
    Of that we hold an idol more than he?
    No, this thrice-worthy and right valiant lord
    Shall not so stale his palm, nobly acquir'd,
    Nor, by my will, assubjugate his merit,
    As amply titled as Achilles is,  
    By going to Achilles.

    That were to enlard his fat-already pride,
    And add more coals to Cancer when he burns
    With entertaining great Hyperion.
'
  NESTOR.
 [Aside] O, this is well! He rubs the vein of him.

  DIOMEDES.
 If I go to him, with my armed fist I'll pash him o'er the
    face.

  AJAX.
 An 'a be proud with me I'll pheeze his pride.
 Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel.

  AJAX.
 [Aside] The raven chides blackness.
 I'll let his humours blood.

  AGAMEMNON.

  AJAX.
 An all men were a my mind-
  ULYSSES.

  AJAX.
 'A should not bear it so, 'a should eat's words first.

    Shall pride carry it?
  NESTOR.
 [Aside] An 'twould, you'd carry half.
 [Aside] 'A would have ten shares.

  AJAX.
 I will knead him, I'll make him supple.
 [Aside] He's not yet through warm.
 Force him with praises;
    pour in, pour in; his ambition is dry.

  NESTOR.
 Our noble general, do not do so.
 Why 'tis this naming of him does him harm.

    Here is a man-but 'tis before his face;
    I will be silent.

  ULYSSES.
 A whoreson dog, that shall palter with us thus!  
    Would he were a Troyan!
  NESTOR.
 If he were proud.

  DIOMEDES.

  ULYSSES.
 Ay, or surly borne.

  DIOMEDES.

  ULYSSES.
 Here's Nestor,
    Instructed by the antiquary times-
    He must, he is, he cannot but be wise;
    But pardon, father Nestor, were your days  
    As green as Ajax' and your brain so temper'd,
    You should not have the eminence of him,
    But be as Ajax.

  AJAX.
 Shall I call you father?
  NESTOR.
 Ay, my good son.
 Be rul'd by him, Lord Ajax.
 There is no tarrying here; the hart Achilles
    Keeps thicket.
 Please it our great general
    To call together all his state of war;
    Fresh kings are come to Troy.

  AGAMEMNON.
 Go we to council.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE 1.

Troy.
 PRIAM'S palace

Music sounds within.
 Friend, you-pray you, a word.
 Do you not follow the young
    Lord Paris?
  SERVANT.
 Ay, sir, when he goes before me.
 You depend upon him, I mean?
  SERVANT.

  PANDARUS.
 You depend upon a notable gentleman; I must needs praise
    him.

  PANDARUS.
 Friend, know me better: I am the Lord Pandarus.
 I hope I shall know your honour better.

  PANDARUS.
 You are in the state of grace.

  PANDARUS.
 Grace! Not so, friend; honour and lordship are my titles.

    What music is this?
  SERVANT.

  PANDARUS.
 Who play they to?
  SERVANT.

  PANDARUS.
 At whose pleasure, friend?
  SERVANT.
 At mine, sir, and theirs that love music.
 Friend, we understand not one another: I am to courtly,
    and thou art too cunning.
 Marry, sir, at the request of
    Paris my lord, who is there in person; with him the mortal Venus,
    the heart-blood of beauty, love's invisible soul-
  PANDARUS.
 No, sir, Helen.
  
  SERVANT.
 Sodden business! There's a stew'd phrase indeed!

              Enter PARIS and HELEN, attended

  PANDARUS.
 Fair be to you, my lord, and to all this fair company!
    Fair desires, in all fair measure, fairly guide them- especially
    to you, fair queen! Fair thoughts be your fair pillow.

  PANDARUS.
 You speak your fair pleasure, sweet queen.
 Fair prince,
    here is good broken music.

  HELEN.

  PANDARUS.

  HELEN.
 O, sir-
  PANDARUS.
 Rude, in sooth; in good sooth, very rude.
 Well said, my lord.
 Well, you say so in fits.

  PANDARUS.
 I have business to my lord, dear queen.
 My lord, will you
    vouchsafe me a word?  
  HELEN.
 Well sweet queen, you are pleasant with me.
 But, marry,
    thus, my lord: my dear lord and most esteemed friend, your
    brother Troilus-
  HELEN.
 My Lord Pandarus, honey-sweet lord-
  PANDARUS.
 You shall not bob us out of our melody.
 If you do, our
    melancholy upon your head!
  PANDARUS.
 Sweet queen, sweet queen; that's a sweet queen, i' faith.

  HELEN.
 And to make a sweet lady sad is a sour offence.
 Nay, that shall not serve your turn; that shall it not,
    in truth, la.
 Nay, I care not for such words; no, no.
 What exploit's in hand? Where sups he to-night?
  HELEN.
 Nay, but, my lord-  
  PANDARUS.
 What says my sweet queen?-My cousin will fall out with
    you.

  HELEN.
 You must not know where he sups.

  PANDARUS.
 Come, your disposer
    is sick.
 Well, I'll make's excuse.

  PANDARUS.
 Ay, good my lord.
 Why should you say Cressida?
    No, your poor disposer's sick.
 I spy.

  PANDARUS.
 You spy! What do you spy?-Come, give me an instrument.

    Now, sweet queen.

  HELEN.
 Why, this is kindly done.

  PANDARUS.
 My niece is horribly in love with a thing you have, sweet
    queen.

  HELEN.

  PANDARUS.
 He! No, she'll none of him; they two are twain.
 I'll hear no more of this; I'll sing you a
    song now.
  
  HELEN.
 Ay, ay, prithee now.
 By my troth, sweet lord, thou hast a
    fine forehead.

  HELEN.
 Let thy song be love.
 This love will undo us all.
 O Cupid,
    Cupid, Cupid!
  PANDARUS.

  PANDARUS.

    O ho! a while, but ha! ha! ha!  
    O ho! groans out for ha! ha! ha!-hey ho!

  HELEN.
 In love, i' faith, to the very tip of the nose.

  PARIS.

  PANDARUS.
 Is this the generation of love: hot blood, hot thoughts,
    and hot deeds? Why, they are vipers.
 Hector, Deiphobus, Helenus, Antenor, and all the gallantry
    of Troy.
 He hangs the lip at something.
 You know all, Lord Pandarus.

  PANDARUS.
 Not I, honey-sweet queen.
 You'll remember your brother's excuse?
  PARIS.
 To a hair.

  HELEN.
 Commend me to your niece.

  PANDARUS.
 I will, sweet queen.
                Exit.
 Sound a retreat
  PARIS.
 They're come from the field.
 Let us to Priam's hall  
    To greet the warriors.
 His stubborn buckles,
    With these your white enchanting fingers touch'd,
    Shall more obey than to the edge of steel
    Or force of Greekish sinews; you shall do more
    Than all the island kings-disarm great Hector.

  PARIS.
 Sweet, above thought I love thee.
                     Exeunt




ACT III.
 SCENE 2.

Troy.
 How now! Where's thy master? At my cousin Cressida's?
  BOY.
 No, sir; he stays for you to conduct him thither.
 O, here he comes.
 How now, how now!
  TROILUS.
 Sirrah, walk off.
                                 Exit Boy
  PANDARUS.
 Have you seen my cousin?
  TROILUS.
 I stalk about her door
    Like a strange soul upon the Stygian banks
    Staying for waftage.
 Walk here i' th' orchard, I'll bring her straight.

    Th' imaginary relish is so sweet
    That it enchants my sense; what will it be
    When that the wat'ry palate tastes indeed
    Love's thrice-repured nectar? Death, I fear me;
    Swooning destruction; or some joy too fine,
    Too subtle-potent, tun'd too sharp in sweetness,
    For the capacity of my ruder powers.

    I fear it much; and I do fear besides
    That I shall lose distinction in my joys;
    As doth a battle, when they charge on heaps
    The enemy flying.


                     Re-enter PANDARUS

  PANDARUS.
 I'll fetch her.

    My heart beats thicker than a feverous pulse,
    And all my powers do their bestowing lose,
    Like vassalage at unawares encount'ring
    The eye of majesty.
 Come, come, what need you blush? Shame's a baby.
-Here she
    is now; swear the oaths now to her that you have sworn to me.
-Why do you not speak to
    her?-Come, draw this curtain and let's see your picture.

    Alas the day, how loath you are to offend daylight! An 'twere
    dark, you'd close sooner.
 So, so; rub on, and kiss the mistress
    How now, a kiss in fee-farm! Build there, carpenter; the air is
    sweet.
 The
    falcon as the tercel, for all the ducks i' th' river.

  TROILUS.
 You have bereft me of all words, lady.
 Words pay no debts, give her deeds; but she'll bereave
    you o' th' deeds too, if she call your activity in question.
' Come in, come in; I'll go get a fire.
 Will you walk in, my lord?
  TROILUS.
 O Cressid, how often have I wish'd me thus!
  CRESSIDA.
 Wish'd, my lord! The gods grant-O my lord!
  TROILUS.
 What should they grant? What makes this pretty abruption?
    What too curious dreg espies my sweet lady in the fountain of our
    love?
  CRESSIDA.

  TROILUS.

  CRESSIDA.
 Blind fear, that seeing reason leads, finds safer footing
    than blind reason stumbling without fear.
  
  CRESSIDA.
 Nothing, but our undertakings when we vow to weep seas,
    live in fire, cat rocks, tame tigers; thinking it harder for our
    mistress to devise imposition enough than for us to undergo any
    difficulty imposed.

  CRESSIDA.
 No perfection in reversion shall have a praise in
    present.
 Few words to fair faith:
    Troilus shall be such to Cressid as what envy can say worst shall
    be a mock for his truth; and what truth can speak truest not
    truer than Troilus.
 Will you walk in, my lord?

                    Re-enter PANDARUS

  PANDARUS.
 What, blushing still? Have you not done talking yet?
  CRESSIDA.
 Well, uncle, what folly I commit, I dedicate to you.
 Be true to my lord; if he flinch, chide me for it.

  TROILUS.

  PANDARUS.
 Nay, I'll give my word for her too: our kindred, though
    they be long ere they are wooed, they are constant being won;
    they are burs, I can tell you; they'll stick where they are
    thrown.
 Boldness comes to me now and brings me heart.
 Hard to seem won; but I was won, my lord,
    With the first glance that ever-pardon me.
  
    If I confess much, you will play the tyrant.

    I love you now; but till now not so much
    But I might master it.
 In faith, I lie;
    My thoughts were like unbridled children, grown
    Too headstrong for their mother.
 See, we fools!
    Why have I blabb'd? Who shall be true to us,
    When we are so unsecret to ourselves?
    But, though I lov'd you well, I woo'd you not;
    And yet, good faith, I wish'd myself a man,
    Or that we women had men's privilege
    Of speaking first.
 Sweet, bid me hold my tongue,
    For in this rapture I shall surely speak
    The thing I shall repent.

  TROILUS.
 And shall, albeit sweet music issues thence.

  PANDARUS.

    I am asham'd.
 O heavens! what have I done?  
    For this time will I take my leave, my lord.

  TROILUS.
 Your leave, sweet Cressid!
  PANDARUS.
 Pray you, content you.
 What offends you, lady?
  CRESSIDA.
 Sir, mine own company.

  TROILUS.

  TROILUS.
 Well know they what they speak that speak so wisely.

  CRESSIDA.
 Perchance, my lord, I show more craft than love;
    And fell so roundly to a large confession
    To angle for your thoughts; but you are wise-
    Or else you love not; for to be wise and love
    Exceeds man's might; that dwells with gods above.

  TROILUS.

  CRESSIDA.
 In that I'll war with you.
 O virtuous fight,
    When right with right wars who shall be most right!
    True swains in love shall in the world to come
    Approve their truth by Troilus, when their rhymes,
    Full of protest, of oath, and big compare,
    Want similes, truth tir'd with iteration-
    As true as steel, as plantage to the moon,
    As sun to day, as turtle to her mate,  
    As iron to adamant, as earth to th' centre-
    Yet, after all comparisons of truth,
    As truth's authentic author to be cited,
    'As true as Troilus' shall crown up the verse
    And sanctify the numbers.

  CRESSIDA.
 Prophet may you be!
    If I be false, or swerve a hair from truth,
    When time is old and hath forgot itself,
    When waterdrops have worn the stones of Troy,
    And blind oblivion swallow'd cities up,
    And mighty states characterless are grated
    To dusty nothing-yet let memory
    From false to false, among false maids in love,
    Upbraid my falsehood when th' have said 'As false
    As air, as water, wind, or sandy earth,
    As fox to lamb, or wolf to heifer's calf,
    Pard to the hind, or stepdame to her son'-
    Yea, let them say, to stick the heart of falsehood,
    'As false as Cressid.
'
  TROILUS.
 Amen.

  PANDARUS.
 Whereupon I will show you a chamber
    and a bed; which bed, because it shall not speak of your
    pretty encounters, press it to death.
 SCENE 3.
 Now, Princes, for the service I have done,
    Th' advantage of the time prompts me aloud
    To call for recompense.
 Appear it to your mind
    That, through the sight I bear in things to come,
    I have abandon'd Troy, left my possession,
    Incurr'd a traitor's name, expos'd myself
    From certain and possess'd conveniences
    To doubtful fortunes, sequest'ring from me all
    That time, acquaintance, custom, and condition,
    Made tame and most familiar to my nature;
    And here, to do you service, am become
    As new into the world, strange, unacquainted-
    I do beseech you, as in way of taste,
    To give me now a little benefit
    Out of those many regist'red in promise,
    Which you say live to come in my behalf.
  
  AGAMEMNON.
 What wouldst thou of us, Troyan? Make demand.

  CALCHAS.
 You have a Troyan prisoner call'd Antenor,
    Yesterday took; Troy holds him very dear.

    Oft have you-often have you thanks therefore-
    Desir'd my Cressid in right great exchange,
    Whom Troy hath still denied; but this Antenor,
    I know, is such a wrest in their affairs
    That their negotiations all must slack
    Wanting his manage; and they will almost
    Give us a prince of blood, a son of Priam,
    In change of him.

  AGAMEMNON.
 Calchas shall have
    What he requests of us.
 Good Diomed,
    Furnish you fairly for this interchange;
    Withal, bring word if Hector will to-morrow
    Be answer'd in his challenge.
 Ajax is ready.

    Please it our general pass strangely by him,
    As if he were forgot; and, Princes all,
    Lay negligent and loose regard upon him.

    I will come last.

  AGAMEMNON.
 We'll execute your purpose, and put on
    A form of strangeness as we pass along.
  
    So do each lord; and either greet him not,
    Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more
    Than if not look'd on.
 What comes the general to speak with me?
    You know my mind.
 No.

  NESTOR.
 Nothing, my lord.
 Good day, good day.
 How do you? How do you?                              Exit
  ACHILLES.
 What, does the cuckold scorn me?
  AJAX.
 How now, Patroclus?
  ACHILLES.
 Good morrow, Ajax.

  AJAX.
 Good morrow.
 Ay, and good next day too.
                               Exit
  ACHILLES.
 They pass by strangely.
 They were us'd to bend,
    To send their smiles before them to Achilles,
    To come as humbly as they us'd to creep
    To holy altars.

  ACHILLES.
 What, am I poor of late?
    'Tis certain, greatness, once fall'n out with fortune,
    Must fall out with men too.
 What the declin'd is,
    He shall as soon read in the eyes of others
    As feel in his own fall; for men, like butterflies,
    Show not their mealy wings but to the summer;
    And not a man for being simply man
    Hath any honour, but honour for those honours
    That are without him, as place, riches, and favour,
    Prizes of accident, as oft as merit;
    Which when they fall, as being slippery standers,
    The love that lean'd on them as slippery too,
    Doth one pluck down another, and together
    Die in the fall.
 Here is Ulysses.

    I'll interrupt his reading.

    How now, Ulysses!
  ULYSSES.
 What are you reading?
  ULYSSES.
 A strange fellow here
    Writes me that man-how dearly ever parted,
    How much in having, or without or in-
    Cannot make boast to have that which he hath,
    Nor feels not what he owes, but by reflection;
    As when his virtues shining upon others
    Heat them, and they retort that heat again
    To the first giver.

  ACHILLES.
 This is not strange, Ulysses.

    The beauty that is borne here in the face
    The bearer knows not, but commends itself
    To others' eyes; nor doth the eye itself-
    That most pure spirit of sense-behold itself,  
    Not going from itself; but eye to eye opposed
    Salutes each other with each other's form;
    For speculation turns not to itself
    Till it hath travell'd, and is mirror'd there
    Where it may see itself.
 This is not strange at all.

  ULYSSES.
 I do not strain at the position-
    It is familiar-but at the author's drift;
    Who, in his circumstance, expressly proves
    That no man is the lord of anything,
    Though in and of him there be much consisting,
    Till he communicate his parts to others;
    Nor doth he of himself know them for aught
    Till he behold them formed in th' applause
    Where th' are extended; who, like an arch, reverb'rate
    The voice again; or, like a gate of steel
    Fronting the sun, receives and renders back
    His figure and his heat.
 I was much rapt in this;
    And apprehended here immediately
    Th' unknown Ajax.
 O heavens, what some men do,
    While some men leave to do!
    How some men creep in skittish Fortune's-hall,
    Whiles others play the idiots in her eyes!
    How one man eats into another's pride,
    While pride is fasting in his wantonness!
    To see these Grecian lords!-why, even already
    They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder,
    As if his foot were on brave Hector's breast,
    And great Troy shrinking.
 What, are my deeds forgot?
  ULYSSES.
 Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back,
    Wherein he puts alms for oblivion,  
    A great-siz'd monster of ingratitudes.

    Those scraps are good deeds past, which are devour'd
    As fast as they are made, forgot as soon
    As done.
 Perseverance, dear my lord,
    Keeps honour bright.
 To have done is to hang
    Quite out of fashion, like a rusty mail
    In monumental mock'ry.
 Take the instant way;
    For honour travels in a strait so narrow -
    Where one but goes abreast.
 Keep then the path,
    For emulation hath a thousand sons
    That one by one pursue; if you give way,
    Or hedge aside from the direct forthright,
    Like to an ent'red tide they all rush by
    And leave you hindmost;
    Or, like a gallant horse fall'n in first rank,
    Lie there for pavement to the abject rear,
    O'er-run and trampled on.
 O, let not virtue seek
    Remuneration for the thing it was;
    For beauty, wit,
    High birth, vigour of bone, desert in service,
    Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all
    To envious and calumniating Time.

    Then marvel not, thou great and complete man,
    That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax,
    Since things in motion sooner catch the eye
    Than what stirs not.
 The cry went once on thee,
    And still it might, and yet it may again,
    If thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive  
    And case thy reputation in thy tent,
    Whose glorious deeds but in these fields of late
    Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves,
    And drave great Mars to faction.

  ACHILLES.
 Of this my privacy
    I have strong reasons.

  ULYSSES.
 But 'gainst your privacy
    The reasons are more potent and heroical.

    'Tis known, Achilles, that you are in love
    With one of Priam's daughters.

  ACHILLES.
 Ha! known!
  ULYSSES.
 Is that a wonder?
    The providence that's in a watchful state
    Knows almost every grain of Plutus' gold;
    Finds bottom in th' uncomprehensive deeps;
    Keeps place with thought, and almost, like the gods,
    Do thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles.

    There is a mystery-with whom relation
    Durst never meddle-in the soul of state,
    Which hath an operation more divine  
    Than breath or pen can give expressure to.
'
    Farewell, my lord.

    The fool slides o'er the ice that you should break.

    A woman impudent and mannish grown
    Is not more loath'd than an effeminate man
    In time of action.
 I stand condemn'd for this;
    They think my little stomach to the war
    And your great love to me restrains you thus.

  ACHILLES.
 I see my reputation is at stake;
    My fame is shrewdly gor'd.

  PATROCLUS.
 O, then, beware:
    Those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves;
    Omission to do what is necessary
    Seals a commission to a blank of danger;
    And danger, like an ague, subtly taints
    Even then when they sit idly in the sun.

  ACHILLES.
 I have a woman's longing,
    An appetite that I am sick withal,
    To see great Hector in his weeds of peace;
    To talk with him, and to behold his visage,
    Even to my full of view.
  

                     Enter THERSITES

    A labour sav'd!
  THERSITES.
 What?
  THERSITES.
 Ajax goes up and down the field asking for himself.

  ACHILLES.
 How so?
  THERSITES.
 He must fight singly to-morrow with Hector, and is so
    prophetically proud of an heroical cudgelling that he raves in
    saying nothing.

  ACHILLES.
 How can that be?
  THERSITES.
 Why, 'a stalks up and down like a peacock-a stride and a
    stand; ruminaies like an hostess that hath no arithmetic but her
    brain to set down her reckoning, bites his lip with a politic
    regard, as who should say 'There were wit in this head, an
    'twould out'; and so there is; but it lies as coldly in him as
    fire in a flint, which will not show without knocking.
 A plague of opinion! A man may
    wear it on both sides, like leather jerkin.

  ACHILLES.
 Thou must be my ambassador to him, Thersites.

  THERSITES.
 I will put on his presence.
 Let Patroclus make his demands
    to me, you shall see the pageant of Ajax.

  ACHILLES.
 To him, Patroclus.
 Tell him I humbly desire the valiant
    Ajax to invite the most valorous Hector to come unarm'd to my
    tent; and to procure safe conduct for his person of the
    magnanimous and most illustrious six-or-seven-times-honour'd
    Captain General of the Grecian army, et cetera, Agamemnon.
 Do
    this.
 Jove bless great Ajax!
  THERSITES.
 Hum!
  PATROCLUS.
 Ha!
  PATROCLUS.
 Hum!
  PATROCLUS.

  THERSITES.
 Agamemnon!
  PATROCLUS.
 Ay, my lord.
 Ha!
  PATROCLUS.
 What you say to't?
  THERSITES.
 Your answer, sir.
 If to-morrow be a fair day, by eleven of the clock it
    will go one way or other.
 Howsoever, he shall pay for me ere he
    has me.

  PATROCLUS.
 Why, but he is not in this tune, is he?
  THERSITES.
 What music will be in him
    when Hector has knock'd out his brains I know not; but, I am sure,
    none; unless the fiddler Apollo get his sinews to make catlings
    on.
 Come, thou shalt bear a letter to him straight.

  ACHILLES.
 My mind is troubled, like a fountain stirr'd;
    And I myself see not the bottom of it.

                                        Exeunt ACHILLES and PATROCLUS
  THERSITES.
 Would the fountain of your mind were clear again, that I
    might water an ass at it.
                                    Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>



ACT IV.

Troy.
 See, ho! Who is that there?
  DEIPHOBUS.
 It is the Lord Aeneas.

  DIOMEDES.
 That's my mind too.

  PARIS.
 Health to you, valiant sir,
    During all question of the gentle truce;
    But when I meet you arm'd, as black defiance
    As heart can think or courage execute.
  
  DIOMEDES.
 The one and other Diomed embraces.

  AENEAS.
 In humane gentleness,
    Welcome to Troy! now, by Anchises' life,
    Welcome indeed! By Venus' hand I swear
    No man alive can love in such a sort
    The thing he means to kill, more excellently.

  DIOMEDES.
We do; and long to know each other worse.

  PARIS.
 This is the most despiteful'st gentle greeting
    The noblest hateful love, that e'er I heard of.
  
    What business, lord, so early?
  AENEAS.
 I was sent for to the King; but why, I know not.

  PARIS.
 His purpose meets you: 'twas to bring this Greek
    To Calchas' house, and there to render him,
    For the enfreed Antenor, the fair Cressid.
 I constantly believe-
    Or rather call my thought a certain knowledge-
    My brother Troilus lodges there to-night.

    Rouse him and give him note of our approach,
    With the whole quality wherefore; I fear
    We shall be much unwelcome.

  AENEAS.

  PARIS.
 On, lord; we'll follow you.
 Good morrow, all.
 And tell me, noble Diomed-faith, tell me true,  
    Even in the soul of sound good-fellowship-
    Who in your thoughts deserves fair Helen best,
    Myself or Menelaus?
  DIOMEDES.

    He like a puling cuckold would drink up
    The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece;
    You, like a lecher, out of whorish loins
    Are pleas'd to breed out your inheritors.

    Both merits pois'd, each weighs nor less nor more;
    But he as he, the heavier for a whore.

  PARIS.
 You are too bitter to your country-woman.
 She's bitter to her country.

  PARIS.
 Fair Diomed, you do as chapmen do,
    Dispraise the thing that you desire to buy;
    But we in silence hold this virtue well:
    We'll not commend what we intend to sell.

    Here lies our way.
                                         Exeunt




ACT IV.
 SCENE 2.
 The court of PANDARUS' house

Enter TROILUS and CRESSIDA

  TROILUS.
 Dear, trouble not yourself; the morn is cold.

  CRESSIDA.

  TROILUS.
 Trouble him not;
    To bed, to bed! Sleep kill those pretty eyes,
    And give as soft attachment to thy senses
    As infants' empty of all thought!
  CRESSIDA.
 Good morrow, then.

  TROILUS.
 I prithee now, to bed.

  CRESSIDA.
 Night hath been too brief.

  TROILUS.
 Beshrew the witch! with venomous wights she stays
    As tediously as hell, but flies the grasps of love  
    With wings more momentary-swift than thought.

    You will catch cold, and curse me.

  CRESSIDA.

  PANDARUS.
 [Within] What's all the doors open here?
  TROILUS.


                     Enter PANDARUS

  CRESSIDA.
 A pestilence on him! Now will he be mocking.

    I shall have such a life!
  PANDARUS.
 How now, how now! How go maidenheads?
    Here, you maid! Where's my cousin Cressid?
  CRESSIDA.
 Go hang yourself, you naughty mocking uncle.

  PANDARUS.

  PANDARUS.
 Ha, ha! Alas, poor wretch! a poor capocchia! hast not
    slept to-night? Would he not, a naughty man, let it sleep? A
    bugbear take him!
  CRESSIDA.
 Did not I tell you? Would he were knock'd i' th' head!
                                                         [One knocks]
    Who's that at door? Good uncle, go and see.
 Come, you are deceiv'd, I think of no such thing.

   [Knock]
    How earnestly they knock! Pray you come in:
    I would not for half Troy have you seen here.

  PANDARUS.
 What news with you so early?
  AENEAS.
 Is not Prince Troilus here?
  PANDARUS.
 Here! What should he do here?
  AENEAS.
 Come, he is here, my lord; do not deny him.

    It doth import him much to speak with me.

  PANDARUS.
 Is he here, say you? It's more than I know, I'll be
    sworn.
 What should he do here?
  AENEAS.
 How now! What's the matter?
  AENEAS.
 There is at hand
    Paris your brother, and Deiphobus,
    The Grecian Diomed, and our Antenor  
    Deliver'd to us; and for him forthwith,
    Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
    We must give up to Diomedes' hand
    The Lady Cressida.

  TROILUS.

  TROILUS.
 How my achievements mock me!
    I will go meet them; and, my lord Aeneas,
    We met by chance; you did not find me here.

  AENEAS.

                                            Exeunt TROILUS and AENEAS
  PANDARUS.
 How now! What's the matter? Who was here?  
  PANDARUS.
 Ah, ah!
  CRESSIDA.
 O the gods! What's the matter?
  PANDARUS.
 Pray thee, get thee in.
 Would thou hadst ne'er been born!
    I knew thou wouldst be his death! O, poor gentleman! A plague
    upon Antenor!
  CRESSIDA.
 Good uncle, I beseech you, on my knees I beseech you,
    what's the matter?
  PANDARUS.
 Thou must be gone, wench, thou must be gone; thou art
    chang'd for Antenor; thou must to thy father, and be gone from
    Troilus.
 'Twill be his death; 'twill be his bane; he cannot bear
    it.
 O you immortal gods! I will not go.

  PANDARUS.
 Thou must.

  CRESSIDA.
 I will not, uncle.
 Do, do.

  CRESSIDA.
 SCENE 3.
 Good my brother Troilus,
    Tell you the lady what she is to do
    And haste her to the purpose.

  TROILUS.
 Walk into her house.

    I'll bring her to the Grecian presently;
    And to his hand when I deliver her,
    Think it an altar, and thy brother Troilus
    A priest, there off'ring to it his own heart.
 SCENE 4.

Troy.
 PANDARUS' house

Enter PANDARUS and CRESSIDA

  PANDARUS.

  CRESSIDA.
 How can I moderate it?
    If I could temporize with my affections
    Or brew it to a weak and colder palate,
    The like allayment could I give my grief.

    My love admits no qualifying dross;
    No more my grief, in such a precious loss.


                    Enter TROILUS

  PANDARUS.
 Here, here, here he comes.
 O Troilus! Troilus! [Embracing him]
  PANDARUS.
 What a pair of spectacles is here! Let me embrace too.
 'O
    heart,' as the goodly saying is,  
          O heart, heavy heart,
       Why sigh'st thou without breaking?
    where he answers again
       Because thou canst not ease thy smart
       By friendship nor by speaking.

    There was never a truer rhyme.
 Let us cast away nothing, for we
    may live to have need of such a verse.
 We see it, we see it.
 How
    now, lambs!
  TROILUS.

  CRESSIDA.
 Ay, ay, ay; 'tis too plain a case.

  CRESSIDA.
 A hateful truth.

  CRESSIDA.
 Is't possible?
  TROILUS.

    Injurious time now with a robber's haste
    Crams his rich thievery up, he knows not how.

  AENEAS.
 Hark! you are call'd.
 Some say the Genius so
    Cries 'Come' to him that instantly must die.

  PANDARUS.
 Where are my tears? Rain, to lay this wind, or my heart  
    will be blown up by th' root?                                Exit
  CRESSIDA.
 I must then to the Grecians?
  TROILUS.
 No remedy.

  CRESSIDA.
 A woeful Cressid 'mongst the merry Greeks!
    When shall we see again?
  TROILUS.
 Hear me, my love.
 Be thou but true of heart-
  CRESSIDA.
 Nay, we must use expostulation kindly,
    For it is parting from us.

  CRESSIDA.
 O, you shall be expos'd, my lord, to dangers
    As infinite as imminent! But I'll be true.

  TROILUS.
 And I'll grow friend with danger.
 Wear this sleeve.

  CRESSIDA.
 And you this glove.
 When shall I see you?
  TROILUS.
 I will corrupt the Grecian sentinels  
    To give thee nightly visitation.

    But yet be true.

  CRESSIDA.
 O heavens! 'Be true' again!
  TROILUS.

    How novelties may move, and parts with person,
    Alas, a kind of godly jealousy,
    Which I beseech you call a virtuous sin,
    Makes me afeard.
 O heavens! you love me not.

  TROILUS.
 Die I a villain, then!
    In this I do not call your faith in question
    So mainly as my merit.
 But be not tempted.
 Do you think I will?
  TROILUS.
 No.

    But something may be done that we will not;
    And sometimes we are devils to ourselves,
    When we will tempt the frailty of our powers,
    Presuming on their changeful potency.

  AENEAS.
 [Within] Nay, good my lord!
  TROILUS.
 [Within] Brother Troilus!
  TROILUS.
 Good brother, come you hither;
    And bring Aeneas and the Grecian with you.

  CRESSIDA.
 My lord, will you be true?
  TROILUS.


      Enter AENEAS, PARIS, ANTENOR, DEIPHOBUS, and DIOMEDES  

    Fear not my truth: the moral of my wit
    Is 'plain and true'; there's all the reach of it.

    Welcome, Sir Diomed! Here is the lady
    Which for Antenor we deliver you;
    At the port, lord, I'll give her to thy hand,
    And by the way possess thee what she is.

    Entreat her fair; and, by my soul, fair Greek,
    If e'er thou stand at mercy of my sword,
    Name Cressid, and thy life shall be as safe
    As Priam is in Ilion.
 Fair Lady Cressid,
    So please you, save the thanks this prince expects.

    The lustre in your eye, heaven in your cheek,
    Pleads your fair usage; and to Diomed
    You shall be mistress, and command him wholly.

    I charge thee use her well, even for my charge;
    For, by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not,
    Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard,
    I'll cut thy throat.
 O, be not mov'd, Prince Troilus.
'
  TROILUS.
 I'll tell thee, Diomed,
    This brave shall oft make thee to hide thy head.

  AENEAS.

  PARIS.
 'Tis Troilus' fault.
 Yea, with a bridegroom's fresh alacrity
    Let us address to tend on Hector's heels.

    The glory of our Troy doth this day lie
    On his fair worth and single chivalry.
                     Exeunt




ACT IV.
 SCENE 5.
 Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair,
    Anticipating time with starting courage.

    Give with thy trumpet a loud note to Troy,
    Thou dreadful Ajax, that the appalled air
    May pierce the head of the great combatant,
    And hale him hither.
 Thou, trumpet, there's my purse.

    Now crack thy lungs and split thy brazen pipe;
    Blow, villain, till thy sphered bias cheek
    Out-swell the colic of puff Aquilon'd.

    Come, stretch thy chest, and let thy eyes spout blood:
    Thou blowest for Hector.
                         [Trumpet sounds]
  ULYSSES.
 No trumpet answers.
 Is not yond Diomed, with Calchas' daughter?
  ULYSSES.
 'Tis he, I ken the manner of his gait:
    He rises on the toe.
 That spirit of his
    In aspiration lifts him from the earth.

  AGAMEMNON.
 Is this the lady Cressid?
  DIOMEDES.

  AGAMEMNON.
 Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet lady.
 Our general doth salute you with a kiss.

  ULYSSES.
 Yet is the kindness but particular;
    'Twere better she were kiss'd in general.

  NESTOR.
 And very courtly counsel: I'll begin.

    So much for Nestor.

  ACHILLES.
 I'll take that winter from your lips, fair lady.
 I had good argument for kissing once.

  PATROCLUS.

  ULYSSES.
 O deadly gall, and theme of all our scorns!  
    For which we lose our heads to gild his horns.

  PATROCLUS.
 The first was Menelaus' kiss; this, mine-
                                                   [Kisses her again]
    Patroclus kisses you.
 O, this is trim!
  PATROCLUS.

  MENELAUS.
 Both take and give.

  MENELAUS.
 I'll give you boot; I'll give you three for one.

  CRESSIDA.

  MENELAUS.
 An odd man, lady? Every man is odd.

  CRESSIDA.
 No, Paris is not; for you know 'tis true
    That you are odd, and he is even with you.

  MENELAUS.

  CRESSIDA.
 It were no match, your nail against his horn.
  
    May I, sweet lady, beg a kiss of you?
  CRESSIDA.
 You may.

  ULYSSES.

  CRESSIDA.

  ULYSSES.
 Why then, for Venus' sake give me a kiss
    When Helen is a maid again, and his.

  ULYSSES.

  DIOMEDES.
 I'll bring you to your father.

                                                   Exit with CRESSIDA
  NESTOR.

  ULYSSES.
                       [Trumpet within]
  ALL.
 The Troyans' trumpet.


        Enter HECTOR, armed; AENEAS, TROILUS, PARIS, HELENUS,
                 and other Trojans, with attendants

  AGAMEMNON.

  AENEAS.
 Hail, all the state of Greece! What shall be done
    To him that victory commands? Or do you purpose
    A victor shall be known? Will you the knights
    Shall to the edge of all extremity
    Pursue each other, or shall they be divided
    By any voice or order of the field?
    Hector bade ask.

  AGAMEMNON.
 He cares not; he'll obey conditions.

  ACHILLES.
 'Tis done like Hector; but securely done,
    A little proudly, and great deal misprizing
    The knight oppos'd.

  AENEAS.
 If not Achilles, sir,  
    What is your name?
  ACHILLES.
 But whate'er, know this:
    In the extremity of great and little
    Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector;
    The one almost as infinite as all,
    The other blank as nothing.
 A maiden battle then? O, I perceive you!

                   Re-enter DIOMEDES

  AGAMEMNON.
 Go, gentle knight,
    Stand by our Ajax.
 As you and Lord ]Eneas
    Consent upon the order of their fight,
    So be it; either to the uttermost,  
    Or else a breath.
 The combatants being kin
    Half stints their strife before their strokes begin.

                                    [AJAX and HECTOR enter the lists]
  ULYSSES.
 They are oppos'd already.
 What Troyan is that same that looks so heavy?
  ULYSSES.

    Thus says Aeneas, one that knows the youth  
    Even to his inches, and, with private soul,
    Did in great Ilion thus translate him to me.

                                      [Alarum.
 HECTOR and AJAX fight]
  AGAMEMNON.
 They are in action.

  NESTOR.
 His blows are well dispos'd.
 There, Ajax!
                                                     [Trumpets cease]
  DIOMEDES.
 You must no more.

  AENEAS.
 Princes, enough, so please you.

  DIOMEDES.
 As Hector pleases.

  HECTOR.
 Why, then will I no more.

    By him that thunders, thou hast lusty arms;
    Hector would have them fall upon him thus.
 I thank thee, Hector.

    Thou art too gentle and too free a man.

  HECTOR.
 Not Neoptolemus so mirable,
    On whose bright crest Fame with her loud'st Oyes
    Cries 'This is he' could promise to himself  
    A thought of added honour torn from Hector.

  HECTOR.
 We'll answer it:
    The issue is embracement.

  AJAX.
 If I might in entreaties find success,
    As seld I have the chance, I would desire
    My famous cousin to our Grecian tents.

  DIOMEDES.
 Give me thy hand, my cousin;
    I will go eat with thee, and see your knights.
 Great Agamemnon comes to meet us here.

  HECTOR.

  AGAMEMNON.

    But that's no welcome.
 Understand more clear,
    What's past and what's to come is strew'd with husks
    And formless ruin of oblivion;
    But in this extant moment, faith and troth,
    Strain'd purely from all hollow bias-drawing,
    Bids thee with most divine integrity,
    From heart of very heart, great Hector, welcome.

  HECTOR.
 [To Troilus] My well-fam'd lord of Troy, no less to you.

  MENELAUS.
 Let me confirm my princely brother's greeting.
 Who must we answer?
  AENEAS.
 The noble Menelaus.
 Name her not now, sir; she's a deadly theme.
 I have, thou gallant Troyan, seen thee oft,
    Labouring for destiny, make cruel way
    Through ranks of Greekish youth; and I have seen thee,
    As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian steed,
    Despising many forfeits and subduements,
    When thou hast hung thy advanced sword i' th' air,
    Not letting it decline on the declined;
    That I have said to some my standers-by
    'Lo, Jupiter is yonder, dealing life!'
    And I have seen thee pause and take thy breath,
    When that a ring of Greeks have hemm'd thee in,
    Like an Olympian wrestling.
 This have I seen;
    But this thy countenance, still lock'd in steel,
    I never saw till now.
 I knew thy grandsire,
    And once fought with him.
 O, let an old man embrace thee;  
    And, worthy warrior, welcome to our tents.

  AENEAS.
 Let me embrace thee, good old chronicle,
    That hast so long walk'd hand in hand with time.
 I would my arms could match thee in contention
    As they contend with thee in courtesy.

  NESTOR.
 Ha!
    By this white beard, I'd fight with thee to-morrow.

    Well, welcome, welcome! I have seen the time.

  ULYSSES.
 I wonder now how yonder city stands,
    When we have here her base and pillar by us.

  HECTOR.
 Sir, I foretold you then what would ensue.

    My prophecy is but half his journey yet;
    For yonder walls, that pertly front your town,  
    Yond towers, whose wanton tops do buss the clouds,
    Must kiss their own feet.

  HECTOR.
 I must not believe you.

  ULYSSES.
 So to him we leave it.

    Most gentle and most valiant Hector, welcome.
 I shall forestall thee, Lord Ulysses, thou!
    Now, Hector, I have fed mine eyes on thee;
    I have with exact view perus'd thee, Hector,
    And quoted joint by joint.
 I am Achilles.

  HECTOR.
 Stand fair, I pray thee; let me look on thee.
  
  HECTOR.
 Nay, I have done already.

  ACHILLES.
 Thou art too brief.
 I will the second time,
    As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb.
 O, like a book of sport thou'lt read me o'er;
    But there's more in me than thou understand'st.

    Why dost thou so oppress me with thine eye?
  ACHILLES.
 Tell me, you heavens, in which part of his body
    Shall I destroy him? Whether there, or there, or there?
    That I may give the local wound a name,
    And make distinct the very breach whereout
    Hector's great spirit flew.
 It would discredit the blest gods, proud man,
    To answer such a question.

    Think'st thou to catch my life so pleasantly
    As to prenominate in nice conjecture
    Where thou wilt hit me dead?
  ACHILLES.
 I tell thee yea.

  HECTOR.
 Do not chafe thee, cousin;
    And you, Achilles, let these threats alone
    Till accident or purpose bring you to't.
 The general state, I fear,
    Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him.

  HECTOR.

  ACHILLES.
 Dost thou entreat me, Hector?
    To-morrow do I meet thee, fell as death;
    To-night all friends.

  HECTOR.

    Beat loud the tambourines, let the trumpets blow,
    That this great soldier may his welcome know.

                                   Exeunt all but TROILUS and ULYSSES
  TROILUS.
 My Lord Ulysses, tell me, I beseech you,
    In what place of the field doth Calchas keep?
  ULYSSES.

    There Diomed doth feast with him to-night,
    Who neither looks upon the heaven nor earth,
    But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view
    On the fair Cressid.

  TROILUS.
 Shall I, sweet lord, be bound to you so much,
    After we part from Agamemnon's tent,
    To bring me thither?
  ULYSSES.

    As gentle tell me of what honour was
    This Cressida in Troy? Had she no lover there
    That wails her absence?  
  TROILUS.
 O, sir, to such as boasting show their scars
    A mock is due.
          Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.

The Grecian camp.
 Before the tent of ACHILLES

Enter ACHILLES and PATROCLUS

  ACHILLES.
 I'll heat his blood with Greekish wine to-night,
    Which with my scimitar I'll cool to-morrow.

    Patroclus, let us feast him to the height.

  PATROCLUS.
 Here comes Thersites.


                   Enter THERSITES

  ACHILLES.
 How now, thou core of envy!
    Thou crusty batch of nature, what's the news?
  THERSITES.

  ACHILLES.
 From whence, fragment?
  THERSITES.
 Why, thou full dish of fool, from Troy.

  PATROCLUS.
 Who keeps the tent now?
  THERSITES.
 The surgeon's box or the patient's wound.

  PATROCLUS.
 Well said, Adversity! and what needs these tricks?
  THERSITES.
 Prithee, be silent, boy; I profit not by thy talk; thou  
    art said to be Achilles' male varlet.

  PATROCLUS.
 Now, the rotten diseases of
    the south, the guts-griping ruptures, catarrhs, loads o' gravel
    in the back, lethargies, cold palsies, raw eyes, dirt-rotten
    livers, wheezing lungs, bladders full of imposthume, sciaticas,
    limekilns i' th' palm, incurable bone-ache, and the rivelled fee-
    simple of the tetter, take and take again such preposterous
    discoveries!
  PATROCLUS.
 Why, thou damnable box of envy, thou, what meanest thou
    to curse thus?
  THERSITES.
 Why, no, you ruinous butt; you whoreson
    indistinguishable cur, no.
 No! Why art thou, then, exasperate, thou idle immaterial
    skein of sleid silk, thou green sarcenet flap for a sore eye,
    thou tassel of a prodigal's purse, thou? Ah, how the poor world is
    pest'red with such water-flies-diminutives of nature!
  PATROCLUS.
 Out, gall!
  THERSITES.
 Finch egg!  
  ACHILLES.

    Here is a letter from Queen Hecuba,
    A token from her daughter, my fair love,
    Both taxing me and gaging me to keep
    An oath that I have sworn.
 I will not break it.

    Fall Greeks; fail fame; honour or go or stay;
    My major vow lies here, this I'll obey.
 With too much blood and too little brain these two may
    run mad; but, if with too much brain and to little blood they do,
    I'll be a curer of madmen.
 To an ox, were nothing: he is both
    ox and ass.
 To be a dog, a mule, a cat, a fitchew, a toad, a
    lizard, an owl, a put-tock, or a herring without a roe, I would
    not care; but to be Menelaus, I would conspire against destiny.

    Ask me not what I would be, if I were not Thersites; for I care
    not to be the louse of a lazar, so I were not Menelaus.

  AJAX.
 No, yonder 'tis;
    There, where we see the lights.

  AJAX.
 No, not a whit.


                    Re-enter ACHILLES

  ULYSSES.
 Here comes himself to guide you.

  AGAMEMNON.
 So now, fair Prince of Troy, I bid good night;
    Ajax commands the guard to tend on you.

  HECTOR.
 Thanks, and good night to the Greeks' general.

  MENELAUS.
 Good night, my lord.

  HECTOR.
 Good night, sweet Lord Menelaus.

  THERSITES.
 Good night and welcome, both at once, to those
    That go or tarry.
 Good night.

                                        Exeunt AGAMEMNON and MENELAUS
  ACHILLES.
 Old Nestor tarries; and you too, Diomed,
    Keep Hector company an hour or two.
 I cannot, lord; I have important business,
    The tide whereof is now.
 Good night, great Hector.

  HECTOR.
 Give me your hand.

  ULYSSES.
 [Aside to TROILUS] Follow his torch; he goes to
    Calchas' tent; I'll keep you company.

  TROILUS.
 Sweet sir, you honour me.
  
  HECTOR.
 And so, good night.

                         Exit DIOMEDES; ULYSSES and TROILUS following
  ACHILLES.
 Come, come, enter my tent.
 That same Diomed's a false-hearted rogue, a most unjust
    knave; I will no more trust him when he leers than I will a
    serpent when he hisses.
 He will spend his mouth and promise, like
    Brabbler the hound; but when he performs, astronomers foretell
    it: it is prodigious, there will come some change; the sun
    borrows of the moon when Diomed keeps his word.
 I will rather
    leave to see Hector than not to dog him.
 What, are you up here, ho? Speak.

  CALCHAS.
 [Within] Who calls?
  DIOMEDES.
 Diomed.
 Where's your daughter?
  CALCHAS.
 [Within] She comes to you.


      Enter TROILUS and ULYSSES, at a distance; after them
                        THERSITES

  ULYSSES.


                     Enter CRESSIDA

  TROILUS.
 Cressid comes forth to him.

[Whispers]
  TROILUS.
 Yea, so familiar!  
  ULYSSES.
 She will sing any man at first sight.
 And any man may sing her, if he can take her cliff;
    she's noted.
 Will you remember?
  CRESSIDA.
 Remember? Yes.

  DIOMEDES.
 Nay, but do, then;
    And let your mind be coupled with your words.

  TROILUS.
 I'll tell you what-
  DIOMEDES.
 Fo, fo! come, tell a pin; you are a forsworn-
  CRESSIDA.
 In faith, I cannot.
 What would you have me do?
  THERSITES.
 A juggling trick, to be secretly open.

  DIOMEDES.
 Good night.
 Hold, patience!
  ULYSSES.
 How now, Troyan!
  CRESSIDA.
 Diomed!
  DIOMEDES.

  TROILUS.
 Thy better must.

  CRESSIDA.
 Hark! a word in your ear.

  TROILUS.
 O plague and madness!
  ULYSSES.
 You are moved, Prince; let us depart, I pray,
    Lest your displeasure should enlarge itself
    To wrathful terms.
 This place is dangerous;
    The time right deadly; I beseech you, go.

  TROILUS.
 Behold, I pray you.
 Nay, good my lord, go off;
    You flow to great distraction; come, my lord.
 You have not patience; come.

  TROILUS.

  CRESSIDA.
 Nay, but you part in anger.
  
  TROILUS.
 Doth that grieve thee? O withered truth!
  ULYSSES.
 By Jove, I will be patient.
 Guardian! Why, Greek!
  DIOMEDES.
 Fo, fo! adieu! you palter.

  CRESSIDA.
 In faith, I do not.
 Come hither once again.

  ULYSSES.
 You shake, my lord, at something; will you go?
    You will break out.
 She strokes his cheek.

  ULYSSES.

  TROILUS.
 Nay, stay; by Jove, I will not speak a word:
    There is between my will and all offences
    A guard of patience.
 Stay a little while.

  THERSITES.
 How the devil luxury, with his fat rump and potato
    finger, tickles these together! Fry, lechery, fry!
  DIOMEDES.
 But will you, then?
  CRESSIDA.

  DIOMEDES.
 Give me some token for the surety of it.

  CRESSIDA.
 I'll fetch you one.
 You have sworn patience.
  
  TROILUS.
 I am all patience.


                    Re-enter CRESSIDA

  THERSITES.
 Now the pledge; now, now, now!
  CRESSIDA.

  TROILUS.
 My lord!
  TROILUS.
 I will be patient; outwardly I will.

  CRESSIDA.
 You look upon that sleeve; behold it well.

    He lov'd me-O false wench!-Give't me again.

  DIOMEDES.
 Whose was't?
  CRESSIDA.
 It is no matter, now I ha't again.

    I will not meet with you to-morrow night.

    I prithee, Diomed, visit me no more.

  THERSITES.
 Now she sharpens.
 I shall have it.
 O all you gods! O pretty, pretty pledge!
    Thy master now lies thinking on his bed
    Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my glove,
    And gives memorial dainty kisses to it,
    As I kiss thee.

  TROILUS.
 I did swear patience.

  CRESSIDA.

  DIOMEDES.
 It is no matter.

  DIOMEDES.
 Come, tell me whose it was.

  CRESSIDA.
 'Twas one's that lov'd me better than you will.

    But, now you have it, take it.
 By all Diana's waiting women yond,
    And by herself, I will not tell you whose.
 To-morrow will I wear it on my helm,  
    And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.

  TROILUS.
 Wert thou the devil and wor'st it on thy horn,
    It should be challeng'd.

  DIOMEDES.
 Why, then farewell;
    Thou never shalt mock Diomed again.
 One cannot speak a word
    But it straight starts you.
 Nor I, by Pluto; but that that likes not you
    Pleases me best.

  DIOMEDES.
 Ay, come-O Jove! Do come.

  DIOMEDES.
 Farewell till then.
 Good night.
 I prithee come.
  
    What error leads must err; O, then conclude,
    Minds sway'd by eyes are full of turpitude.
                  Exit
  THERSITES.
 A proof of strength she could not publish more,
    Unless she said 'My mind is now turn'd whore.
'
  ULYSSES.
 It is.
 Why stay we, then?
  TROILUS.
 To make a recordation to my soul
    Of every syllable that here was spoke.

    Was Cressid here?
  ULYSSES.

  TROILUS.
 She was not, sure.
 Let it not be believ'd for womanhood.

    Think, we had mothers; do not give advantage
    To stubborn critics, apt, without a theme,
    For depravation, to square the general sex
    By Cressid's rule.

  ULYSSES.

    If beauty have a soul, this is not she;
    If souls guide vows, if vows be sanctimonies,
    If sanctimony be the god's delight,
    If there be rule in unity itself,
    This was not she.

    Instance, O instance! strong as Pluto's gates:
    Cressid is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven.

  ULYSSES.
 Never did young man fancy
    With so eternal and so fix'd a soul.
  
    Hark, Greek: as much as I do Cressid love,
    So much by weight hate I her Diomed.

    That sleeve is mine that he'll bear on his helm;
    Were it a casque compos'd by Vulcan's skill
    My sword should bite it.

  THERSITES.
 He'll tickle it for his concupy.

  ULYSSES.
 O, contain yourself;
    Your passion draws ears hither.
 Have with you, Prince.
 My courteous lord, adieu.

    Fairwell, revolted fair!-and, Diomed,
    Stand fast and wear a castle on thy head.

  ULYSSES.

  TROILUS.


            Exeunt TROILUS, AENEAS.
 and ULYSSES

  THERSITES.
 Would I could meet that rogue Diomed! I would croak like
    a raven; I would bode, I would bode.
 Lechery,
    lechery! Still wars and lechery! Nothing else holds fashion.
 A
    burning devil take them!                                     Exit




ACT V.
 SCENE 3.
 Before PRIAM'S palace

Enter HECTOR and ANDROMACHE

  ANDROMACHE.

  HECTOR.
 My dreams will, sure, prove ominous to the day.
 No more, I say.


                    Enter CASSANDRA

  CASSANDRA.
 Where is my brother Hector?
  ANDROMACHE.

  CASSANDRA.
 O, 'tis true!  
  HECTOR.

  CASSANDRA.
 The gods have heard me swear.

  CASSANDRA.
 The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows;
    They are polluted off'rings, more abhorr'd
    Than spotted livers in the sacrifice.

  ANDROMACHE.
 O, be persuaded! Do not count it holy
    To hurt by being just.
 It is as lawful,
    For we would give much, to use violent thefts
    And rob in the behalf of charity.
 It is the purpose that makes strong the vow;
    But vows to every purpose must not hold.

    Unarm, sweet Hector.

  HECTOR.
 Hold you still, I say.


                      Enter TROILUS
  
    How now, young man! Mean'st thou to fight to-day?
  ANDROMACHE.
 Cassandra, call my father to persuade.

                                                       Exit CASSANDRA
  HECTOR.
 No, faith, young Troilus; doff thy harness, youth;
    I am to-day i' th' vein of chivalry.

    Unarm thee, go; and doubt thou not, brave boy,
    I'll stand to-day for thee and me and Troy.

  HECTOR.
 What vice is that, good Troilus?
    Chide me for it.
 When many times the captive Grecian falls,
    Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword,
    You bid them rise and live.
 Fool's play, by heaven, Hector.

  HECTOR.
 How now! how now!
  TROILUS.
 For th' love of all the gods,  
    Let's leave the hermit Pity with our mother;
    And when we have our armours buckled on,
    The venom'd vengeance ride upon our swords,
    Spur them to ruthful work, rein them from ruth!
  HECTOR.
 Fie, savage, fie!
  TROILUS.
 Hector, then 'tis wars.
 Who should withhold me?
    Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars
    Beck'ning with fiery truncheon my retire;
    Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees,
    Their eyes o'ergalled with recourse of tears;
    Nor you, my brother, with your true sword drawn,
    Oppos'd to hinder me, should stop my way,
    But by my ruin.


              Re-enter CASSANDRA, with PRIAM

  CASSANDRA.
 Lay hold upon him, Priam, hold him fast;
    He is thy crutch; now if thou lose thy stay,  
    Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
    Fall all together.

  PRIAM.

    Thy wife hath dreamt; thy mother hath had visions;
    Cassandra doth foresee; and I myself
    Am like a prophet suddenly enrapt
    To tell thee that this day is ominous.

  HECTOR.
 Ay, but thou shalt not go.

  HECTOR.

  CASSANDRA.
 Do not, dear father.
  
  HECTOR.
 Andromache, I am offended with you.

    Upon the love you bear me, get you in.
 This foolish, dreaming, superstitious girl
    Makes all these bodements.

  CASSANDRA.

    Hark how Troy roars; how Hecuba cries out;
    How poor Andromache shrills her dolours forth;
    Behold distraction, frenzy, and amazement,
    Like witless antics, one another meet,
    And all cry, Hector! Hector's dead! O Hector!
  TROILUS.
 Farewell!-yet, soft! Hector, I take my leave.

    Thou dost thyself and all our Troy deceive.
 You are amaz'd, my liege, at her exclaim.

    Go in, and cheer the town; we'll forth, and fight,
    Do deeds worth praise and tell you them at night.


                     Enter PANDARUS

  PANDARUS.
 Do you hear, my lord? Do you hear?
  TROILUS.
 What now?
  PANDARUS.
 Here's a letter come from yond poor girl.
 Let me read.
 What
    says she there?
  TROILUS.

                                                 [Tearing the letter]
    Go, wind, to wind, there turn and change together.
  
    My love with words and errors still she feeds,
    But edifies another with her deeds.
              Exeunt severally




ACT V.
 SCENE 4.
 Excursions

  THERSITES.
 I would fain see them meet, that that same young Troyan ass
    that loves the whore there might send that Greekish whoremasterly
    villain with the sleeve back to the dissembling luxurious drab of
    a sleeve-less errand.
 A th' t'other side, the policy of those
    crafty swearing rascals-that stale old mouse-eaten dry cheese,
    Nestor, and that same dog-fox, Ulysses -is not prov'd worth a
    blackberry.
 They set me up, in policy, that mongrel cur, Ajax,
    against that dog of as bad a kind, Achilles; and now is the cur,
    Ajax prouder than the cur Achilles, and will not arm to-day;
    whereupon the Grecians begin to proclaim barbarism, and policy
    grows into an ill opinion.


             Enter DIOMEDES, TROILUS following
  
    Soft! here comes sleeve, and t'other.
 Fly not; for shouldst thou take the river Styx
    I would swim after.
 Thou dost miscall retire.

    I do not fly; but advantageous care
    Withdrew me from the odds of multitude.

    Have at thee.

  THERSITES.
 What art thou, Greek? Art thou for Hector's match?
    Art thou of blood and honour?
  THERSITES.
 No, no-I am a rascal; a scurvy railing knave; a very
    filthy rogue.

  HECTOR.
 I do believe thee.
 Live.
                               Exit
  THERSITES.
 God-a-mercy, that thou wilt believe me; but a plague
    break thy neck for frighting me! What's become of the wenching  
    rogues? I think they have swallowed one another.
 I would laugh at
    that miracle.
 I'll seek
    them.
                                                        Exit




ACT V.

Another part of the plain

Enter DIOMEDES and A SERVANT

  DIOMEDES.
 Go, go, my servant, take thou Troilus' horse;
    Present the fair steed to my lady Cressid.

    Fellow, commend my service to her beauty;
    Tell her I have chastis'd the amorous Troyan,
    And am her knight by proof.

  SERVANT.
 I go, my lord.
 Renew, renew! The fierce Polydamus
    Hath beat down enon; bastard Margarelon
    Hath Doreus prisoner,
    And stands colossus-wise, waving his beam,
    Upon the pashed corses of the kings
    Epistrophus and Cedius.
 Polixenes is slain;
    Amphimacus and Thoas deadly hurt;
    Patroclus ta'en, or slain; and Palamedes  
    Sore hurt and bruis'd.


                        Enter NESTOR

  NESTOR.

    Here, there, and everywhere, he leaves and takes;
    Dexterity so obeying appetite
    That what he will he does, and does so much
    That proof is call'd impossibility.
 Ajax hath lost a friend
    And foams at mouth, and he is arm'd and at it,
    Roaring for Troilus; who hath done to-day
    Mad and fantastic execution,
    Engaging and redeeming of himself
    With such a careless force and forceless care
    As if that luck, in very spite of cunning,
    Bade him win all.


                        Enter AJAX

  AJAX.
  
  NESTOR.
 Where is this Hector?
    Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face;
    Know what it is to meet Achilles angry.

    Hector! where's Hector? I will none but Hector.
            Exeunt




ACT V.
 SCENE 6.

Another part of the plain

Enter AJAX

  AJAX.
 Troilus, I say! Where's Troilus?
  AJAX.

  AJAX.
 Were I the general, thou shouldst have my office
    Ere that correction.
 O traitor Diomed! Turn thy false face, thou traitor,
    And pay thy life thou owest me for my horse.

  DIOMEDES.
 I'll fight with him alone.
 Stand, Diomed.

  DIOMEDES.
 He is my prize.
 I will not look upon.
  
  TROILUS.
 Come, both, you cogging Greeks; have at you
                                                      Exeunt fighting

                      Enter HECTOR

  HECTOR.
 Now do I see thee, ha! Have at thee, Hector!
  HECTOR.
 Pause, if thou wilt.
 I do disdain thy courtesy, proud Troyan.

    Be happy that my arms are out of use;
    My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
    But thou anon shalt hear of me again;
    Till when, go seek thy fortune.

  
                     Re-enter TROILUS

    How now, my brother!
  TROILUS.
                   Exit

                    Enter one in armour

  HECTOR.

    No? wilt thou not? I like thy armour well;
    I'll frush it and unlock the rivets all
    But I'll be master of it.
 Wilt thou not, beast, abide?
    Why then, fly on; I'll hunt thee for thy hide.
             Exeunt




ACT V.
 SCENE 7.
 Attend me where I wheel;
    Strike not a stroke, but keep yourselves in breath;
    And when I have the bloody Hector found,
    Empale him with your weapons round about;
    In fellest manner execute your arms.

    It is decreed Hector the great must die.
                   Exeunt

      Enter MENELAUS and PARIS, fighting; then THERSITES

  THERSITES.
 Ware horns, ho!
                                            Exeunt PARIS and MENELAUS

                      Enter MARGARELON  

  MARGARELON.
 What art thou?
  MARGARELON.

  THERSITES.
 I am a bastard too; I love bastards.
 I am a bastard
    begot, bastard instructed, bastard in mind, bastard in valour, in
    everything illegitimate.
 One bear will not bite another, and
    wherefore should one bastard? Take heed, the quarrel's most
    ominous to us: if the son of a whore fight for a whore, he tempts
    judgment.
 Farewell, bastard.
 The devil take thee, coward!                       Exit




ACT V.

Another part of the plain

Enter HECTOR

  HECTOR.
 Most putrified core so fair without,
    Thy goodly armour thus hath cost thy life.

    Now is my day's work done; I'll take good breath:
    Rest, sword; thou hast thy fill of blood and death!
 [Disarms]

              Enter ACHILLES and his Myrmidons

  ACHILLES.
 Look, Hector, how the sun begins to set;
    How ugly night comes breathing at his heels;
    Even with the vail and dark'ning of the sun,
    To close the day up, Hector's life is done.

  HECTOR.
 I am unarm'd; forego this vantage, Greek.

  ACHILLES.
 Strike, fellows, strike; this is the man I seek.
'
                                                  [A retreat sounded]
    Hark! a retire upon our Grecian part.

  MYRMIDON.
 The Troyan trumpets sound the like, my lord.
 The dragon wing of night o'erspreads the earth
    And, stickler-like, the armies separates.

    My half-supp'd sword, that frankly would have fed,
    Pleas'd with this dainty bait, thus goes to bed.

                                                 [Sheathes his sword]
    Come, tie his body to my horse's tail;
    Along the field I will the Troyan trail.
                   Exeunt




ACT V.
 SCENE 9.

Another part of the plain

Sound retreat.
 Peace, drums!
  SOLDIERS.
 The bruit is Hector's slain, and by Achilles.

  AJAX.

  AGAMEMNON.
 Let one be sent
    To pray Achilles see us at our tent.

    Exeunt




ACT V.
 SCENE 10.
 Hector is slain.

  ALL.
 He's dead, and at the murderer's horse's tail,
    In beastly sort, dragg'd through the shameful field.

    Sit, gods, upon your thrones, and smile at Troy.

  AENEAS.

  TROILUS.

    I do not speak of flight, of fear of death,
    But dare all imminence that gods and men  
    Address their dangers in.
 But, march away;
    Hector is dead; there is no more to say.
 You vile abominable tents,
    Thus proudly pight upon our Phrygian plains,
    Let Titan rise as early as he dare,
    I'll through and through you.
 And, thou great-siz'd coward,
    No space of earth shall sunder our two hates;
    I'll haunt thee like a wicked conscience still,
    That mouldeth goblins swift as frenzy's thoughts.

    Strike a free march to Troy.
 With comfort go;
    Hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe.


                        Enter PANDARUS  

  PANDARUS.
 But hear you, hear you!
  TROILUS.
 Ignominy and shame
    Pursue thy life and live aye with thy name!
                                              Exeunt all but PANDARUS
  PANDARUS.
 A goodly medicine for my aching bones! world! world! thus
    is the poor agent despis'd! traitors and bawds, how earnestly are
    you set a work, and how ill requited! Why should our endeavour be
    so lov'd, and the performance so loathed? What verse for it? What
    instance for it? Let me see-

          Full merrily the humble-bee doth sing
          Till he hath lost his honey and his sting;
          And being once subdu'd in armed trail,
          Sweet honey and sweet notes together fail.


    Good traders in the flesh, set this in your painted
    cloths.
 As many as be here of pander's hall,
    Your eyes, half out, weep out at Pandar's fall;
    Or, if you cannot weep, yet give some groans,  
    Though not for me, yet for your aching bones.

    Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade,
    Some two months hence my will shall here be made.

    It should be now, but that my fear is this,
    Some galled goose of Winchester would hiss.
                   Exit

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
>>





1602


TWELFTH NIGHT; OR, WHAT YOU WILL

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  ORSINO, Duke of Illyria
  SEBASTIAN, brother of Viola
  ANTONIO, a sea captain, friend of Sebastian
  A SEA CAPTAIN, friend of Viola
  VALENTINE, gentleman attending on the Duke
  CURIO, gentleman attending on the Duke
  SIR TOBY BELCH, uncle of Olivia
  SIR ANDREW AGUECHEEK
  MALVOLIO, steward to Olivia
  FABIAN, servant to Olivia
  FESTE, a clown, servant to Olivia

  OLIVIA, a rich countess
  VIOLA, sister of Sebastian
  MARIA, Olivia's waiting woman

  Lords, Priests, Sailors, Officers, Musicians, and Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.
 If music be the food of love, play on,
    Give me excess of it, that, surfeiting,
    The appetite may sicken and so die.

    O spirit of love, how quick and fresh art thou!
    That, notwithstanding thy capacity
    Receiveth as the sea, nought enters there,
    Of what validity and pitch soe'er,
    But falls into abatement and low price
    Even in a minute.
 So full of shapes is fancy,
    That it alone is high fantastical.

  CURIO.
 Will you go hunt, my lord?  
  DUKE.
 What, Curio?
  CURIO.
 The hart.

  DUKE.
 Why, so I do, the noblest that I have.


                     Enter VALENTINE

    How now! what news from her?
  VALENTINE.
 So please my lord, I might not be admitted,
    But from her handmaid do return this answer:
    The element itself, till seven years' heat,
    Shall not behold her face at ample view;
    But like a cloistress she will veiled walk,
    And water once a day her chamber round
    With eye-offending brine; all this to season
    A brother's dead love, which she would keep fresh  
    And lasting in her sad remembrance.
 What country, friends, is this?
  CAPTAIN.

    Perchance he is not drown'd- what think you, sailors?
  CAPTAIN.
 It is perchance that you yourself were saved.
 O my poor brother! and so perchance may he be.
  
  VIOLA.

  VIOLA.
 Who governs here?
  CAPTAIN.
 A noble duke, in nature as in name.

  VIOLA.
 What is his name?
  CAPTAIN.
 Orsino.

    He was a bachelor then.

  CAPTAIN.
 And so is now, or was so very late;
    For but a month ago I went from hence,
    And then 'twas fresh in murmur- as, you know,
    What great ones do the less will prattle of-
    That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.

  VIOLA.
 O that I serv'd that lady,
    And might not be delivered to the world,
    Till I had made mine own occasion mellow,
    What my estate is!
  CAPTAIN.
 I'll serve this duke:  
    Thou shalt present me as an eunuch to him;
    It may be worth thy pains, for I can sing
    And speak to him in many sorts of music,
    That will allow me very worth his service.

  CAPTAIN.
 Be you his eunuch and your mute I'll be;
    When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.

  VIOLA.
 I thank thee.
 Lead me on.
                        Exeunt




SCENE III.

OLIVIA'S house

Enter SIR TOBY BELCH and MARIA

  SIR TOBY.

  MARIA.

  SIR TOBY.
 Why, let her except before excepted.

  MARIA.
 Confine! I'll confine myself no finer than I am.
 These
    clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too;
    an they be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.
 Who? Sir Andrew Aguecheek?
  MARIA.
 Ay, he.

  SIR TOBY.
 He's as tall a man as any's in Illyria.

  MARIA.
 What's that to th' purpose?  
  SIR TOBY.
 Why, he has three thousand ducats a year.
 Ay, but he'll have but a year in all these ducats; he's a
    very fool and a prodigal.

  SIR TOBY.

  SIR TOBY.
 By this hand, they are scoundrels and subtractors that
    say so of him.
 They that add, moreover, he's drunk nightly in your company.

  SIR TOBY.
 With drinking healths to my niece; I'll drink to her as
    long as there is a passage in my throat and drink in Illyria.

    He's a coward and a coystrill that will not drink to my niece
    till his brains turn o' th' toe like a parish-top.
 What, wench!
    Castiliano vulgo! for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface.

  MARIA.

  SIR TOBY.
 Accost, Sir Andrew, accost.
 What's that?
  SIR TOBY.
 My niece's chambermaid.

  AGUECHEEK.

  MARIA.
 My name is Mary, sir.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Good Mistress Mary Accost-
  SIR Toby.
 You mistake, knight.
 'Accost' is front her, board her,
    woo her, assail her.

  AGUECHEEK.
 By my troth, I would not undertake her in this company.
 An you part so, mistress, I would I might never draw
    sword again.
 Marry, but you shall have; and here's my hand.

  MARIA.
 Now, sir, thought is free.
 I pray you, bring your hand to
    th' buttry-bar and let it drink.

  AGUECHEEK.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Why, I think so; I am not such an ass but I can keep my
    hand dry.
 But what's your jest?
  MARIA.
 A dry jest, sir.
 Ay, sir, I have them at my fingers' ends; marry, now I let
    go your hand, I am barren.
                        Exit MARIA
  SIR TOBY.
 Methinks sometimes I have no more wit than a Christian
    or an ordinary man has; but I am great eater of beef, and I
    believe that does harm to my wit.

  SIR TOBY.
 No question.
 An I thought that, I'd forswear it.
 I'll ride home  
    to-morrow, Sir Toby.

  SIR TOBY.
 Pourquoi, my dear knight?
  AGUECHEEK.
 Oh, had I but followed the arts!
  SIR TOBY.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Why, would that have mended my hair?
  SIR TOBY.
 Past question; for thou seest it will not curl by nature.

  AGUECHEEK.
 But it becomes me well enough, does't not?
  SIR TOBY.
 Excellent; it hangs like flax on a distaff, and I hope to
    see a huswife take thee between her legs and spin it off.

  SIR TOBY.
 She'll none o' th' Count; she'll not match above her
    degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit; I have heard her
    swear't.

  AGUECHEEK.
 I'll stay a month longer.
 Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?
  AGUECHEEK.
 As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the
    degree of my betters; and yet I will not compare with an old man.
 And I can cut the mutton to't.

  AGUECHEEK.

  SIR TOBY.
 Ay, 'tis strong, and it does indifferent well in
    flame-colour'd stock.
 What shall we do else? Were we not born under Taurus?
  AGUECHEEK.
  
  SIR TOBY.
 No, sir; it is legs and thighs.

The DUKE'S palace

Enter VALENTINE, and VIOLA in man's attire

  VALENTINE.
 If the Duke continue these favours towards you, Cesario,
    you are like to be much advanc'd; he hath known you but three
    days, and already you are no stranger.
 Is he inconstant, sir,
    in his favours?
  VALENTINE.
 No, believe me.


                  Enter DUKE, CURIO, and ATTENDANTS

  VIOLA.
 I thank you.

  DUKE.
 Who saw Cesario, ho?
  VIOLA.
 On your attendance, my lord, here.
 Stand you awhile aloof.
 Cesario,
    Thou know'st no less but all; I have unclasp'd
    To thee the book even of my secret soul.

    Therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her;  
    Be not denied access, stand at her doors,
    And tell them there thy fixed foot shall grow
    Till thou have audience.
 Sure, my noble lord,
    If she be so abandon'd to her sorrow
    As it is spoke, she never will admit me.
 Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?
  DUKE.

  VIOLA.

  DUKE.
 Dear lad, believe it,
    For they shall yet belie thy happy years
    That say thou art a man: Diana's lip
    Is not more smooth and rubious; thy small pipe
    Is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound,  
    And all is semblative a woman's part.

    I know thy constellation is right apt
    For this affair.
 Some four or five attend him-
    All, if you will, for I myself am best
    When least in company.

  VIOLA.
 I'll do my best
    To woo your lady.

  CLOWN.
 He that is well hang'd in this world needs
    to fear no colours.

  MARIA.
 Make that good.

  CLOWN.

  MARIA.
 A good lenten answer.
'
  CLOWN.
 In the wars; and that may you be bold to say in your
    foolery.
 Well, God give them wisdom that have it; and those that are
    fools, let them use their talents.
 Yet you will be hang'd for being so long absent; or to be
    turn'd away- is not that as good as a hanging to you?
  CLOWN.
 Many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage; and for turning  
    away, let summer bear it out.
 You are resolute, then?
  CLOWN.
 Not so, neither; but I am resolv'd on two points.
 That if one break, the other will hold; or if both break,
    your gaskins fall.

  MARIA.
 Peace, you rogue, no more o' that.
 Here comes my lady.
 Make
    your excuse wisely, you were best.
 Wit, an't be thy will, put me into good fooling! Those wits
    that think they have thee do very oft prove fools; and I that am
    sure I lack thee may pass for a wise man.
 Do you not hear, fellows? Take away the lady.

  CLOWN.
 Two faults, madonna, that drink and good counsel will amend;
    for give the dry fool drink, then is the fool not dry.
 Bid the
    dishonest man mend himself: if he mend, he is no longer
    dishonest; if he cannot, let the botcher mend him.

    If that this simple syllogism will serve, so; if it will not,
    what remedy? As there is no true cuckold but calamity, so
    beauty's a flower.
 Sir, I bade them take away you.

  CLOWN.
 Good madonna, give me leave to prove you a fool.
 Can you do it?
  CLOWN.
 Dexteriously, good madonna.

  OLIVIA.
 Make your proof.

  CLOWN.
  
    Good my mouse of virtue, answer me.

  OLIVIA.

  CLOWN.
 Good madonna, why mourn'st thou?
  OLIVIA.
 Good fool, for my brother's death.
 I think his soul is in hell, madonna.
 I know his soul is in heaven, fool.

  CLOWN.
 Take away the fool, gentlemen.

  OLIVIA.
 What think you of this fool, Malvolio? Doth he not mend?
  MALVOLIO.
 Yes, and shall do, till the pangs of death shake him.

    Infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make the better fool.
 God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the better
    increasing your folly! Sir Toby will be sworn that I am no fox;
    but he will not pass his word for twopence that you are no fool.
 How say you to that, Malvolio?
  MALVOLIO.
 I marvel your ladyship takes delight in such a barren
    rascal; I saw him put down the other day with an ordinary fool
    that has no more brain than a stone.
 I protest I take these wise men that crow so at
    these set kind of fools no better than the fools' zanies.

  OLIVIA.
 O, you are sick of self-love, Malvolio, and taste with a
    distemper'd appetite.
 To be generous, guiltless, and of free
    disposition, is to take those things for bird-bolts that you deem
    cannon bullets.
 There is no slander in an allow'd fool, though he
    do nothing but rail; nor no railing in known discreet man, though
    he do nothing but reprove.
 Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much desires
    to speak with you.
 From the Count Orsino, is it?
  MARIA.
 I know not, madam; 'tis a fair young man, and well attended.

  OLIVIA.
 Who of my people hold him in delay?
  MARIA.
 Fetch him off, I pray you; he speaks nothing but madman.
 Thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest son should
    be a fool; whose skull Jove cram with brains! For- here he comes-
    one of thy kin has a most weak pia mater.


                         Enter SIR TOBY

  OLIVIA.
 By mine honour, half drunk! What is he at the gate, cousin?
  SIR TOBY.
 A gentleman.

  OLIVIA.
 'Tis a gentleman here.
 [Hiccups] A plague o' these
    pickle-herring! How now, sot!
  CLOWN.
 Good Sir Toby!
  OLIVIA.
 Lechery! I defy lechery.
 Ay, marry; what is he?  
  SIR TOBY.
                       Exit
  OLIVIA.

  OLIVIA.

  CLOWN.
 He is but mad yet, madonna, and the fool shall look to the
    madman.
                                                 Exit

                           Re-enter MALVOLIO

  MALVOLIO.
 Madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with you.
 I
    told him you were sick; he takes on him to understand so much,
     and therefore comes to speak with you.
 I told him you were
    asleep; he seems to have a foreknowledge of that too, and
    therefore comes to speak with you.
 Tell him he shall not speak with me.

  MALVOLIO.

  OLIVIA.
 Why, of mankind.

  OLIVIA.
 What manner of man?
  MALVOLIO.
 Of very ill manner; he'll speak with you, will you or no.
 Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a boy;
    as a squash is before 'tis a peascod, or a codling when 'tis
    almost an apple; 'tis with him in standing water, between boy and
    man.

  MALVOLIO.
 Gentlewoman, my lady calls.


                             Enter VIOLA

  VIOLA.
 The honourable lady of the house, which is she?
  OLIVIA.
 I
    would be loath to cast away my speech; for, besides that it is
    excellently well penn'd, I have taken great pains to con it.

  OLIVIA.

  OLIVIA.
 Are you the lady of the house?  
  OLIVIA.

  VIOLA.
 But this is from
    my commission.
 I will on with my speech in your praise, and then
    show you the heart of my message.

  OLIVIA.
 Come to what is important in't.
 I forgive you the praise.

  VIOLA.

  OLIVIA.
 I
    heard you were saucy at my gates, and allow'd your approach
    rather to wonder at you than to hear you.
 If you be not mad, be
    gone; if you have reason, be brief; 'tis not that time of moon
    with me to make one in so skipping dialogue.

  MARIA.
 Will you hoist sail, sir? Here lies your way.

  VIOLA.
 No, good swabber, I am to hull here a little longer.

    Some mollification for your giant, sweet lady.

  OLIVIA.
 Tell me your mind.

  VIOLA.
 I am a messenger.
 Sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, when the
    courtesy of it is so fearful.
 Speak your office.
 What are you? What would you?
  VIOLA.

    [Exeunt MARIA and ATTENDANTS] Now, sir, what is your text?
  VIOLA.
 Most sweet lady-
  OLIVIA.
 A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it.

    Where lies your text?
  VIOLA.
 In his bosom! In what chapter of his bosom?
  VIOLA.
 To answer by the method: in the first of his heart.

  OLIVIA.
 O, I have read it; it is heresy.
 Have you no more to say?
  VIOLA.
 Good madam, let me see your face.

  OLIVIA.
 [Unveiling] Look you, sir, such a one I
    was this present.
 Is't not well done?  
  VIOLA.

  OLIVIA.
 'Tis in grain, sir; 'twill endure wind and weather.
 'Tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white
    Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on.

  OLIVIA.
 O, sir, I will not be so hard-hearted; I will give out
    divers schedules of my beauty.
 It shall be inventoried, and every
    particle and utensil labell'd to my will: as- item, two lips
    indifferent red; item, two grey eyes with lids to them; item, one
    neck, one chin, and so forth.
 Were you sent hither to praise me?
  VIOLA.

    My lord and master loves you- O, such love
    Could be but recompens'd though you were crown'd
    The nonpareil of beauty!
  OLIVIA.
 How does he love me?
  VIOLA.
 Your lord does know my mind; I cannot love him.

    Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
    Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth;
    In voices well divulg'd, free, learn'd, and valiant,
    And in dimension and the shape of nature
    A gracious person; but yet I cannot love him.

  VIOLA.
 If I did love you in my master's flame,
    With such a suff'ring, such a deadly life,
    In your denial I would find no sense;
    I would not understand it.

  OLIVIA.

    What is your parentage?
  VIOLA.
 Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
    I am a gentleman.

  OLIVIA.

    Love make his heart of flint that you shall love;
    And let your fervour, like my master's, be
    Plac'd in contempt! Farewell, fair cruelty.
             Exit
  OLIVIA.
 'What is your parentage?'
    'Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
    I am a gentleman.
' I'll be sworn thou art;
    Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit,
    Do give thee five-fold blazon.
 How now!
    Even so quickly may one catch the plague?
    Methinks I feel this youth's perfections
    With an invisible and subtle stealth
    To creep in at mine eyes.
 Well, let it be.
 Here, madam, at your service.

  OLIVIA.
 Run after that same peevish messenger,
    The County's man.
 He left this ring behind him,
    Would I or not.
 Tell him I'll none of it.

    Desire him not to flatter with his lord,
    Nor hold him up with hopes; I am not for him.
 Hie thee, Malvolio.

  MALVOLIO.
                                  Exit
  OLIVIA.
  
    Fate, show thy force: ourselves we do not owe;
    What is decreed must be; and be this so!                Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.
 SCENE I.
 Will you stay no longer; nor will you not that I go with
    you?
  SEBASTIAN.
 By your patience, no.
 My stars shine darkly over me; the
    malignancy of my fate might perhaps distemper yours; therefore I
    shall crave of you your leave that I may bear my evils alone.
 It
    were a bad recompense for your love to lay any of them on you.
 Let me know of you whither you are bound.

  ANTONIO.
 O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble.

  ANTONIO.
 If you will not murder me for my love, let me be your
    servant.

  SEBASTIAN.
 If you will not undo what you have done- that is, kill
    him whom you have recover'd-desire it not.
 Fare ye well at once;
    my bosom is full of kindness, and I am yet so near the manners of
    my mother that, upon the least occasion more, mine eyes will tell
    tales of me.
 I am bound to the Count Orsino's court.
 Farewell.
 The gentleness of all the gods go with thee!
    I have many cnemies in Orsino's court,  
    Else would I very shortly see thee there.

    But come what may, I do adore thee so
    That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.

A street

Enter VIOLA and MALVOLIO at several doors

  MALVOLIO.
 Even now, sir; on a moderate pace I have since arriv'd but
    hither.

  MALVOLIO.
 She returns this ring to you, sir; you might have saved
    me my pains, to have taken it away yourself.
 She adds, moreover,
    that you should put your lord into a desperate assurance she will
    none of him.

  VIOLA.
 She took the ring of me; I'll none of it.

  MALVOLIO.
 If it be worth stooping for, there it
    lies in your eye; if not, be it his that finds it.
 I left no ring with her; what means this lady?
    Fortune forbid my outside have not charm'd her!
    She made good view of me; indeed, so much  
    That methought her eyes had lost her tongue,
    For she did speak in starts distractedly.

    She loves me, sure: the cunning of her passion
    Invites me in this churlish messenger.

    None of my lord's ring! Why, he sent her none.

    I am the man.

    How will this fadge? My master loves her dearly,
    And I, poor monster, fond as much on him;
    And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me.
 Approach, Sir Andrew.
 Not to be abed after midnight is to
    be up betimes; and 'diluculo surgere' thou know'st-
  AGUECHEEK.
 A false conclusion! I hate it as an unfill'd can.
 To be
    up after midnight and to go to bed then is early; so that to go
    to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes.
 Does not our lives
    consist of the four elements?
  AGUECHEEK.

    Marian, I say! a stoup of wine.


                          Enter CLOWN

  AGUECHEEK.
 Here comes the fool, i' faith.

  CLOWN.
 How now, my hearts! Did you never see the picture of 'we  
    three'?
  SIR TOBY.
 Welcome, ass.
 In sooth, thou wast in very
    gracious fooling last night, when thou spok'st of Pigrogromitus,
    of the Vapians passing the equinoctial of Queubus; 'twas very
    good, i' faith.
 My lady has a white hand, and the Myrmidons are no
    bottle-ale houses.
 Come on, there is sixpence for you.
 Let's have a song.

  AGUECHEEK.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Ay, ay; I care not for good life.


                         CLOWN sings
  
         O mistress mine, where are you roaming?
         O, stay and hear; your true love's coming,
           That can sing both high and low.


  AGUECHEEK.
 Good, good!

                         CLOWN sings

           What is love? 'Tis not hereafter;
           Present mirth hath present laughter;
             What's to come is still unsure.


  AGUECHEEK.
  
  SIR TOBY.

  SIR TOBY.
 An you love me, let's do't.
 I am dog at a catch.

  CLOWN.
 By'r lady, sir, and some dogs will catch well.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Most certain.
 Let our catch be 'Thou knave.
 'Hold thy peace, thou knave' knight? I shall be constrain'd
    in't to call thee knave, knight.

  AGUECHEEK.
 'Tis not the first time I have constrained one to call
    me knave.
'
  CLOWN.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Good, i' faith! Come, begin.
           [Catch sung]

                         Enter MARIA

  MARIA.
 What a caterwauling do you keep here! If my lady have not
    call'd up her steward Malvolio, and bid him turn you out of  
    doors, never trust me.

  SIR TOBY.

    Am not I consanguineous? Am I not of her blood? Tilly-vally,
    lady.

  CLOWN.
 Ay, he does well enough if he be dispos'd, and so do I
    too; he does it with a better grace, but I do it more natural.

  SIR TOBY.
 [Sings] O' the twelfth day of December-
  MARIA.
 For the love o' God, peace!

                       Enter MALVOLIO

  MALVOLIO.
 Sir Toby, I must be round with you.
 If you can separate yourself and your
    misdemeanours, you are welcome to the house; if not, and it would
    please you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid you
    farewell.

  CLOWN.

  MALVOLIO.
 Is't even so?
  SIR TOBY.
           [Falls down]
  CLOWN.

  MALVOLIO.
 [Sings] Shall I bid him go?
  CLOWN.
  
  SIR TOBY.
 [Rising] Out o' tune, sir! Ye lie.
 Art any more than a
    steward? Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall
    be no more cakes and ale?
  CLOWN.
 Yes, by Saint Anne; and ginger shall be hot i' th' mouth
    too.

 SIR TOBY.
 Th' art i' th' right.
 Go, sir, rub your chain with crumbs.
 Mistress Mary, if you priz'd my lady's favour at anything
    more than contempt, you would not give means for this uncivil
    rule; she shall know of it, by this hand.

 Exit
  MARIA.

  AGUECHEEK.

  SIR TOBY.
 I'll write thee a challenge; or I'll
    deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.
 Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for to-night; since the youth of
    the Count's was to-day with my lady, she is much out of quiet.

    For Monsieur Malvolio, let me alone with him; if I do not gull
    him into a nayword, and make him a common recreation, do not  
    think I have wit enough to lie straight in my bed.
 Possess us, possess us; tell us something of him.

  MARIA.
 O, if I thought that, I'd beat him like a dog.

  MARIA.
 What wilt thou do?
  MARIA.
 I  
    can write very like my lady, your niece; on forgotten matter we
    can hardly make distinction of our hands.

  SIR TOBY.

  AGUECHEEK.
 I have't in my nose too.

  SIR TOBY.
 He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop, that
    they come from my niece, and that she's in love with him.
 My purpose is, indeed, a horse of that colour.

  AGUECHEEK.

  MARIA.
 Ass, I doubt not.

  AGUECHEEK.
 I know my physic will work with
    him.
 For
    this night, to bed, and dream on the event.
 Farewell.

 Exit
  SIR TOBY.
 Good night, Penthesilea.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Before me, she's a good wench.

  SIR TOBY.
 She's a beagle true-bred, and one that adores me.

    What o' that?
  AGUECHEEK.
  
  SIR TOBY.
 Let's to bed, knight.
 Thou hadst need send for more
    money.
 If I cannot recover your niece, I am a foul way out.
 Send for money, knight; if thou hast her not i' th' end,
    call me Cut.

  AGUECHEEK.
 If I do not, never trust me; take it how you will.
 Come, come, I'll go burn some sack; 'tis too late to go
    to bed now.
 Come, knight; come, knight.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE IV.

The DUKE'S palace

Enter DUKE, VIOLA, CURIO, and OTHERS

  DUKE.

    Now, good Cesario, but that piece of song,
    That old and antique song we heard last night;
    Methought it did relieve my passion much,
    More than light airs and recollected terms
    Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times.

  CURIO.
 He is not here, so please your lordship, that should sing
    it.
 Feste, the jester, my lord; a fool that the Lady Olivia's
    father took much delight in.

  DUKE.
 Seek him out, and play the tune the while.

                                       Exit CURIO.
 [Music plays]
    Come hither, boy.
 How dost thou like this tune?
  VIOLA.
 It gives a very echo to the seat
    Where Love is thron'd.

  DUKE.
 Thou dost speak masterly.

    My life upon't, young though thou art, thine eye
    Hath stay'd upon some favour that it loves;
    Hath it not, boy?
  VIOLA.

  DUKE.
 What kind of woman is't?
  VIOLA.
 Of your complexion.

  DUKE.
 She is not worth thee, then.
 What years, i' faith?
  VIOLA.

  DUKE.
 Too old, by heaven! Let still the woman take
    An elder than herself; so wears she to him,
    So sways she level in her husband's heart.

    For, boy, however we do praise ourselves,
    Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm,
    More longing, wavering, sooner lost and won,  
    Than women's are.

  VIOLA.

  DUKE.
 Then let thy love be younger than thyself,
    Or thy affection cannot hold the bent;
    For women are as roses, whose fair flow'r
    Being once display'd doth fall that very hour.

  VIOLA.
 O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.

    Mark it, Cesario; it is old and plain;
    The spinsters and the knitters in the sun,
    And the free maids that weave their thread with bones,
    Do use to chant it; it is silly sooth,
    And dallies with the innocence of love,
    Like the old age.

  CLOWN.
 Are you ready, sir?
  DUKE.
 Ay; prithee, sing.


            Not a flower, not a flower sweet,
          On my black coffin let there be strown;
            Not a friend, not a friend greet
          My poor corpse where my bones shall be thrown;
          A thousand thousand to save,
                 Lay me, O, where
          Sad true lover never find my grave,
                 To weep there!  

  DUKE.

  DUKE.
 I'll pay thy pleasure, then.

  DUKE.
 Farewell.

                                                      Exit CLOWN
  DUKE.
 Let all the rest give place.

    Tell her my love, more noble than the world,
    Prizes not quantity of dirty lands;
    The parts that fortune hath bestow'd upon her,
    Tell her I hold as giddily as Fortune;  
    But 'tis that miracle and queen of gems
    That Nature pranks her in attracts my soul.

  VIOLA.
 I cannot be so answer'd.

  VIOLA.
 Sooth, but you must.

    Say that some lady, as perhaps there is,
    Hath for your love as great a pang of heart
    As you have for Olivia.
 You cannot love her;
    You tell her so.
 There is no woman's sides
    Can bide the beating of so strong a passion
    As love doth give my heart; no woman's heart
    So big to hold so much; they lack retention.
  
  VIOLA.
 Ay, but I know-
  DUKE.
 Too well what love women to men may owe.

    In faith, they are as true of heart as we.

    My father had a daughter lov'd a man,
    As it might be perhaps, were I a woman,
    I should your lordship.
 And what's her history?
  VIOLA.
 A blank, my lord.
 She never told her love,
    But let concealment, like a worm i' th' bud,
    Feed on her damask cheek.
 Was not this love indeed?
    We men may say more, swear more, but indeed
    Our shows are more than will; for still we prove
    Much in our vows, but little in our love.

  DUKE.
 I am all the daughters of my father's house,
    And all the brothers too- and yet I know not.
  
    Sir, shall I to this lady?
  DUKE.

    To her in haste.
 Give her this jewel; say
    My love can give no place, bide no denay.
             Exeunt




SCENE V.
 Nay, I'll come; if I lose a scruple of this sport let me be
    boil'd to death with melancholy.

  SIR TOBY.
 To anger him we'll have the bear again; and we will fool
    him black and blue- shall we not, Sir Andrew?
  AGUECHEEK.


                       Enter MARIA

  SIR TOBY.
 Get ye all three into the box-tree.
 Malvolio's coming down
    this walk.
 He has been yonder i' the sun practising behaviour to  
    his own shadow this half hour.
 'Tis but fortune; all is fortune.
 Besides, she
    uses me with a more exalted respect than any one else that
    follows her.
 What should I think on't?
  SIR TOBY.
 Here's an overweening rogue!
  FABIAN.
 'Slight, I could so beat the rogue-
  SIR TOBY.
 Peace, I say.
 To be Count Malvolio!  
  SIR TOBY.
 Ah, rogue!
  AGUECHEEK.
 Pistol him, pistol him.

  SIR TOBY.
 Peace, peace!
  MALVOLIO.
 There is example for't: the Lady of the Strachy married
    the yeoman of the wardrobe.
 Fie on him, Jezebel!
  FABIAN.
 O, for a stone-bow to hit him in the eye!
  MALVOLIO.
 Fire and brimstone!
  FABIAN.
 O, peace, peace!
  MALVOLIO.
 And then to have the humour of state; and after a demure
    travel of regard, telling them I know my place as I would they
    should do theirs, to ask for my kinsman Toby-
  SIR TOBY.
 I frown the while, and perchance wind up my watch, or play
    with my- some rich jewel.
 Toby approaches; curtsies there to me-
  SIR TOBY.
 Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.
 I extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar smile
   with an austere regard of control-
  SIR TOBY.
 Saying 'Cousin Toby, my fortunes having cast me on your
    niece give me this prerogative of speech'-
  SIR TOBY.
 What, what?
  MALVOLIO.
 'You must amend your drunkenness'-
  SIR TOBY.
 Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.

  MALVOLIO.
 'Besides, you waste the treasure of your time with a
    foolish knight'-
  AGUECHEEK.
 That's me, I warrant you.

  MALVOLIO.
 'One Sir Andrew.
'
  AGUECHEEK.
 I knew 'twas I; for many do call me fool.

  SIR TOBY.
 By my life, this is my lady's hand: these be her very
    C's, her U's, and her T's; and thus makes she her great P's.
 It
    is, in contempt of question, her hand.
 Her C's, her U's, and her T's.
 Why that?
  MALVOLIO.
' Her very phrases! By your leave, wax.
'
  
    'No man must know.
' If this should be thee, Malvolio?
  SIR TOBY.
 Marry, hang thee, brock!
  MALVOLIO.
 A.
 I.
 doth sway my life.
'

  FABIAN.
 A fustian riddle!
  SIR TOBY.

  MALVOLIO.
 'M.
 I.
 doth sway my life.
 'I may command where I adore.
 And the end- what
    should that alphabetical position portend? If I could make that  
    resemble something in me.
 Softly! M.
 O.
-
  SIR TOBY.
 O, ay, make up that! He is now at a cold scent.

  FABIAN.
 M- Malvolio; M- why, that begins my name.

  FABIAN.

  MALVOLIO.
 M- But then there is no consonancy in the sequel; that
    suffers under probation: A should follow, but O does.

  SIR TOBY.

  FABIAN.
 Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see more
    detraction at your heels than fortunes before you.

  MALVOLIO.
 O.
 A.
 This simulation is not as the former; and
    yet, to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for every one of
    these letters are in my name.
 In my stars I am above
    thee; but be not afraid of greatness.
 Thy
    Fates open their hands; let thy blood and spirit embrace them;
    and, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast thy
    humble slough and appear fresh.
 Be opposite with a kinsman, surly
    with servants; let thy tongue tang arguments of state; put
    thyself into the trick of singularity.
 Farewell.
 She that would alter services with
    thee,
                                         THE FORTUNATE-UNHAPPY.
'

    Daylight and champain discovers not more.
 This is open.
 I do not now fool myself to let imagination jade me; for
    every reason excites to this, that my lady loves me.
 She did
    commend my yellow stockings of late, she did praise my leg being  
    cross-garter'd; and in this she manifests herself to my love, and
    with a kind of injunction drives me to these habits of her
    liking.
 I thank my stars I am happy.


    [Reads] 'Thou canst not choose but know who I am.
 Therefore in my presence still smile, dear my
    sweet, I prithee.
'

    Jove, I thank thee.
 I will not give my part of this sport for a pension of
    thousands to be paid from the Sophy.

  SIR TOBY.
 So could I too.
 Nor I neither.
 Here comes my noble gull-catcher.

  SIR TOBY.
 Or o' mine either?
  SIR TOBY.
 Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy
    bond-slave?
  AGUECHEEK.
 I' faith, or I either?
  SIR TOBY.
 Why, thou hast put him in such a dream that when the
    image of it leaves him he must run mad.

  MARIA.
 Like aqua-vita! with a midwife.

  AIARIA.
 If you will see it, follow me.
  
  SIR TOBY.
 To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!
  AGUECHEEK.
                           Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

OLIVIA'S garden

Enter VIOLA, and CLOWN with a tabor

  VIOLA.

  VIOLA.
 Art thou a churchman?
  CLOWN.
 No such matter, sir: I do live by the church; for I do live
    at my house, and my house doth stand by the church.
 So thou mayst say the king lies by a beggar, if a beggar
    dwell near him; or the church stands by thy tabor, if thy tabor
    stand by the church.

  CLOWN.
 How quickly the wrong side may be
    turn'd outward!
  VIOLA.
 I would, therefore, my sister had had name, sir.

  VIOLA.
 Why, man?
  CLOWN.
 But indeed words are very rascals
    since bonds disgrac'd them.

  VIOLA.
 Thy reason, man?
  CLOWN.
 Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words, and words
    are grown so false I am loath to prove reason with them.

  VIOLA.
 I warrant thou art a merry fellow and car'st for nothing.
 If that be to care for nothing, sir,
    I would it would make you invisible.
 No, indeed, sir; the Lady Olivia has no folly; she will keep
    no fool, sir, till she be married; and fools are as like husbands
    as pilchers are to herrings- the husband's the bigger.

  CLOWN.
 Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun- it
    shines everywhere.
 I would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be
    as oft with your master as with my mistress: think I saw your
    wisdom there.
 Nay, an thou pass upon me, I'll no more with thee.
             [Giving a coin]
  CLOWN.
 Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send the a beard!
  VIOLA.
 By my troth, I'll tell thee, I am almost sick for one;
    [Aside] though I would not have it grow on my chin.
 I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to bring a
    Cressida to this Troilus.

                                           [Giving another coin]
  CLOWN.
 This fellow is wise enough to play the fool;
    And to do that well craves a kind of wit.

    He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
    The quality of persons, and the time;  
    And, like the haggard, check at every feather
    That comes before his eye.
 This is a practice
    As full of labour as a wise man's art;
    For folly that he wisely shows is fit;
    But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.


                Enter SIR TOBY and SIR ANDREW

  SIR TOBY.
 Save you, gentleman!
  VIOLA.
 And you, sir.
 Dieu vous garde, monsieur.

  VIOLA.
 Will you encounter the house? My niece is desirous you
    should enter, if your trade be to her.

  SIR TOBY.

  VIOLA.
 My legs do better understand me, sir, than I understand what
    you mean by bidding me taste my legs.
  
  SIR TOBY.

  VIOLA.
 But we are
    prevented.


                  Enter OLIVIA and MARIA

    Most excellent accomplish'd lady, the heavens rain odours on you!
  AGUECHEEK.

  OLIVIA.

    [Exeunt all but OLIVIA and VIOLA] Give me your hand, sir.

  VIOLA.
 My duty, madam, and most humble service.

  OLIVIA.
 Cesario is your servant's name, fair Princess.

  OLIVIA.

    Y'are servant to the Count Orsino, youth.
 And he is yours, and his must needs be yours:
    Your servant's servant is your servant, madam.

  OLIVIA.
 For him, I think not on him; for his thoughts,
    Would they were blanks rather than fill'd with me!
  VIOLA.
 Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts
    On his behalf.
 O, by your leave, I pray you:
    I bade you never speak again of him;
    But, would you undertake another suit,
    I had rather hear you to solicit that
    Than music from the spheres.
 Give me leave, beseech you.
 I did send,
    After the last enchantment you did here,
    A ring in chase of you; so did I abuse
    Myself, my servant, and, I fear me, you.

    Under your hard construction must I sit,
    To force that on you in a shameful cunning
    Which you knew none of yours.
 So, let me hear you speak.
 That's a degree to love.

  VIOLA.

  OLIVIA.
 Why, then, methinks 'tis time to smile again.

    There lies your way, due west.

  VIOLA.
 Then westward-ho!
    Grace and good disposition attend your ladyship!
    You'll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?  
  OLIVIA.
 Stay.

    I prithee tell me what thou think'st of me.
 That you do think you are not what you are.

  OLIVIA.
 If I think so, I think the same of you.

  OLIVIA.
 I would you were as I would have you be!
  VIOLA.

  OLIVIA.
 O, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful
    In the contempt and anger of his lip!
    A murd'rous guilt shows not itself more soon
    Than love that would seem hid: love's night is noon.

    Cesario, by the roses of the spring,
    By maidhood, honour, truth, and every thing,
    I love thee so that, maugre all thy pride,
    Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide.

    Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,
    For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause;
    But rather reason thus with reason fetter:
    Love sought is good, but given unsought is better.
  
  VIOLA.

  OLIVIA.
 Yet come again; for thou perhaps mayst move
    That heart which now abhors to like his love.
         Exeunt




SCENE II.

OLIVIA'S house

Enter SIR TOBY, SIR ANDREW and FABIAN

  AGUECHEEK.
 No, faith, I'll not stay a jot longer.

  FABIAN.
 You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Marry, I saw your niece do more favours to the Count's
    servingman than ever she bestow'd upon me; I saw't i' th'
    orchard.

  SIR TOBY.
 Did she see thee the while, old boy? Tell me that.

  AGUECHEEK.

  FABIAN.

  AGUECHEEK.
 I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of judgment
    and reason.
 And they have been grand-jurymen since before Noah was a
    sailor.

  FABIAN.
 She did show favour to the youth in your sight only to
    exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valour, to put fire in
    your heart and brimstone in your liver.
 You should then have  
    accosted her; and with some excellent jests, fire-new from the
    mint, you should have bang'd the youth into dumbness.
 This was
    look'd for at your hand, and this was baulk'd.

  SIR TOBY.
 Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of
    valour.
 Challenge me the Count's youth to fight with him; hurt
    him in eleven places.
 There is no way but this, Sir Andrew.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?
  SIR TOBY.
 About it.
 Go.

                                                 Exit SIR ANDREW
  FABIAN.

  SIR TOBY.
 I have been dear to him, lad- some two thousand strong,
    or so.

  FABIAN.
 We shall have a rare letter from him; but you'll not
    deliver't?
  SIR TOBY.
 I think oxen and wainropes cannot hale them
    together.

  FABIAN.

  
                         Enter MARIA

  SIR TOBY.

  MARIA.
 If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourselves into
    stitches, follow me.
 Yond gull Malvolio is turned heathen, a very
    renegado; for there is no Christian that means to be saved by
    believing rightly can ever believe such impossible passages of
    grossness.
 He's in yellow stockings.

  SIR TOBY.
 And cross-garter'd?
  MARIA.
 Most villainously; like a pedant that keeps a school i' th'
    church.
 He does smile
    his face into more lines than is in the new map with the
    augmentation of the Indies.
 You have not seen such a thing as
    'tis; I  can hardly forbear hurling things at him.
 I know my lady
    will strike him; if she do, he'll smile and take't for a great
    favour.

  SIR TOBY.
 Come, bring us, bring us where he is.
 I could not stay behind you: my desire,
    More sharp than filed steel, did spur me forth;
    And not all love to see you- though so much
    As might have drawn one to a longer voyage-
    But jealousy what might befall your travel,
    Being skilless in these parts; which to a stranger,
    Unguided and unfriended, often prove
    Rough and unhospitable.
 My kind Antonio,
    I can no other answer make but thanks,
    And thanks, and ever thanks; and oft good turns
    Are shuffl'd off with such uncurrent pay;  
    But were my worth as is my conscience firm,
    You should find better dealing.
 What's to do?
    Shall we go see the reliques of this town?
  ANTONIO.

  SEBASTIAN.
 I am not weary, and 'tis long to night;
    I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes
    With the memorials and the things of fame
    That do renown this city.

  ANTONIO.

    I do not without danger walk these streets:
    Once in a sea-fight 'gainst the Count his galleys
    I did some service; of such note, indeed,
    That, were I ta'en here, it would scarce be answer'd.
 Only myself stood out;  
    For which, if I be lapsed in this place,
    I shall pay dear.

  SEBASTIAN.

  ANTONIO.
 It doth not fit me.
 Hold, sir, here's my purse;
    In the south suburbs, at the Elephant,
    Is best to lodge.

  SEBASTIAN.
 I'll be your purse-bearer, and leave you for
    An hour.

  ANTONIO.
 To th' Elephant.

  SEBASTIAN.

OLIVIA'S garden

Enter OLIVIA and MARIA

  OLIVIA.

    I speak too loud.

    Where's Malvolio? He is sad and civil,
    And suits well for a servant with my fortunes.

    He is sure possess'd, madam.
 Why, what's the matter? Does he rave?
  MARIA.
 Go call him hither.
                         Exit MARIA
    I am as mad as he,
    If sad and merry madness equal be.

  
               Re-enter MARIA with MALVOLIO

    How now, Malvolio!
  MALVOLIO.

  OLIVIA.
 Smil'st thou?
    I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.
 Sad, lady? I could be sad.

    I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.

  OLIVIA.
 How do you, Malvolio?
  MALVOLIO.
 At your request? Yes, nightingales answer daws!  
  MARIA.
 Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady?
  MALVOLIO.
 'Be not afraid of greatness.
' 'Twas well writ.
 What say'st thou?
  MALVOLIO.
 'And some have greatness thrust upon them.
 'Remember who commended thy yellow stockings,'-
  OLIVIA.
'
  OLIVIA.
 'Cross-garter'd?'
  MALVOLIO.
'
  OLIVIA.


                     Enter SERVANT
  
  SERVANT.
 Madam, the young gentleman of the Count Orsino's is
    return'd; I could hardly entreat him back; he attends your
    ladyship's pleasure.
 [Exit SERVANT] Good Maria, let this
    fellow be look'd to.
 Where's my cousin Toby? Let some of my
    people have a special care of him; I would not have him miscarry
    for the half of my dowry.
 O, ho! do you come near me now? No worse man than Sir
    Toby to look to me! This concurs directly with the letter: she
    sends him on purpose, that I may appear stubborn to him; for she
    incites me to that in the letter.
 'Cast thy humble slough,' says
    she.
 'Be opposite with kinsman, surly with servants; let thy
    tongue tang with arguments of state; put thyself into the trick
    of singularity' and consequently sets down the manner how, as: a
    sad face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue, in the habit of
    some sir of note, and so forth.
' 'Fellow,' not 'Malvolio' nor
    after my degree, but 'fellow.
' Why, everything adheres together,  
    that no dram of a scruple, no scruple of a scruple, no obstacle,
    no incredulous or unsafe circumstance- What can be said? Nothing
    that can be can come between me and the full prospect of my
    hopes.
 Well, Jove, not I, is the doer of this, and he is to be
    thanked.


             Re-enter MARIA, with SIR TOBY and FABIAN

  SIR TOBY.
 Which way is he, in the name of sanctity? If all the
    devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion himself possess'd
    him, yet I'll speak to him.
 Here he is, here he is.
 How is't with you, sir?
  SIR TOBY.
 Go off; I discard you.
 Let me enjoy my private; go off.

  MARIA.
 Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him! Did not I tell
    you? Sir Toby, my lady prays you to have a care of him.

  MALVOLIO.
 Ah, ha! does she so?
  SIR TOBY.
 Go to, go to; peace, peace; we must deal gently with him.
 How do you, Malvolio? How is't with you? What, man,
    defy the devil; consider, he's an enemy to mankind.
  
  MALVOLIO.
 Do you know what you say?
  MARIA.
 La you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at
    heart! Pray God he be not bewitched.

  FABIAN.

  MALVOLIO.
 O Lord!
  SIR TOBY.
 Prithee hold thy peace; this is not the way.

  FABIAN.
 No way but gentleness- gently, gently.

  SIR TOBY.
 Sir!
  SIR TOBY.

  MALVOLIO.
  
  MALVOLIO.

  SIR TOBY.
 Nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.

  FABIAN.
 Why, we shall make him mad indeed.
 Come, we'll have him in a dark room and bound.
 We may carry it thus, for
    our pleasure and his penance, till our very pastime, tired out of
    breath, prompt us to have mercy on him; at which time we will
    bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of
    madmen.
 But see, but see.


                     Enter SIR ANDREW
  
  FABIAN.
 More matter for a May morning.
 Here's the challenge; read it.

  FABIAN.
 Ay, is't, I warrant him; do but read.

  SIR TOBY.
 Give me.
 [Reads] 'Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art
    but a scurvy fellow.
'
  FABIAN.
 Good and valiant.
'
  FABIAN.
 A good note; that keeps you from the blow of the law.

  SIR TOBY.

  SIR TOBY.
 [Reads] 'I will waylay thee going home; where if it be
    thy chance to kill me'-
  FABIAN.
 Good.
'
  FABIAN.
 Good!  
  SIR TOBY.
'

    If this letter move him not, his legs cannot.
 I'll give't him.

  MARIA.
 Go, Sir Andrew; scout me for him at the corner of the
    orchard, like a bum-baily; so soon as ever thou seest him, draw;
    and as thou draw'st, swear horrible; for it comes to pass oft
    that a terrible oath, with a swaggering accent sharply twang'd
    off, gives manhood more approbation than ever proof itself would
    have earn'd him.
 Away.

  AGUECHEEK.
                Exit
  SIR TOBY.
 Now will not I deliver his letter; for the behaviour of
    the young gentleman gives him out to be of good capacity and
    breeding; his employment between his lord and my niece confirms
    no less.
 Therefore this letter, being so excellently ignorant,  
    will breed no terror in the youth: he will find it comes from a
    clodpole.
 With VIOLA

  FABIAN.
 Here he comes with your niece; give them way till he take
    leave, and presently after him.

  SIR TOBY.
 I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a
    challenge.

                              Exeunt SIR TOBY, FABIAN, and MARIA
  OLIVIA.
 I have said too much unto a heart of stone,
    And laid mine honour too unchary out;
    There's something in me that reproves my fault;
    But such a headstrong potent fault it is
    That it but mocks reproof.
  
  VIOLA.
 With the same haviour that your passion bears
    Goes on my master's griefs.

  OLIVIA.
 Here, wear this jewel for me; 'tis my picture.

    Refuse it not; it hath no tongue to vex you.

    And I beseech you come again to-morrow.
 Nothing but this- your true love for my master.
 How with mine honour may I give him that
    Which I have given to you?
  VIOLA.
 Well, come again to-morrow.
           Exit

              Re-enter SIR TOBY and SIR FABIAN

  SIR TOBY.

  SIR TOBY.
 That defence thou hast, betake thee tot.
 Of what nature
    the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know not; but thy  
    intercepter, full of despite, bloody as the hunter, attends
    thee at the orchard end.
 Dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy
    preparation, for thy assailant is quick, skilful, and deadly.
 You mistake, sir; I am sure no man hath any quarrel to me;
    my remembrance is very free and clear from any image of offence
    done to any man.

  SIR TOBY.

  VIOLA.
 I pray you, sir, what is he?
  SIR TOBY.
 He is knight, dubb'd with unhatch'd rapier and on carpet
    consideration; but he is a devil in private brawl.
 Souls and
    bodies hath he divorc'd three; and his incensement at this moment
    is so implacable that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of
    death and sepulchre.
 Hob-nob is his word- give't or take't.

  VIOLA.
 I will return again into the house and desire some conduct
    of the lady.
 I am no fighter.
 I have heard of some kind of men
    that put quarrels purposely on others to taste their valour;
    belike this is a man of that quirk.
  
  SIR TOBY.

    Back you shall not to the house, unless you undertake that with
    me which with as much safety you might answer him; therefore on,
    or strip your sword stark naked; for meddle you must, that's
    certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.

  VIOLA.
 I beseech you do me this
    courteous office as to know of the knight what my offence to him
    is: it is something of my negligence, nothing of my purpose.

  SIR TOBY.
 I Will do so.
                                Exit SIR TOBY
  VIOLA.

  VIOLA.
 Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by his form,
    as you are like to find him in the proof of his valour.
 He is
    indeed, sir, the most skilful, bloody, and fatal opposite that
    you could possibly have found in any part of Illyria.
 I shall be much bound to you for't.
 I am one that would
    rather go with sir priest than sir knight.
 I care not who knows
    so much of my mettle.
                                 Exeunt

                Re-enter SIR TOBY With SIR ANDREW

  SIR TOBY.
 Why, man, he's a very devil; I have not seen such a
    firago.
 They say he has been fencer to the
    Sophy.

  AGUECHEEK.

  SIR TOBY.
 Ay, but he will not now be pacified; Fabian can scarce
    hold him yonder.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Plague on't; an I thought he had been valiant, and so
    cunning in fence, I'd have seen him damn'd ere I'd have
    challeng'd him.
 Let him let the matter slip, and I'll give him
    my horse, grey Capilet.

  SIR TOBY.
 Stand here, make a good show on't;  
    this shall end without the perdition of souls.
 [Aside] Marry,
    I'll ride your horse as well as I ride you.

  FABIAN.
 [To SIR TOBY] He is as horribly conceited of him; and pants
   and looks pale, as if a bear were at his heels.

  SIR TOBY.
 [To VIOLA] There's no remedy, sir: he will fight with you
    for's oath sake.
 Marry, he hath better bethought him of his
    quarrel, and he finds that now scarce to be worth talking of.

    Therefore draw for the supportance of his vow; he protests he
    will not hurt you.
 [Aside] Pray God defend me! A little thing would make me
    tell them how much I lack of a man.

  FABIAN.

  SIR TOBY.
 Come on; to't.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Pray God he keep his oath!                [They draw]

                      Enter ANTONIO

  VIOLA.
 I do assure you 'tis against my will.

  ANTONIO.
 Put up your sword.
 You, sir! Why, what are you?
  ANTONIO.

  SIR TOBY.
 Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.

                                                     [They draw]

                         Enter OFFICERS

  FABIAN.
 O good Sir Toby, hold! Here come the officers.

  SIR TOBY.
 [To ANTONIO] I'll be with you anon.
 Pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.
 Marry, will I, sir; and for that I promis'd you, I'll be
    as good as my word.
 This is the man; do thy office.

  SECOND OFFICER.
 Antonio, I arrest thee at the suit
    Of Count Orsino.

  ANTONIO.
 You do mistake me, sir.

  FIRST OFFICER.
 No, sir, no jot; I know your favour well,
    Though now you have no sea-cap on your head.

  SECOND OFFICER.
 Come, sir, away.

  ANTONIO.
 I must entreat of you some of that money.

  VIOLA.
 What money, sir?
    For the fair kindness you have show'd me here,  
    And part being prompted by your present trouble,
    Out of my lean and low ability
    I'll lend you something.

  ANTONIO.
 Will you deny me now?
    Is't possible that my deserts to you
    Can lack persuasion? Do not tempt my misery,
    Lest that it make me so unsound a man
    As to upbraid you with those kindnesses
    That I have done for you.

  VIOLA.
 I know of none,
    Nor know I you by voice or any feature.

  ANTONIO.
 Come, sir, I pray you go.

  ANTONIO.
 This youth that you see here  
    I snatch'd one half out of the jaws of death,
    Reliev'd him with such sanctity of love,
    And to his image, which methought did promise
    Most venerable worth, did I devotion.

  ANTONIO.
 But, O, how vile an idol proves this god!
    Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame.
 The man grows mad.
 Away with him.

    Come, come, sir.

  ANTONIO.
                        Exit with OFFICERS
  VIOLA.

    Prove true, imagination, O, prove true,
    That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!
  SIR TOBY.
 I my brother know
    Yet living in my glass; even such and so
    In favour was my brother; and he went
    Still in this fashion, colour, ornament,
    For him I imitate.
 A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than a
    hare.
 His dishonesty appears in leaving his friend here in
    necessity and denying him; and for his cowardship, ask Fabian.
 A coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.

  AGUECHEEK.
 'Slid, I'll after him again and beat him.

  SIR TOBY.
 Do; cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.

  AGUECHEEK.
 Come, let's see the event.

  SIR TOBY.

                                                          Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.
 SCENE I.
 Will you make me believe that I am not sent for you?
  SEBASTIAN.
 Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow; let me be clear
    of thee.

  CLOWN.
 I prithee vent thy folly somewhere else.

    Thou know'st not me.
 I prithee now, ungird
    thy strangeness, and tell me what I shall vent to my lady.
 Shall
    I vent to her that thou art coming?
  SEBASTIAN.
  
  CLOWN.
 These wise men that
    give fools money get themselves a good report after fourteen
    years' purchase.
 Now, sir, have I met you again?
    [Striking SEBASTIAN] There's for you.

  SEBASTIAN.
 Why, there's for thee, and there, and there.
 Hold, sir, or I'll throw your dagger o'er the house.
 This will I tell my lady straight.
 I would not be in some of
    your coats for two-pence.
                               Exit
  SIR TOBY.
 Come on, sir; hold.

  SEBASTIAN.
 Let go thy hand.
  
  SIR TOBY.
 Come, sir, I will not let you go.
 Come, my young soldier,
    put up your iron; you are well flesh'd.
 Come on.

  SEBASTIAN.
 What wouldst thou now?
    If thou dar'st tempt me further, draw thy sword.
 [Draws]

                        Enter OLIVIA

  OLIVIA.

  SIR TOBY.
 Madam!
  OLIVIA.
 Will it be ever thus? Ungracious wretch,
    Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves,
    Where manners ne'er were preach'd! Out of my sight!
    Be not offended, dear Cesario-
    Rudesby, be gone!
                         Exeunt SIR TOBY, SIR ANDREW, and FABIAN
    I prithee, gentle friend,
    Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway
    In this uncivil and unjust extent  
    Against thy peace.
 Go with me to my house,
    And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks
    This ruffian hath botch'd up, that thou thereby
    Mayst smile at this.
 Thou shalt not choose but go;
    Do not deny.
 Beshrew his soul for me!
    He started one poor heart of mine in thee.

  SEBASTIAN.
 Nay, come, I prithee.
 Would thou'dst be rul'd by me!
  SEBASTIAN.
 Madam, I will.

  OLIVIA.
 O, say so, and so be!                           Exeunt




SCENE II.

OLIVIA'S house

Enter MARIA and CLOWN

  MARIA.
 I'll call
    Sir Toby the whilst.
                                    Exit
  CLOWN.
 I
    am not tall enough to become the function well nor lean enough to
    be thought a good student; but to be said an honest man and a
    good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a careful man and a
    great scholar.
 The competitors enter.
 Jove bless thee, Master Parson.
 Bonos dies, Sir Toby; for as the old hermit of Prague, that
    never saw pen and ink, very wittily said to niece of King
    Gorboduc 'That that is is'; so I, being Master Parson, am Master
    Parson; for what is 'that' but that, and 'is' but is?  
  SIR TOBY.
 To him, Sir Topas.

  CLOWN.
 [Within] Who calls there?
  CLOWN.

  MALVOLIO.
 Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to my lady.

  MALVOLIO.
 Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged.
 Say'st thou that house is dark?
  MALVOLIO.
 As hell, Sir Topas.

  CLOWN.
 Why, it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes, and the
    clerestories toward the south north are as lustrous as ebony; and
    yet complainest thou of obstruction?
  MALVOLIO.
 I am not mad, Sir Topas.
 Madman, thou errest.
 I say there is no darkness but
    ignorance; in which thou art more puzzled than the Egyptians in
    their fog.
 I am no more mad than you are; make the trial of it
    in any constant question.

  CLOWN.
 What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wild fowl?
  MALVOLIO.
 That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.
 I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his
    opinion.
 Remain thou still in darkness: thou shalt
   hold th' opinion of Pythagoras ere I will allow of thy wits; and
    fear to kill a woodcock, lest thou dispossess the soul of thy
    grandam.
 Fare thee well.
 Sir Topas, Sir Topas!
  SIR TOBY.
 My most exquisite Sir Topas!
  CLOWN.
 Nay, I am for all waters.
 Thou mightst have done this without thy beard and gown: he  
    sees thee not.

  SIR TOBY.
 If he may
    be conveniently deliver'd, I would he were; for I am now so far
    in offence with my niece that I cannot pursue with any safety
    this sport to the upshot.

                                                 Exit with MARIA
  CLOWN.
 [Sings] Hey, Robin, jolly Robin,
    Tell me how thy lady does.
 Fool!
  CLOWN.
 [Sings] My lady is unkind, perdy.
 [Sings] Alas, why is she so?
  MALVOLIO.
 Fool I say!
  CLOWN.
 Master Malvolio?
  MALVOLIO.
 Ay, good fool.
 Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?
  MALVOLIO.

  CLOWN.

  MALVOLIO.
 They have here propertied me; keep me in darkness, send
    ministers to me, asses, and do all they can to face me out of my
    wits.

  CLOWN.
 you say: the minister is here.

    [Speaking as SIR TOPAS] Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore!
    Endeavour thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain bibble-babble.

  MALVOLIO.
- Marry, amen.
 Fool, fool, fool, I say!
  CLOWN.
 Alas, sir, be patient.
 What say you, sir? I am shent for
    speaking to you.

  MALVOLIO.
 Well-a-day that you were, sir!
  MALVOLIO.
 By this hand, I am.
 It shall
    advantage thee more than ever the bearing of letter did.

  CLOWN.
 I will help you to't.

  MALVOLIO.
 [Singing]
                   I am gone, sir,
                   And anon, sir,
                 I'll be with you again,
                   In a trice,
                   Like to the old Vice,
                 Your need to sustain;

                 Who with dagger of lath,  
                 In his rage and his wrath,
                   Cries, Ah, ha! to the devil,
                 Like a mad lad,
                 Pare thy nails, dad.

                   Adieu, goodman devil.
                    Exit




SCENE III.

OLIVIA'S garden

Enter SEBASTIAN

  SEBASTIAN.
 This is the air; that is the glorious sun;
    This pearl she gave me, I do feel't and see't;
    And though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus,
    Yet 'tis not madness.
 Where's Antonio, then?
    I could not find him at the Elephant;
    Yet there he was; and there I found this credit,
    That he did range the town to seek me out.
 But here the lady comes.


                Enter OLIVIA and PRIEST

  OLIVIA.
 He shall conceal it
    Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,
    What time we will our celebration keep
    According to my birth.
 I'll follow this good man, and go with you;
    And, having sworn truth, ever will be true.

  OLIVIA.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.
 SCENE I.

Before OLIVIA's house

Enter CLOWN and FABIAN

  FABIAN.

  CLOWN.
 Anything.

  CLOWN.

  FABIAN.


             Enter DUKE, VIOLA, CURIO, and LORDS

  DUKE.
 Ay, sir, we are some of her trappings.

  DUKE.
 How dost thou, my good fellow?
  CLOWN.
 Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse for my
    friends.

  DUKE.
 No, sir, the worse.

  DUKE.
 Marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me.
 Now my
    foes tell me plainly I am an ass; so that by my foes, sir, I
    profit in the knowledge of myself, and by my friends I am abused;
    so that, conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives make
    your two affirmatives, why then, the worse for my friends, and
    the better for my foes.
 Why, this is excellent.
 By my troth, sir, no; though it please you to be one of my
    friends.
 But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would you could
    make it another.
 O, you give me ill counsel.

  CLOWN.

  DUKE.

    There's another.

  CLOWN.
 Primo, secundo, tertio, is a good play; and the old saying
    is 'The third pays for all.
' The triplex, sir, is a good tripping
    measure; or the bells of Saint Bennet, sir, may put you in mind-  
    one, two, three.
 You can fool no more money out of me at this throw; if you
    will let your lady know I am here to speak with her, and bring
    her along with you, it may awake my bounty further.
 I go,
    sir; but I would not have you to think that my desire of having
    is the sin of covetousness.

  DUKE.
 That face of his I do remember well;
    Yet when I saw it last it was besmear'd
    As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war.

    A baubling vessel was he captain of,
    For shallow draught and bulk unprizable,
    With which such scathful grapple did he make
    With the most noble bottom of our fleet
    That very envy and the tongue of los  
    Cried fame and honour on him.
 What's the matter?
  FIRST OFFICER.
 He did me kindness, sir; drew on my side;
    But in conclusion put strange speech upon me.

    I know not what 'twas but distraction.
 Orsino, noble sir,
    Be pleas'd that I shake off these names you give me:
    Antonio never yet was thief or pirate,
    Though I confess, on base and ground enough,
    Orsino's enemy.
 A witchcraft drew me hither:
    That most ingrateful boy there by your side  
    From the rude sea's enrag'd and foamy mouth
    Did I redeem; a wreck past hope he was.

    His life I gave him, and did thereto ad
    My love without retention or restraint,
    All his in dedication; for his sake,
    Did I expose myself, pure for his love,
    Into the danger of this adverse town;
    Drew to defend him when he was beset;
    Where being apprehended, his false cunning,
    Not meaning to partake with me in danger,
    Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,
    And grew a twenty years removed thing
    While one would wink; denied me mine own purse,
    Which I had recommended to his use
    Not half an hour before.
 To-day, my lord; and for three months before,
    No int'rim, not a minute's vacancy,
    Both day and night did we keep company.
 Here comes the Countess; now heaven walks on earth.

    But for thee, fellow- fellow, thy words are madness.
 Take him aside.

  OLIVIA.

  VIOLA.
 Madam?
  DUKE.
 Gracious Olivia-
  OLIVIA.
 If it be aught to the old tune, my lord,
    It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
    As howling after music.
 Still so cruel?
  OLIVIA.

  DUKE.
 What, to perverseness? You uncivil lady,  
    To whose ingrate and unauspicious altars
    My soul the faithfull'st off'rings hath breath'd out
    That e'er devotion tender'd! What shall I do?
  OLIVIA.

  DUKE.
 Why should I not, had I the heart to do it,
    Like to the Egyptian thief at point of death,
    Kill what I love?- a savage jealousy
    That sometime savours nobly.

    Come, boy, with me; my thoughts are ripe in mischief:
    I'll sacrifice the lamb that I do love
    To spite a raven's heart within a dove.

  OLIVIA.
 After him I love
    More than I love these eyes, more than my life,
    More, by all mores, than e'er I shall love wife.

    If I do feign, you witnesses above
    Punish my life for tainting of my love!
  OLIVIA.
 Who does beguile you? Who does do you wrong?
  OLIVIA.
 Hast thou forgot thyself? Is it so long?
    Call forth the holy father.
 Come, away!
  OLIVIA.
 Whither, my lord? Cesario, husband, stay.

  DUKE.
 Ay, husband; can he that deny?
  DUKE.
 Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear
    That makes thee strangle thy propriety.


                   Enter PRIEST

    O, welcome, father!
    Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence,
    Here to unfold- though lately we intended
    To keep in darkness what occasion now
    Reveals before 'tis ripe- what thou dost know
    Hath newly pass'd between this youth and me.
 A contract of eternal bond of love,
    Confirm'd by mutual joinder of your hands,
    Attested by the holy close of lips,
    Strength'ned by interchangement of your rings;
    And all the ceremony of this compact
    Seal'd in my function, by my testimony;
    Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave,
    I have travell'd but two hours.

  DUKE.

  VIOLA.
 My lord, I do protest-
  OLIVIA.
 O, do not swear!
    Hold little faith, though thou has too much fear.


                  Enter SIR ANDREW

  AGUECHEEK.

  OLIVIA.
 What's the matter?
  AGUECHEEK.
 For the love of God, your help! I had rather
    than forty pound I were at home.

  OLIVIA.
 The Count's gentleman, one Cesario.

  VIOLA.


                Enter SIR TOBY and CLOWN

  AGUECHEEK.
 Here comes Sir Toby halting;
    you shall hear more; but if he had not been in drink, he would
    have tickl'd you othergates than he did.

    Sot, didst see Dick Surgeon, sot?
  CLOWN.
 O, he's drunk, Sir Toby, an hour agone; his eyes were set at
    eight i' th' morning.

  SIR TOBY.
 Then he's a rogue and a passy measures pavin.
 I hate a
    drunken rogue.
  
  OLIVIA.
 Away with him.
 Will you help- an ass-head and a coxcomb and a knave, a
    thin fac'd knave, a gull?
  OLIVIA.
 Get him to bed, and let his hurt be look'd to.

                  Exeunt CLOWN, FABIAN, SIR TOBY, and SIR ANDREW

                      Enter SEBASTIAN

  SEBASTIAN.

    Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows
    We made each other but so late ago.
 One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons!
    A natural perspective, that is and is not.
 Sebastian are you?
  SEBASTIAN.
 Fear'st thou that, Antonio?
  ANTONIO.
 How have you made division of yourself?
    An apple cleft in two is not more twin
    Than these two creatures.
 Which is Sebastian?
  OLIVIA.
 Most wonderful!
  SEBASTIAN.
 Do I stand there? I never had a brother;
    Nor can there be that deity in my nature
    Of here and everywhere.

    Of charity, what kin are you to me?
    What countryman, what name, what parentage?
  VIOLA.
 Of Messaline; Sebastian was my father.

    Such a Sebastian was my brother too;
    So went he suited to his watery tomb;
    If spirits can assume both form and suit,
    You come to fright us.

  SEBASTIAN.
 A spirit I am indeed,  
    But am in that dimension grossly clad
    Which from the womb I did participate.

    Were you a woman, as the rest goes even,
    I should my tears let fall upon your cheek,
    And say 'Thrice welcome, drowned Viola!'
  VIOLA.
 My father had a mole upon his brow.

  VIOLA.
 O, that record is lively in my soul!
    He finished indeed his mortal act
    That day that made my sister thirteen years.
  
    All the occurrence of my fortune since
    Hath been between this lady and this lord.

  SEBASTIAN.
 [To OLIVIA] So Comes it, lady, you have been mistook;
    But nature to her bias drew in that.

    You would have been contracted to a maid;
    Nor are you therein, by my life, deceiv'd;
    You are betroth'd both to a maid and man.

  DUKE.

    If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,
    I shall have share in this most happy wreck.

    [To VIOLA] Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times
    Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.

  VIOLA.
 And all those sayings will I overswear;
    And all those swearings keep as true in soul
    As doth that orbed continent the fire
    That severs day from night.
 The captain that did bring me first on shore
    Hath my maid's garments.
 He shall enlarge him.
 Fetch Malvolio hither;
    And yet, alas, now I remember me,
    They say, poor gentleman, he's much distract.
 Truly, madam, he holds Belzebub at the stave's end as well
    as a man in his case may do.
 [Reads madly ] 'By the Lord, madam-'
  OLIVIA.

  OLIVIA.
 So I do, madonna; but to read his right wits is to read
    thus; therefore perpend, my Princess, and give ear.
 [To FABIAN] Read it you, sirrah.
 [Reads] 'By the Lord, madam, you wrong me, and the world
    shall know it.
 I have your own letter that
    induced me to the semblance I put on, with the which I doubt not
    but to do myself much right or you much shame.
 Think of me as you
    please.
 I leave my duty a little unthought of, and speak out of
    my injury.
 Ay, Madam.
 This savours not much of distraction.

  OLIVIA.
 See him deliver'd, Fabian; bring him hither.

  DUKE.
 Madam, I am most apt t' embrace your offer.

    [To VIOLA] Your master quits you; and, for your service done
      him,
    So much against the mettle of your sex,
    So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,
    And since you call'd me master for so long,
    Here is my hand; you shall from this time be
    You master's mistress.

  OLIVIA.
 Ay, my lord, this same.

    How now, Malvolio!  
  MALVOLIO.

  MALVOLIO.
 Lady, you have.
 Pray you peruse that letter.

  OLIVIA.
 Prithee, be content;
    This practice hath most shrewdly pass'd upon thee,
    But, when we know the grounds and authors of it,
    Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge
    Of thine own cause.
 Good madam, hear me speak,
    And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come
    Taint the condition of this present hour,
    Which I have wond'red at.
 In hope it shall not,
    Most freely I confess myself and Toby
    Set this device against Malvolio here,
    Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts
    We had conceiv'd against him.

  OLIVIA.
 Why, 'Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some
    have greatness thrown upon them.
' I was one, sir, in this
    interlude- one Sir Topas, sir; but that's all one.

  MALVOLIO.

 Exit
  OLIVIA.

  DUKE.
 Pursue him, and entreat him to a peace;
    He hath not told us of the captain yet.

    When that is known, and golden time convents,
    A solemn combination shall be made
    Of our dear souls.
  

           But when I came unto my beds,
             With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
           With toss-pots still had drunken heads,
             For the rain it raineth every day.

 Exit

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
 SCENE I.
 An open place

Enter VALENTINE and PROTEUS

  VALENTINE.

    But since thou lov'st, love still, and thrive therein,
    Even as I would, when I to love begin.

  PROTEUS.

    Wish me partaker in thy happiness
    When thou dost meet good hap; and in thy danger,
    If ever danger do environ thee,
    Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers,  
    For I will be thy headsman, Valentine.
 And on a love-book pray for my success?
  PROTEUS.
 Upon some book I love I'll pray for thee.

  VALENTINE.
 That's a deep story of a deeper love;
    For he was more than over shoes in love.

  VALENTINE.
 'Tis true; for you are over boots in love,
    And yet you never swum the Hellespont.

  VALENTINE.
 To be in love- where scorn is bought with groans,
    Coy looks with heart-sore sighs, one fading moment's mirth
    With twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights;
    If haply won, perhaps a hapless gain;
    If lost, why then a grievous labour won;
    However, but a folly bought with wit,
    Or else a wit by folly vanquished.

  PROTEUS.
 So, by your circumstance, you call me fool.
 So, by your circumstance, I fear you'll prove.

  PROTEUS.

  VALENTINE.
 Love is your master, for he masters you;
    And he that is so yoked by a fool,
    Methinks, should not be chronicled for wise.
 Yet writers say, as in the sweetest bud
    The eating canker dwells, so eating love
    Inhabits in the finest wits of all.

  VALENTINE.
 And writers say, as the most forward bud
    Is eaten by the canker ere it blow,
    Even so by love the young and tender wit
    Is turn'd to folly, blasting in the bud,
    Losing his verdure even in the prime,
    And all the fair effects of future hopes.

    But wherefore waste I time to counsel the
    That art a votary to fond desire?
    Once more adieu.
 My father at the road
    Expects my coming, there to see me shipp'd.
 Sweet Proteus, no; now let us take our leave.

  PROTEUS.
 He after honour hunts, I after love;
    He leaves his friends to dignify them more:
    I leave myself, my friends, and all for love.

    Thou, Julia, thou hast metamorphis'd me,
    Made me neglect my studies, lose my time,
    War with good counsel, set the world at nought;
    Made wit with musing weak, heart sick with thought.


                         Enter SPEED

  SPEED.
 Sir Proteus, save you! Saw you my master?
  PROTEUS.
 But now he parted hence to embark for Milan.

  SPEED.
 Twenty to one then he is shipp'd already,  
    And I have play'd the sheep in losing him.

  PROTEUS.

  SPEED.
 I do.

  SPEED.
 Why then, my horns are his horns, whether I wake or sleep.

  PROTEUS.

  SPEED.

  PROTEUS.
 True; and thy master a shepherd.

  PROTEUS.
 It shall go hard but I'll prove it by another.
 The shepherd seeks the sheep, and not the sheep the
    shepherd; but I seek my master, and my master seeks not me;
    therefore, I am no sheep.
 The sheep for fodder follow the shepherd; the shepherd for
    food follows not the sheep: thou for wages followest thy master;
    thy master for wages follows not thee.

  SPEED.
'  
  PROTEUS.
 But dost thou hear? Gav'st thou my letter to Julia?
  SPEED.

  PROTEUS.

  SPEED.
 If the ground be overcharg'd, you were best stick her.
 Nay, in that you are astray: 'twere best pound you.

  SPEED.
 Nay, sir, less than a pound shall serve me for carrying your
    letter.

  PROTEUS.
 You mistake; I mean the pound- a pinfold.

  SPEED.
 From a pound to a pin? Fold it over and over,
    'Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to your lover.

  PROTEUS.

  PROTEUS.
 Nod- ay.
 Why, that's 'noddy.
'
  SPEED.
 You mistook, sir; I say she did nod; and you ask me if she
    did nod; and I say 'Ay.
'
  PROTEUS.
'
  SPEED.
 Now you have taken the pains to set it together, take it for
    your pains.
  
  PROTEUS.
 No, no; you shall have it for bearing the letter.

  SPEED.
 Well, I perceive I must be fain to bear with you.

  SPEED.
 And yet it cannot overtake your slow purse.
 Come, come, open the matter; in brief, what said she?
  SPEED.
 Open your purse, that the money and the matter may be both
    at once delivered.

  PROTEUS.
 What said she?
  SPEED.
 Truly, sir, I think you'll hardly win her.

  PROTEUS.
 Why, couldst thou perceive so much from her?
  SPEED.
 Sir, I could perceive nothing at all from her; no, not so
    much as a ducat for delivering your letter; and being so hard to
    me that brought your mind, I fear she'll prove as hard to you in
    telling your mind.
 Give her no token but stones, for she's as
    hard as steel.
 No, not so much as 'Take this for thy pains.

  PROTEUS.
 Go, go, be gone, to save your ship from wreck,
    Which cannot perish, having thee aboard,
    Being destin'd to a drier death on shore.

    I fear my Julia would not deign my lines,
    Receiving them from such a worthless post.
              Exit




SCENE II.
 The garden Of JULIA'S house

Enter JULIA and LUCETTA

  JULIA.
 Ay, madam; so you stumble not unheedfully.
 Of all the fair resort of gentlemen
    That every day with parle encounter me,
    In thy opinion which is worthiest love?
  LUCETTA.
 What think'st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?
  LUCETTA.

  JULIA.
 What think'st thou of the rich Mercatio?
  LUCETTA.

  JULIA.
 What think'st thou of the gentle Proteus?
  LUCETTA.

  JULIA.
 Your reason?
  LUCETTA.
 Ay, if you thought your love not cast away.

  JULIA.
 Why, he, of all the rest, hath never mov'd me.
 His little speaking shows his love but small.

  LUCETTA.
 Fire that's closest kept burns most of all.
 They do not love that do not show their love.

  LUCETTA.
 I would I knew his mind.
 That the contents will show.

    He would have given it you; but I, being in the way,
    Did in your name receive it; pardon the fault, I pray.

  JULIA.

  LUCETTA.
 That you may ruminate.
                           Exit
  JULIA.
 And yet, I would I had o'erlook'd the letter.

    What fool is she, that knows I am a maid
    And would not force the letter to my view!
    Since maids, in modesty, say 'No' to that
    Which they would have the profferer construe 'Ay.
'  
    Fie, fie, how wayward is this foolish love,
    That like a testy babe will scratch the nurse,
    And presently, all humbled, kiss the rod!
    How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence,
    When willingly I would have had her here!
    How angerly I taught my brow to frown,
    When inward joy enforc'd my heart to smile!
    My penance is to call Lucetta back
    And ask remission for my folly past.

    What ho! Lucetta!

                     Re-enter LUCETTA

  LUCETTA.
 Is't near dinner time?
  LUCETTA.
 I would it were,
    That you might kill your stomach on your meat
    And not upon your maid.
 Nothing.
 Why didst thou stoop then?
  LUCETTA.
 To take a paper up that I let fall.

  JULIA.

  JULIA.
 Then let it lie for those that it concerns.
 Madam, it will not lie where it concerns,
    Unless it have a false interpreter.
 Some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme.

  LUCETTA.
 That I might sing it, madam, to a tune.

    Give me a note; your ladyship can set.

  JULIA.
 It is too heavy for so light a tune.
 Heavy! belike it hath some burden then.

  LUCETTA.
 Ay; and melodious were it, would you sing it.

  JULIA.
 And why not you?
  LUCETTA.
 I cannot reach so high.

  JULIA.
 Let's see your song.
     [LUCETTA withholds the letter]
    How now, minion!
  LUCETTA.
 Keep tune there still, so you will sing it out.

  JULIA.
 You do not!
  LUCETTA.

  JULIA.
 You, minion, are too saucy.

  LUCETTA.
 Nay, now you are too flat
    And mar the concord with too harsh a descant;
    There wanteth but a mean to fill your song.

  JULIA.
 Indeed, I bid the base for Proteus.

  JULIA.

    Here is a coil with protestation!         [Tears the letter]
    Go, get you gone; and let the papers lie.

    You would be fing'ring them, to anger me.
                   Exit
  JULIA.
 Nay, would I were so ang'red with the same!
    O hateful hands, to tear such loving words!
    Injurious wasps, to feed on such sweet honey
    And kill the bees that yield it with your stings!
    I'll kiss each several paper for amends.
  
    Look, here is writ 'kind Julia.
' Unkind Julia,
    As in revenge of thy ingratitude,
    I throw thy name against the bruising stones,
    Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.

    And here is writ 'love-wounded Proteus.
'
    Poor wounded name! my bosom,,as a bed,
    Shall lodge thee till thy wound be throughly heal'd;
    And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss.

    Be calm, good wind, blow not a word away
    Till I have found each letter in the letter-
    Except mine own name; that some whirlwind bear
    Unto a ragged, fearful, hanging rock,
    And throw it thence into the raging sea.
' That I'll tear away;
    And yet I will not, sith so prettily
    He couples it to his complaining names.

    Thus will I fold them one upon another;  
    Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.


                        Re-enter LUCETTA

  LUCETTA.
 Madam,
    Dinner is ready, and your father stays.

  JULIA.
 Well, let us go.

  LUCETTA.
 What, shall these papers lie like tell-tales here?
  JULIA.

  LUCETTA.
 Nay, I was taken up for laying them down;
    Yet here they shall not lie for catching cold.

  JULIA.
 Ay, madam, you may say what sights you see;
    I see things too, although you judge I wink.
 Come, come; will't please you go?                Exeunt




SCENE III.
 'Twas of his nephew Proteus, your son.

  ANTONIO.

    For any, or for all these exercises,
    He said that Proteus, your son, was meet;
    And did request me to importune you
    To let him spend his time no more at home,
    Which would be great impeachment to his age,
    In having known no travel in his youth.
  
  ANTONIO.

    I have consider'd well his loss of time,
    And how he cannot be a perfect man,
    Not being tried and tutor'd in the world:
    Experience is by industry achiev'd,
    And perfected by the swift course of time.
 I think your lordship is not ignorant
    How his companion, youthful Valentine,
    Attends the Emperor in his royal court.
 I know it well.

  ANTONIO.
 To-morrow, may it please you, Don Alphonso
    With other gentlemen of good esteem
    Are journeying to salute the Emperor,
    And to commend their service to his will.

  ANTONIO.
 Good company; with them shall Proteus go.


                        Enter PROTEUS

    And- in good time!- now will we break with him.
 Sweet love! sweet lines! sweet life!
    Here is her hand, the agent of her heart;
    Here is her oath for love, her honour's pawn.

    O that our fathers would applaud our loves,
    To seal our happiness with their consents!
    O heavenly Julia!
  ANTONIO.

  ANTONIO.
 Lend me the letter; let me see what news.

  PROTEUS.
 There is no news, my lord; but that he writes
    How happily he lives, how well-belov'd
    And daily graced by the Emperor;
    Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune.

  ANTONIO.
 And how stand you affected to his wish?
  PROTEUS.
 As one relying on your lordship's will,
    And not depending on his friendly wish.

    Muse not that I thus suddenly proceed;
    For what I will, I will, and there an end.

    To-morrow be in readiness to go-
    Excuse it not, for I am peremptory.

  PROTEUS.

                                     Exeunt ANTONIO and PANTHINO
  PROTEUS.
 Thus have I shunn'd the fire for fear of burning,
    And drench'd me in the sea, where I am drown'd.

    I fear'd to show my father Julia's letter,
    Lest he should take exceptions to my love;
    And with the vantage of mine own excuse
    Hath he excepted most against my love.
 Sir Proteus, your father calls for you;
    He is in haste; therefore, I pray you, go.
'             Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
>>



ACT II.
 The DUKE'S palace

Enter VALENTINE and SPEED

  SPEED.

  SPEED.

  VALENTINE.
  [Calling]  Madam Silvia! Madam Silvia!
  VALENTINE.
 She is not within hearing, sir.

  VALENTINE.
 Why, sir, who bade you call her?
  SPEED.
 Your worship, sir; or else I mistook.

  VALENTINE.

  SPEED.
 And yet I was last chidden for being too slow.
 Go to, sir; tell me, do you know Madam Silvia?
  SPEED.
 She that your worship loves?
  VALENTINE.
 You were
    wont, when you laughed, to crow like a cock; when you walk'd, to
    walk like one of the lions; when you fasted, it was presently
    after dinner; when you look'd sadly, it was for want of money.

    And now you are metamorphis'd with a mistress, that, when I look
    on you, I can hardly think you my master.
 Are all these things perceiv'd in me?
  SPEED.
 They are all perceiv'd without ye.
 Without me? They cannot.
 Without you! Nay, that's certain; for, without you were so
    simple, none else would; but you are so without these follies
    that these follies are within you, and shine through you like the
    water in an urinal, that not an eye that sees you but is a
    physician to comment on your malady.
 But tell me, dost thou know my lady Silvia?  
  SPEED.
 She that you gaze on so, as she sits at supper?
  VALENTINE.
 Hast thou observ'd that? Even she, I mean.

  VALENTINE.
 Dost thou know her by my gazing on her, and yet know'st
    her not?
  SPEED.
 Not so fair, boy, as well-favour'd.
 I mean that her beauty is exquisite, but her favour
    infinite.

  VALENTINE.
 How painted? and how out of count?
  SPEED.
 How esteem'st thou me? I account of her beauty.

  SPEED.
 You never saw her since she was deform'd.
 How long hath she been deform'd?  
  SPEED.
 Ever since you lov'd her.

  VALENTINE.

  SPEED.

  VALENTINE.
 Because Love is blind.
 What should I see then?
  SPEED.
 Your own present folly and her passing deformity; for he,
    being in love, could not see to garter his hose; and you, being
    in love, cannot see to put on your hose.

  VALENTINE.
 Belike, boy, then you are in love; for last morning you
    could not see to wipe my shoes.
 I thank you, you
    swing'd me for my love, which makes me the bolder to chide you
    for yours.

  VALENTINE.
 In conclusion, I stand affected to her.
 I would you were set, so your affection would cease.

  SPEED.
 I have.

  SPEED.
  [Aside]  O excellent motion! O exceeding puppet!
    Now will he interpret to her.

  VALENTINE.

  SPEED.
 Sir Valentine and servant, to you two thousand.
  [Aside]  He should give her interest, and she gives it him.

  VALENTINE.
  
  SILVIA.
 I thank you, gentle servant.
 'Tis very clerkly done.

  VALENTINE.
 Now trust me, madam, it came hardly off;
    For, being ignorant to whom it goes,
    I writ at random, very doubtfully.

  SILVIA.
 Perchance you think too much of so much pains?
  VALENTINE.
 A pretty period! Well, I guess the sequel;
    And yet I will not name it- and yet I care not.

    And yet take this again- and yet I thank you-
    Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
'
  VALENTINE.
 What means your ladyship? Do you not like it?
  SILVIA.
 Yes, yes; the lines are very quaintly writ;
    But, since unwillingly, take them again.

    Nay, take them.
                      [Gives hack the letter]
  VALENTINE.

  SILVIA.

  VALENTINE.
 And when it's writ, for my sake read it over;
    And if it please you, so; if not, why, so.
 If it please me, madam, what then?
  SILVIA.
 Why, if it please you, take it for your labour.
                     Exit SILVIA
  SPEED.
 O jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible,
    As a nose on a man's face, or a weathercock on a steeple!
    My master sues to her; and she hath taught her suitor,
    He being her pupil, to become her tutor.

    O excellent device! Was there ever heard a better,
    That my master, being scribe, to himself should write the letter?
  VALENTINE.
 How now, sir! What are you reasoning with yourself?
  SPEED.
 Nay, I was rhyming: 'tis you that have the reason.

  VALENTINE.
 To do what?
  SPEED.
 To be a spokesman from Madam Silvia?
  VALENTINE.

  VALENTINE.
 By a letter, I should say.

  SPEED.
 No, believe me.

  SPEED.
 No believing you indeed, sir.
 But did you perceive her
    earnest?
  VALENTINE.
 She gave me none except an angry word.
 Why, she hath given you a letter.
 And that letter hath she deliver'd, and there an end.
 I'll warrant you 'tis as well.

    'For often have you writ to her; and she, in modesty,
    Or else for want of idle time, could not again reply;
    Or fearing else some messenger that might her mind discover,
    Herself hath taught her love himself to write unto her lover.
'
    All this I speak in print, for in print I found it.
 Why muse you,
    sir? 'Tis dinner time.
 I have din'd.
  
  SPEED.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE II.

Verona.
 JULIA'S house

Enter PROTEUS and JULIA

  PROTEUS.
 I must, where is no remedy.
 When possibly I can, I will return.
 If you turn not, you will return the sooner.

    Keep this remembrance for thy Julia's sake.

                                                 [Giving a ring]
  PROTEUS.

  JULIA.
 Here is my hand for my true constancy;
    And when that hour o'erslips me in the day
    Wherein I sigh not, Julia, for thy sake,
    The next ensuing hour some foul mischance
    Torment me for my love's forgetfulness!
    My father stays my coming; answer not;
    The tide is now- nay, not thy tide of tears:
    That tide will stay me longer than I should.


                          Enter PANTHINO

  PANTHINO.
 Sir Proteus, you are stay'd for.

  PROTEUS.
 Go; I come, I come.
          Exeunt




SCENE III.
 A street

Enter LAUNCE, leading a dog

  LAUNCE.
 Nay, 'twill be this hour ere I have done weeping; all the
    kind of the Launces have this very fault.
 I have receiv'd my
    proportion, like the Prodigious Son, and am going with Sir
    Proteus to the Imperial's court.
 A Jew would have
    wept to have seen our parting; why, my grandam having no eyes,
    look you, wept herself blind at my parting.
 This shoe is my father; no, this left shoe is
    my father; no, no, left shoe is my mother; nay, that cannot be so
    neither; yes, it is so, it is so, it hath the worser sole.
 A
    vengeance on 't! There 'tis.
 Now, sir, this staff is my sister,
    for, look you, she is as white as a lily and as small as a wand;  
    this hat is Nan our maid; I am the dog; no, the dog is himself,
    and I am the dog- O, the dog is me, and I am myself; ay, so, so.
' Now should not
    the shoe speak a word for weeping; now should I kiss my father;
    well, he weeps on.
 O that she could
    speak now like a wood woman! Well, I kiss her- why there 'tis;
    here's my mother's breath up and down.
 Now come I to my sister;
    mark the moan she makes.
 Now the dog all this while sheds not a
    tear, nor speaks a word; but see how I lay the dust with my
    tears.
 What's the matter? Why weep'st
    thou, man? Away, ass! You'll lose the tide if you tarry any
    longer.
 It is no matter if the tied were lost; for it is the
    unkindest tied that ever any man tied.

  PANTHINO.
 Why, he that's tied here, Crab, my dog.

  PANTHINO.

  PANTHINO.
 Where should I lose my tongue?
  LAUNCE.
 In thy tale.
 In thy tail!
  LAUNCE.

  PANTHINO.

  LAUNCE.
 Sir, call me what thou dar'st.
 Well, I will go.

Milan.
 Servant!
  VALENTINE.
 Mistress?
  SPEED.
 Master, Sir Thurio frowns on you.

  VALENTINE.
 Ay, boy, it's for love.

  SPEED.
 Not of you.

  VALENTINE.
 Of my mistress, then.

  SPEED.
 'Twere good you knock'd him.

  VALENTINE.
 Indeed, madam, I seem so.

  THURIO.

  THURIO.

  VALENTINE.
 So do you.

  THURIO.
 What seem I that I am not?
  VALENTINE.
 What instance of the contrary?
  VALENTINE.
 Your folly.
  
  THURIO.
 My jerkin is a doublet.

  VALENTINE.
 Well, then, I'll double your folly.
 How?
  SILVIA.
 What, angry, Sir Thurio! Do you change colour?
  VALENTINE.
 That hath more mind to feed on your blood than live in your
    air.

  VALENTINE.
 A fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly shot off.
 Yourself, sweet lady; for you gave the fire.
 Sir Thurio
    borrows his wit from your ladyship's looks, and spends what he
    borrows kindly in your company.
 Sir, if you spend word for word with me, I shall make your
    wit bankrupt.
 I know it well, sir; you have an exchequer of words,
    and, I think, no other treasure to give your followers; for it
    appears by their bare liveries that they live by your bare words.
 No more, gentlemen, no more.
 Here comes my father.

  DUKE.
 Now, daughter Silvia, you are hard beset.

    Sir Valentine, your father is in good health.
 My lord, I will be thankful
    To any happy messenger from thence.

  DUKE.
 Know ye Don Antonio, your countryman?
  VALENTINE.

  DUKE.
 Hath he not a son?
  VALENTINE.
 Ay, my good lord; a son that well deserves
    The honour and regard of such a father.

  DUKE.
  
    I think 'tis no unwelcome news to you.
 Should I have wish'd a thing, it had been he.
 Welcome him, then, according to his worth-
    Silvia, I speak to you, and you, Sir Thurio;
    For Valentine, I need not cite him to it.
 This is the gentleman I told your ladyship
    Had come along with me but that his mistresss
    Did hold his eyes lock'd in her crystal looks.
 Belike that now she hath enfranchis'd them
    Upon some other pawn for fealty.

  VALENTINE.
 Why, lady, Love hath twenty pair of eyes.

  THURIO.
 They say that Love hath not an eye at all.

  VALENTINE.
 To see such lovers, Thurio, as yourself;
    Upon a homely object Love can wink.

  VALENTINE.
 Welcome, dear Proteus! Mistress, I beseech you
    Confirm his welcome with some special favour.

  VALENTINE.
 Mistress, it is; sweet lady, entertain him
    To be my fellow-servant to your ladyship.
 Too low a mistress for so high a servant.

  PROTEUS.

  VALENTINE.

  PROTEUS.

  SILVIA.
 And duty never yet did want his meed.

    Servant, you are welcome to a worthless mistress.

  PROTEUS.

  SILVIA.
 That you are welcome?
  PROTEUS.
 That you are worthless.

  
                          Re-enter THURIO

  THURIO.
 Madam, my lord your father would speak with you.

  SILVIA.
 I wait upon his pleasure.

    I'll leave you to confer of home affairs;
    When you have done we look to hear from you.

  PROTEUS.
 We'll both attend upon your ladyship.

                                        Exeunt SILVIA and THURIO
  VALENTINE.
 Now, tell me, how do all from whence you came?
  PROTEUS.

  VALENTINE.
 I left them all in health.

  VALENTINE.
 My tales of love were wont to weary you;
    I know you joy not in a love-discourse.

  VALENTINE.

    O gentle Proteus, Love's a mighty lord,
    And hath so humbled me as I confess
    There is no woe to his correction,
    Nor to his service no such joy on earth.

    Now no discourse, except it be of love;
    Now can I break my fast, dine, sup, and sleep,
    Upon the very naked name of love.
 Call her divine.
 I will not flatter her.
 O, flatter me; for love delights in praises!
  PROTEUS.
 Then speak the truth by her; if not divine,
    Yet let her be a principality,
    Sovereign to all the creatures on the earth.

  PROTEUS.
 Except my mistress.
 Have I not reason to prefer mine own?
  VALENTINE.
 And I will help thee to prefer her too:
    She shall be dignified with this high honour-
    To bear my lady's train, lest the base earth
    Should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss
    And, of so great a favour growing proud,
    Disdain to root the summer-swelling flow'r
    And make rough winter everlastingly.

  PROTEUS.
 Why, Valentine, what braggardism is this?
  VALENTINE.
 Pardon me, Proteus; all I can is nothing
    To her, whose worth makes other worthies nothing;
    She is alone.

  PROTEUS.

  VALENTINE.

    Forgive me that I do not dream on thee,
    Because thou seest me dote upon my love.
 Ay, and we are betroth'd; nay more, our marriage-hour,
    With all the cunning manner of our flight,
    Determin'd of- how I must climb her window,
    The ladder made of cords, and all the means
    Plotted and 'greed on for my happiness.

    Good Proteus, go with me to my chamber,
    In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel.

  PROTEUS.
 I will.
                                Exit VALENTINE
    Even as one heat another heat expels
    Or as one nail by strength drives out another,
    So the remembrance of my former love
    Is by a newer object quite forgotten.

    Is it my mind, or Valentinus' praise,
    Her true perfection, or my false transgression,
    That makes me reasonless to reason thus?
    She is fair; and so is Julia that I love-
    That I did love, for now my love is thaw'd;
    Which like a waxen image 'gainst a fire
    Bears no impression of the thing it was.

    Methinks my zeal to Valentine is cold,
    And that I love him not as I was wont.

    O! but I love his lady too too much,
    And that's the reason I love him so little.

    If I can check my erring love, I will;
    If not, to compass her I'll use my skill.
               Exit




SCENE V.

Milan.
 Launce! by mine honesty, welcome to Padua.

  LAUNCE.
 Forswear not thyself, sweet youth, for I am not welcome.
 Come on, you madcap; I'll to the alehouse with you
    presently; where, for one shot of five pence, thou shalt have
    five thousand welcomes.
 But, sirrah, how did thy master part with
    Madam Julia?
  LAUNCE.

  SPEED.
 But shall she marry him?
  LAUNCE.
 No.

  SPEED.
 How then? Shall he marry her?
  LAUNCE.
 No, neither.

  SPEED.
 No, they are both as whole as a fish.
 Why then, how stands the matter with them?
  LAUNCE.

  SPEED.
 What an ass art thou! I understand thee not.

  LAUNCE.

  SPEED.
 Ay, and what I do too; look thee, I'll but lean, and my
    staff understands me.

  LAUNCE.
 Why, stand-under and under-stand is all one.

  SPEED.
 Ask my dog.
 The conclusion is, then, that it will.
 Thou shalt never get such a secret from me but by a
    parable.

  SPEED.
 But, Launce, how say'st thou
    that my master is become a notable lover?
  LAUNCE.
 I never knew him otherwise.
  
  SPEED.
 Than how?
  LAUNCE.
 A notable lubber, as thou reportest him to be.
 Why, thou whoreson ass, thou mistak'st me.
 Why, fool, I meant not thee, I meant thy master.

  SPEED.

  LAUNCE.
 Why, I tell thee I care not though he burn himself in love.

    If thou wilt, go with me to the alehouse; if not, thou art an
    Hebrew, a Jew, and not worth the name of a Christian.
 Why?
  LAUNCE.
 Because thou hast not so much charity in thee as to go to
    the ale with a Christian.
 Wilt thou go?
  SPEED.
                                  Exeunt




SCENE VI.

Milan.
 The DUKE's palace

Enter PROTEUS

  PROTEUS.

    Unheedful vows may heedfully be broken;
    And he wants wit that wants resolved will
    To learn his wit t' exchange the bad for better.

    Fie, fie, unreverend tongue, to call her bad
    Whose sovereignty so oft thou hast preferr'd
    With twenty thousand soul-confirming oaths!
    I cannot leave to love, and yet I do;  
    But there I leave to love where I should love.

    Julia I lose, and Valentine I lose;
    If I keep them, I needs must lose myself;
    If I lose them, thus find I by their loss:
    For Valentine, myself; for Julia, Silvia.

    I to myself am dearer than a friend;
    For love is still most precious in itself;
    And Silvia- witness heaven, that made her fair!-
    Shows Julia but a swarthy Ethiope.

    I cannot now prove constant to myself
    Without some treachery us'd to Valentine.

    Now presently I'll give her father notice
    Of their disguising and pretended flight,  
    Who, all enrag'd, will banish Valentine,
    For Thurio, he intends, shall wed his daughter;
    But, Valentine being gone, I'll quickly cross
    By some sly trick blunt Thurio's dull proceeding.

    Love, lend me wings to make my purpose swift,
    As thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift.
            Exit




SCENE VII.
 Counsel, Lucetta; gentle girl, assist me;
    And, ev'n in kind love, I do conjure thee,
    Who art the table wherein all my thoughts
    Are visibly character'd and engrav'd,
    To lesson me and tell me some good mean
    How, with my honour, I may undertake
    A journey to my loving Proteus.

  LUCETTA.

  LUCETTA.

  JULIA.

    Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow
    As seek to quench the fire of love with words.

  LUCETTA.
 I do not seek to quench your love's hot fire,
    But qualify the fire's extreme rage,
    Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.

  JULIA.

  LUCETTA.
 Not like a woman, for I would prevent
    The loose encounters of lascivious men;
    Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds
    As may beseem some well-reputed page.

  LUCETTA.
 Why then, your ladyship must cut your hair.

  JULIA.
 No, girl; I'll knit it up in silken strings
    With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots-
    To be fantastic may become a youth
    Of greater time than I shall show to be.

  LUCETTA.
 That fits as well as 'Tell me, good my lord,
    What compass will you wear your farthingale.
'
    Why ev'n what fashion thou best likes, Lucetta.

  LUCETTA.
 You must needs have them with a codpiece, madam.
 Lucetta, as thou lov'st me, let me have  
    What thou think'st meet, and is most mannerly.

    But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me
    For undertaking so unstaid a journey?
    I fear me it will make me scandaliz'd.

  JULIA.

  LUCETTA.

    I fear me he will scarce be pleas'd withal.

  JULIA.

  LUCETTA.
 All these are servants to deceitful men.

  JULIA.
 Base men that use them to so base effect!
    But truer stars did govern Proteus' birth;
    His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles,
    His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,
    His tears pure messengers sent from his heart,  
    His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.

    And presently go with me to my chamber,
    To take a note of what I stand in need of
    To furnish me upon my longing journey.

    All that is mine I leave at thy dispose,
    My goods, my lands, my reputation;
    Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence.

    Come, answer not, but to it presently;
    I am impatient of my tarriance.
                       Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.

Milan.
 The DUKE'S palace

Enter DUKE, THURIO, and PROTEUS

  DUKE.
 Sir Thurio, give us leave, I pray, awhile;
    We have some secrets to confer about.

    Know, worthy prince, Sir Valentine, my friend,
    This night intends to steal away your daughter;
    Myself am one made privy to the plot.

    I know you have determin'd to bestow her
    On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates;
    And should she thus be stol'n away from you,
    It would be much vexation to your age.
 Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care,
    Which to requite, command me while I live.

    And, that thou mayst perceive my fear of this,
    Knowing that tender youth is soon suggested,
    I nightly lodge her in an upper tow'r,
    The key whereof myself have ever kept;
    And thence she cannot be convey'd away.
  
  PROTEUS.
 Know, noble lord, they have devis'd a mean
    How he her chamber window will ascend
    And with a corded ladder fetch her down;
    For which the youthful lover now is gone,
    And this way comes he with it presently;
    Where, if it please you, you may intercept him.

    But, good my lord, do it so cunningly
    That my discovery be not aimed at;
    For love of you, not hate unto my friend,
    Hath made me publisher of this pretence.
 Upon mine honour, he shall never know
    That I had any light from thee of this.

  PROTEUS.
 Adieu, my lord; Sir Valentine is coming.
 Sir Valentine, whither away so fast?
  VALENTINE.
 Please it your Grace, there is a messenger
    That stays to bear my letters to my friends,
    And I am going to deliver them.
  
  DUKE.
 The tenour of them doth but signify
    My health and happy being at your court.
 Nay then, no matter; stay with me awhile;
    I am to break with thee of some affairs
    That touch me near, wherein thou must be secret.
 I know it well, my lord; and, sure, the match
    Were rich and honourable; besides, the gentleman
    Is full of virtue, bounty, worth, and qualities
    Beseeming such a wife as your fair daughter.

    Cannot your grace win her to fancy him?
  DUKE.
 No, trust me; she is peevish, sullen, froward,
    Proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty;
    Neither regarding that she is my child
    Nor fearing me as if I were her father;
    And, may I say to thee, this pride of hers,
    Upon advice, hath drawn my love from her;
    And, where I thought the remnant of mine age  
    Should have been cherish'd by her childlike duty,
    I now am full resolv'd to take a wife
    And turn her out to who will take her in.

    Then let her beauty be her wedding-dow'r;
    For me and my possessions she esteems not.

    Now, therefore, would I have thee to my tutor-
    For long agone I have forgot to court;
    Besides, the fashion of the time is chang'd-
    How and which way I may bestow myself
    To be regarded in her sun-bright eye.

  VALENTINE.
 A woman sometime scorns what best contents her.

    Send her another; never give her o'er,  
    For scorn at first makes after-love the more.

    That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man,
    If with his tongue he cannot win a woman.
 But she I mean is promis'd by her friends
    Unto a youthful gentleman of worth;
    And kept severely from resort of men,
    That no man hath access by day to her.
 Why then I would resort to her by night.

  DUKE.
 Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground,  
    And built so shelving that one cannot climb it
    Without apparent hazard of his life.

  VALENTINE.
 Why then a ladder, quaintly made of cords,
    To cast up with a pair of anchoring hooks,
    Would serve to scale another Hero's tow'r,
    So bold Leander would adventure it.

  DUKE.
 Now, as thou art a gentleman of blood,
    Advise me where I may have such a ladder.

  VALENTINE.
 When would you use it? Pray, sir, tell me that.

  VALENTINE.
 By seven o'clock I'll get you such a ladder.

  DUKE.
 It will be light, my lord, that you may bear it
    Under a cloak that is of any length.

  DUKE.
 A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn?
  VALENTINE.
 Ay, my good lord.

    I'll get me one of such another length.
  
  VALENTINE.
 Why, any cloak will serve the turn, my lord.

  DUKE.
 How shall I fashion me to wear a cloak?
    I pray thee, let me feel thy cloak upon me.

    What letter is this same? What's here? 'To Silvia'!
    And here an engine fit for my proceeding!
    I'll be so bold to break the seal for once.

      O, could their master come and go as lightly,
        Himself would lodge where, senseless, they are lying!
      My herald thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them,
        While I, their king, that thither them importune,
      Do curse the grace that with such grace hath blest them,
        Because myself do want my servants' fortune.

      I curse myself, for they are sent by me,
        That they should harbour where their lord should be.
'
    What's here?
      'Silvia, this night I will enfranchise thee.

    Why, Phaethon- for thou art Merops' son-  
    Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly car,
    And with thy daring folly burn the world?
    Wilt thou reach stars because they shine on thee?
    Go, base intruder, over-weening slave,
    Bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates;
    And think my patience, more than thy desert,
    Is privilege for thy departure hence.

    Thank me for this more than for all the favours
    Which, all too much, I have bestow'd on thee.

    But if thou linger in my territories
    Longer than swiftest expedition
    Will give thee time to leave our royal court,
    By heaven! my wrath shall far exceed the love
    I ever bore my daughter or thyself.

    Be gone; I will not hear thy vain excuse,
    But, as thou lov'st thy life, make speed from hence.
 And why not death rather than living torment?
    To die is to be banish'd from myself,
    And Silvia is myself; banish'd from her
    Is self from self, a deadly banishment.

    Except I be by Silvia in the night,
    There is no music in the nightingale;
    Unless I look on Silvia in the day,
    There is no day for me to look upon.

    She is my essence, and I leave to be
    If I be not by her fair influence
    Foster'd, illumin'd, cherish'd, kept alive.


                      Enter PROTEUS and LAUNCE

  PROTEUS.
 Run, boy, run, run, seek him out.
 So-ho, so-ho!
  PROTEUS.
 What seest thou?  
  LAUNCE.
 Him we go to find: there's not a hair on 's head but 'tis a
    Valentine.

  PROTEUS.

  PROTEUS.
 What then?
  VALENTINE.
 Nothing.

  LAUNCE.
 Can nothing speak? Master, shall I strike?
  PROTEUS.
 Nothing.

  PROTEUS.
 Villain, forbear.

  LAUNCE.
 Why, sir, I'll strike nothing.
 I pray you-
  PROTEUS.
 Sirrah, I say, forbear.
 Friend Valentine, a word.

  VALENTINE.

  PROTEUS.

  VALENTINE.
 Is Silvia dead?
  PROTEUS.
 No, Valentine.
 No Valentine, if Silvia have forsworn me.
 That thou art banished- O, that's the news!-
    From hence, from Silvia, and from me thy friend.

  VALENTINE.
 O, I have fed upon this woe already,
    And now excess of it will make me surfeit.

    Doth Silvia know that I am banished?
  PROTEUS.

    But neither bended knees, pure hands held up,
    Sad sighs, deep groans, nor silver-shedding tears,  
    Could penetrate her uncompassionate sire-
    But Valentine, if he be ta'en, must die.

    Besides, her intercession chaf'd him so,
    When she for thy repeal was suppliant,
    That to close prison he commanded her,
    With many bitter threats of biding there.

  VALENTINE.

  PROTEUS.
 Cease to lament for that thou canst not help,
    And study help for that which thou lament'st.

    Time is the nurse and breeder of all good.

    Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence,
    Which, being writ to me, shall be deliver'd
    Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love.

    Come, I'll convey thee through the city gate;
    And, ere I part with thee, confer at large
    Of all that may concern thy love affairs.

  VALENTINE.
 I pray thee, Launce, an if thou seest my boy,
    Bid him make haste and meet me at the Northgate.
 Come, Valentine.

  VALENTINE.
 O my dear Silvia! Hapless Valentine!
                                    Exeunt VALENTINE and PROTEUS
  LAUNCE.
 I am but a fool, look you, and yet I have the wit to think
    my master is a kind of a knave; but that's all one if he be but
    one knave.
 He lives not now that knows me to be in love; yet I am
    in love; but a team of horse shall not pluck that from me; nor
    who 'tis I love; and yet 'tis a woman; but what woman I will not
    tell myself; and yet 'tis a milkmaid; yet 'tis not a maid, for
    she hath had gossips; yet 'tis a maid, for she is her master's
    maid and serves for wages.
 Here is the  
    cate-log  [Pulling out a paper]  of her condition.
 'Inprimis: She
    can fetch and carry.
 'Item: She can milk.
' Look you, a sweet virtue in a maid
    with clean hands.
 With my master's ship? Why, it is at sea.

  SPEED.
 What news,
    then, in your paper?
  LAUNCE.
 Why, man? how black?
  LAUNCE.

  SPEED.
 Let me read them.

  LAUNCE.
 Fie on thee, jolt-head; thou canst not read.

  SPEED.
 Thou liest; I can.

  LAUNCE.
  
  LAUNCE.
 O illiterate loiterer.

    This proves that thou canst not read.

  SPEED.
 Come, fool, come; try me in thy paper.

  LAUNCE.
  [Handing over the paper]  There; and Saint Nicholas be thy
    speed.
  [Reads]  'Inprimis: She can milk.
'
  LAUNCE.
 And thereof comes the proverb: Blessing of your heart, you
    brew good ale.
 That's as much as to say 'Can she so?'
  SPEED.
 'Item: She can knit.

  SPEED.
 'Item: She can wash and scour.
'
  LAUNCE.
 A special virtue; for then she need not be wash'd and
    scour'd.

  SPEED.
'
  LAUNCE.
 Then may I set the world on wheels, when she can spin for  
    her living.

  SPEED.
 'Item: She hath many nameless virtues.
'
  LAUNCE.

  SPEED.
 Well, that fault may be mended with a breakfast.

    Read on.

  SPEED.
'
  LAUNCE.
'
  LAUNCE.
 It's no matter for that, so she sleep not in her talk.

  SPEED.
 I pray thee, out with't; and
    place it for her chief virtue.
'
  LAUNCE.

  SPEED.
'
  LAUNCE.
 I care not for that neither, because I love crusts.

  SPEED.
 'Item: She is curst.
 Well, the best is, she hath no teeth to bite.

  SPEED.
 'Item: She will often praise her liquor.
'
  LAUNCE.
 If her liquor be good, she shall; if she will not, I will;
    for good things should be praised.
 Of her tongue she cannot, for that's writ down she is slow
    of; of her purse she shall not, for that I'll keep shut.
 Now of
    another thing she may, and that cannot I help.
 Well, proceed.
 'Item: She hath more hair than wit, and more faults
    than hairs, and more wealth than faults.
'
  LAUNCE.
 Stop there; I'll have her; she was mine, and not mine,
    twice or thrice in that last article.
 Rehearse that once more.
 'Item: She hath more hair than wit'-
  LAUNCE.
 It may be; I'll prove it: the cover of
    the salt hides the salt, and therefore it is more than the salt;
    the hair that covers the wit is more than the wit, for the  
    greater hides the less.
 'And more faults than hairs'-
  LAUNCE.
 That's monstrous.
 O that that were out!
  SPEED.
 'And more wealth than faults.
 Why, that word makes the faults gracious.
 Well, I'll have
    her; an if it be a match, as nothing is impossible-
  SPEED.
 What then?
  LAUNCE.
 Why, then will I tell thee- that thy master stays for thee
    at the Northgate.

  SPEED.

  SPEED.
 Now will he be swing'd for reading my letter.
 An unmannerly
    slave that will thrust himself into secrets! I'll after, to
    rejoice in the boy's correction.

  THURIO.
 Since his exile she hath despis'd me most,
    Forsworn my company and rail'd at me,
    That I am desperate of obtaining her.

  DUKE.
 This weak impress of love is as a figure
    Trenched in ice, which with an hour's heat
    Dissolves to water and doth lose his form.

    A little time will melt her frozen thoughts,
    And worthless Valentine shall be forgot.


                          Enter PROTEUS

    How now, Sir Proteus! Is your countryman,
    According to our proclamation, gone?
  PROTEUS.
 Gone, my good lord.

  DUKE.
 My daughter takes his going grievously.
 A little time, my lord, will kill that grief.
 So I believe; but Thurio thinks not so.
 Longer than I prove loyal to your Grace
    Let me not live to look upon your Grace.
 Thou know'st how willingly I would effect
    The match between Sir Thurio and my daughter.

  PROTEUS.
 I do, my lord.
 And also, I think, thou art not ignorant
    How she opposes her against my will.

  PROTEUS.
 She did, my lord, when Valentine was here.
 Ay, and perversely she persevers so.

  DUKE.

  DUKE.
 Then you must undertake to slander him.

  PROTEUS.
 And that, my lord, I shall be loath to do:
    'Tis an ill office for a gentleman,
    Especially against his very friend.

  DUKE.
 Where your good word cannot advantage him,
    Your slander never can endamage him;
    Therefore the office is indifferent,
    Being entreated to it by your friend.

  PROTEUS.
 You have prevail'd, my lord; if I can do it
    By aught that I can speak in his dispraise,
    She shall not long continue love to him.

    But say this weed her love from Valentine,
    It follows not that she will love Sir Thurio.

  THURIO.
 Therefore, as you unwind her love from him,
    Lest it should ravel and be good to none,
    You must provide to bottom it on me;
    Which must be done by praising me as much  
    As you in worth dispraise Sir Valentine.

    Upon this warrant shall you have access
    Where you with Silvia may confer at large-
    For she is lumpish, heavy, melancholy,
    And, for your friend's sake, will be glad of you-
    Where you may temper her by your persuasion
    To hate young Valentine and love my friend.

  PROTEUS.
 As much as I can do I will effect.

  DUKE.
 Ay,
    Much is the force of heaven-bred poesy.

    This, or else nothing, will inherit her.

  DUKE.

  THURIO.
 About it, gentlemen!
  PROTEUS.
 We'll wait upon your Grace till after supper,
    And afterward determine our proceedings.

  DUKE.
 Even now about it! I will pardon you.
             Exeunt




ACT_4|SC_1
<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.

The frontiers of Mantua.
 A forest

Enter certain OUTLAWS

  FIRST OUTLAW.
 If there be ten, shrink not, but down with 'em.


                  Enter VALENTINE and SPEED

  THIRD OUTLAW.
 Sir, we are undone; these are the villains
    That all the travellers do fear so much.

  VALENTINE.
 My friends-
  FIRST OUTLAW.

  SECOND OUTLAW.
 Ay, by my beard, will we; for he is a proper man.

  SECOND OUTLAW.
 To Verona.

  FIRST OUTLAW.

  FIRST OUTLAW.
 I was.

  SECOND OUTLAW.

  FIRST OUTLAW.
 Why, ne'er repent it, if it were done so.

    But were you banish'd for so small a fault?
  VALENTINE.
 I was, and held me glad of such a doom.

  SECOND OUTLAW.
 Have you the tongues?
  VALENTINE.
 My youthful travel therein made me happy,  
    Or else I often had been miserable.
 By the bare scalp of Robin Hood's fat friar,
    This fellow were a king for our wild faction!
  FIRST OUTLAW.
 We'll have him.
 Sirs, a word.
 Master, be one of them; it's an honourable kind of thievery.
 Tell us this: have you anything to take to?
  VALENTINE.

  THIRD OUTLAW.
 Know, then, that some of us are gentlemen,
    Such as the fury of ungovern'd youth
    Thrust from the company of awful men;
    Myself was from Verona banished
    For practising to steal away a lady,
    An heir, and near allied unto the Duke.

  SECOND OUTLAW.

  FIRST OUTLAW.

    But to the purpose- for we cite our faults
    That they may hold excus'd our lawless lives;
    And, partly, seeing you are beautified  
    With goodly shape, and by your own report
    A linguist, and a man of such perfection
    As we do in our quality much want-
  SECOND OUTLAW.
 Indeed, because you are a banish'd man,
    Therefore, above the rest, we parley to you.

    Are you content to be our general-
    To make a virtue of necessity,
    And live as we do in this wilderness?
  THIRD OUTLAW.
 What say'st thou? Wilt thou be of our consort?
    Say 'ay' and be the captain of us all.
 But if thou scorn our courtesy thou diest.
 Thou shalt not live to brag what we have offer'd.
 I take your offer, and will live with you,
    Provided that you do no outrages
    On silly women or poor passengers.

    Come, go with us; we'll bring thee to our crews,
    And show thee all the treasure we have got;  
    Which, with ourselves, all rest at thy dispose.
       Exeunt




SCENE II.

Milan.
 Outside the DUKE'S palace, under SILVIA'S window

Enter PROTEUS

  PROTEUS.
 Already have I been false to Valentine,
    And now I must be as unjust to Thurio.

    Under the colour of commending him
    I have access my own love to prefer;
    But Silvia is too fair, too true, too holy,
    To be corrupted with my worthless gifts.

    When I protest true loyalty to her,
    She twits me with my falsehood to my friend;
    When to her beauty I commend my vows,
    She bids me think how I have been forsworn
    In breaking faith with Julia whom I lov'd;
    And notwithstanding all her sudden quips,
    The least whereof would quell a lover's hope,
    Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love
    The more it grows and fawneth on her still.
 Now must we to her window,
    And give some evening music to her ear.

  THURIO.
 Ay, gentle Thurio; for you know that love
    Will creep in service where it cannot go.

  THURIO.
 Ay, but I hope, sir, that you love not here.

  PROTEUS.
 Sir, but I do; or else I would be hence.

  THURIO.

  THURIO.
 I thank you for your own.
 Now, gentlemen,
    Let's tune, and to it lustily awhile.


    Enter at a distance, HOST, and JULIA in boy's clothes

  HOST.

  HOST.
  
  JULIA.
 But shall I hear him speak?
  HOST.
 Ay, that you shall.
                        [Music plays]
  JULIA.
 That will be music.

  HOST.
 Hark, hark!
  JULIA.


                   SONG
         Who is Silvia? What is she,
           That all our swains commend her?
         Holy, fair, and wise is she;
           The heaven such grace did lend her,
         That she might admired be.

         'To her let us garlands bring.


  HOST.
 How now, are you sadder than you were before?
    How do you, man? The music likes you not.
 You mistake; the musician likes me not.

  HOST.
 Why, my pretty youth?
  JULIA.
 He plays false, father.

  HOST.
 Not so; but yet so false that he grieves my very
    heart-strings.

  HOST.
 Ay, I would I were deaf; it makes me have a slow heart.

  HOST.

  JULIA.

  HOST.
 Ay, that change is the spite.
  
  HOST.
 You would have them always play but one thing?
  JULIA.
 I would always have one play but one thing.

    But, Host, doth this Sir Proteus, that we talk on,
    Often resort unto this gentlewoman?
  HOST.
 Where is Launce?
  HOST.
 Peace, stand aside; the company parts.

  PROTEUS.
 Sir Thurio, fear not you; I will so plead
    That you shall say my cunning drift excels.

  THURIO.
 At Saint Gregory's well.

  THURIO.
 Madam, good ev'n to your ladyship.

  SILVIA.
 I thank you for your music, gentlemen.
 One, lady, if you knew his pure heart's truth,
    You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.

  SILVIA.

  PROTEUS.
 Sir Proteus, gentle lady, and your servant.

  SILVIA.

    Thou subtle, perjur'd, false, disloyal man,
    Think'st thou I am so shallow, so conceitless,
    To be seduced by thy flattery
    That hast deceiv'd so many with thy vows?
    Return, return, and make thy love amends.

  PROTEUS.
 I grant, sweet love, that I did love a lady;  
    But she is dead.
  [Aside]  'Twere false, if I should speak it;
    For I am sure she is not buried.

  SILVIA.
 Say that she be; yet Valentine, thy friend,
    Survives, to whom, thyself art witness,
    I am betroth'd; and art thou not asham'd
    To wrong him with thy importunacy?
  PROTEUS.
 I likewise hear that Valentine is dead.
 And so suppose am I; for in his grave
    Assure thyself my love is buried.

  PROTEUS.

  SILVIA.
 Madam, if your heart be so obdurate,
    Vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love,
    The picture that is hanging in your chamber;
    To that I'll speak, to that I'll sigh and weep;
    For, since the substance of your perfect self
    Is else devoted, I am but a shadow;  
    And to your shadow will I make true love.
  [Aside]  If 'twere a substance, you would, sure, deceive it
    And make it but a shadow, as I am.
 I am very loath to be your idol, sir;
    But since your falsehood shall become you well
    To worship shadows and adore false shapes,
    Send to me in the morning, and I'll send it;
    And so, good rest.

  PROTEUS.

                                       Exeunt PROTEUS and SILVIA
  JULIA.
 Marry, at my house.

  JULIA.
           Exeunt




SCENE III.

    Madam, madam!

             Enter SILVIA above, at her window

  SILVIA.
 Your servant and your friend;
    One that attends your ladyship's command.
 Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morrow!
  EGLAMOUR.

    Thou art not ignorant what dear good will
    I bear unto the banish'd Valentine;
    Nor how my father would enforce me marry
    Vain Thurio, whom my very soul abhors.

    Thyself hast lov'd; and I have heard thee say
    No grief did ever come so near thy heart
    As when thy lady and thy true love died,
    Upon whose grave thou vow'dst pure chastity.

    Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine,
    To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode;
    And, for the ways are dangerous to pass,
    I do desire thy worthy company,
    Upon whose faith and honour I repose.

    Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour,
    But think upon my grief, a lady's grief,
    And on the justice of my flying hence
    To keep me from a most unholy match,
    Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues.

    I do desire thee, even from a heart  
    As full of sorrows as the sea of sands,
    To bear me company and go with me;
    If not, to hide what I have said to thee,
    That I may venture to depart alone.

  EGLAMOUR.

    When will you go?
  SILVIA.
 Where shall I meet you?
  SILVIA.
 At Friar Patrick's cell,
    Where I intend holy confession.
 I will not fail your ladyship.
 Good morrow, gentle lady.

  SILVIA.
 Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.
                 Exeunt




SCENE IV.
 When a man's servant shall play the cur with him, look you,
    it goes hard- one that I brought up of a puppy; one that I sav'd
    from drowning, when three or four of his blind brothers and
    sisters went to it.
 O, 'tis a foul thing when a cur
    cannot keep himself in all companies! I would have, as one should
    say, one that takes upon him to be a dog indeed, to be, as it
    were, a dog at all things.

    'Friend,' quoth I 'you mean to whip the dog.
 'You do him the more wrong,' quoth I; "twas I did the
    thing you wot of.
 How many masters would do this for his servant? Nay,
    I'll be sworn, I have sat in the stock for puddings he hath
    stol'n, otherwise he had been executed; I have stood on the
    pillory for geese he hath kill'd, otherwise he had suffer'd
    for't.
 Thou think'st not of this now.
 Nay, I remember the trick
    you serv'd me when I took my leave of Madam Silvia.
  
  JULIA.
 In what you please; I'll do what I can.

  PROTEUS.
I hope thou wilt.
 Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you bade me.

  PROTEUS.
 Marry, she says your dog was a cur, and tells you currish
    thanks is good enough for such a present.

  PROTEUS.
 What, didst thou offer her this from me?
  LAUNCE.
 Ay, sir; the other squirrel was stol'n from me by the
    hangman's boys in the market-place; and then I offer'd her mine
    own, who is a dog as big as ten of yours, and therefore the gift
    the greater.

  PROTEUS.
 Go, get thee hence and find my dog again,
    Or ne'er return again into my sight.
 It seems you lov'd not her, to leave her token.

    She is dead, belike?
  PROTEUS.
 Why dost thou cry 'Alas'?
  JULIA.
 I cannot choose
    But pity her.

  PROTEUS.
 Because methinks that she lov'd you as well  
    As you do love your lady Silvia.

    She dreams on him that has forgot her love:
    You dote on her that cares not for your love.
 That's her chamber.

    Your message done, hie home unto my chamber,
    Where thou shalt find me sad and solitary.
      Exit PROTEUS
  JULIA.
 How many women would do such a message?
    Alas, poor Proteus, thou hast entertain'd
    A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.

    This ring I gave him, when he parted from me,
    To bind him to remember my good will;
    And now am I, unhappy messenger,  
    To plead for that which I would not obtain,
    To carry that which I would have refus'd,
    To praise his faith, which I would have disprais'd.

  SILVIA.
 What would you with her, if that I be she?
  JULIA.
 From whom?
  JULIA.
 From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.
 O, he sends you for a picture?
  JULIA.
 Ay, madam.
  
  SILVIA.
 Ursula, bring my picture there.
 Tell him from me,
    One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget,
    Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.

  JULIA.
 It may not be; good madam, pardon me.

    I know they are stuff'd with protestations,
    And full of new-found oaths, which he wul break
    As easily as I do tear his paper.

  JULIA.
 She thanks you.

  SILVIA.
 I thank you, madam, that you tender her.

    Poor gentlewoman, my master wrongs her much.

  SILVIA.

    To think upon her woes, I do protest
    That I have wept a hundred several times.

  SILVIA.
 Belike she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her.

  JULIA.

  SILVIA.
 She hath been fairer, madam, than she is.

    When she did think my master lov'd her well,
    She, in my judgment, was as fair as you;
    But since she did neglect her looking-glass
    And threw her sun-expelling mask away,
    The air hath starv'd the roses in her cheeks
    And pinch'd the lily-tincture of her face,
    That now she is become as black as I.
  
  SILVIA.
 How tall was she?
  JULIA.
 About my stature; for at Pentecost,
    When all our pageants of delight were play'd,
    Our youth got me to play the woman's part,
    And I was trimm'd in Madam Julia's gown;
    Which served me as fit, by all men's judgments,
    As if the garment had been made for me;
    Therefore I know she is about my height.

    And at that time I made her weep a good,
    For I did play a lamentable part.

  SILVIA.

    Alas, poor lady, desolate and left!
    I weep myself, to think upon thy words.

    Farewell.

    A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful!
    I hope my master's suit will be but cold,
    Since she respects my mistress' love so much.

    Alas, how love can trifle with itself!
    Here is her picture; let me see.

    Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine;
    Ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high.
 O thou senseless form,
    Thou shalt be worshipp'd, kiss'd, lov'd, and ador'd!
    And were there sense in his idolatry
    My substance should be statue in thy stead.

    I'll use thee kindly for thy mistress' sake,
    That us'd me so; or else, by Jove I vow,
    I should have scratch'd out your unseeing eyes,
    To make my master out of love with thee.
                Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.

Milan.
 An abbey

Enter EGLAMOUR

  EGLAMOUR.
 The sun begins to gild the western sky,
    And now it is about the very hour
    That Silvia at Friar Patrick's cell should meet me.


                         Enter SILVIA

    See where she comes.
 Amen, amen! Go on, good Eglamour,
    Out at the postern by the abbey wall;
    I fear I am attended by some spies.
 Fear not.
 The forest is not three leagues off;
    If we recover that, we are sure enough.
               Exeunt




SCENE II.

Milan.
 The DUKE'S palace

Enter THURIO, PROTEUS, and JULIA as SEBASTIAN

  THURIO.
 What, that my leg is too long?
  PROTEUS.
 No; that it is too little.

  THURIO.
  [Aside]  But love will not be spurr'd to what it loathes.

  THURIO.
 What says she to my face?
  PROTEUS.

  THURIO.
 Nay, then, the wanton lies; my face is black.
 But pearls are fair; and the old saying is:
    Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.
  [Aside]  'Tis true, such pearls as put out ladies' eyes;
    For I had rather wink than look on them.

  THURIO.
 Ill, when you talk of war.
  [Aside]  But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.
 What says she to my valour?
  PROTEUS.
 O, sir, she makes no doubt of that.

  THURIO.
 What says she to my birth?
  PROTEUS.

  JULIA.
  [Aside]  True; from a gentleman to a fool.

  THURIO.
 Considers she my possessions?
  PROTEUS.
 O, ay; and pities them.

  THURIO.
 Wherefore?
  JULIA.
  [Aside]  That such an ass should owe them.

  PROTEUS.
 That they are out by lease.

  JULIA.
 Here comes the Duke.


                          Enter DUKE

  DUKE.
 How now, Sir Proteus! how now, Thurio!
    Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of late?
  THURIO.
 Not I.

  PROTEUS.
 Nor I.
  
  DUKE.

    'Tis true; for Friar Lawrence met them both
    As he in penance wander'd through the forest;
    Him he knew well, and guess'd that it was she,
    But, being mask'd, he was not sure of it;
    Besides, she did intend confession
    At Patrick's cell this even; and there she was not.
 And I will follow, more for Silvia's love
    Than hate of Eglamour, that goes with her.
              Exit
  JULIA.
            Exit




SCENE III.

The frontiers of Mantua.
 The forest

Enter OUTLAWS with SILVA

  FIRST OUTLAW.

    Be patient; we must bring you to our captain.
 A thousand more mischances than this one
    Have learn'd me how to brook this patiently.

  SECOND OUTLAW.
 Come, bring her away.
 Where is the gentleman that was with her?
  SECOND OUTLAW.

    Go thou with her to the west end of the wood;
    There is our captain; we'll follow him that's fled.

    The thicket is beset; he cannot 'scape.
 Come, I must bring you to our captain's cave;
    Fear not; he bears an honourable mind,
    And will not use a woman lawlessly.
 O Valentine, this I endure for thee!            Exeunt




SCENE IV.
 How use doth breed a habit in a man!
    This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods,
    I better brook than flourishing peopled towns.

    Here can I sit alone, unseen of any,
    And to the nightingale's complaining notes
    Tune my distresses and record my woes.

    O thou that dost inhabit in my breast,
    Leave not the mansion so long tenantless,
    Lest, growing ruinous, the building fall
    And leave no memory of what it was!
    Repair me with thy presence, Silvia:
    Thou gentle nymph, cherish thy forlorn swain.
  
    Withdraw thee, Valentine.
 Who's this comes here?
                                                   [Steps aside]

          Enter PROTEUS, SILVIA, and JULIA as Sebastian

  PROTEUS.
 Madam, this service I have done for you,
    Though you respect not aught your servant doth,
    To hazard life, and rescue you from him
    That would have forc'd your honour and your love.

    Vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look;
    A smaller boon than this I cannot beg,
    And less than this, I am sure, you cannot give.

  SILVIA.

  JULIA.

  SILVIA.
 Had I been seized by a hungry lion,  
    I would have been a breakfast to the beast
    Rather than have false Proteus rescue me.

    O, heaven be judge how I love Valentine,
    Whose life's as tender to me as my soul!
    And full as much, for more there cannot be,
    I do detest false, perjur'd Proteus.

    Therefore be gone; solicit me no more.
 When Proteus cannot love where he's belov'd!
    Read over Julia's heart, thy first best love,
    For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith
    Into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths
    Descended into perjury, to love me.
 All men but Proteus.
 Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words
    Can no way change you to a milder form,
    I'll woo you like a soldier, at arms' end,
    And love you 'gainst the nature of love- force ye.
 I'll force thee yield to my desire.
 Ruffian! let go that rude uncivil touch;
    Thou friend of an ill fashion!
  PROTEUS.
 Thou common friend, that's without faith or love-
    For such is a friend now; treacherous man,
    Thou hast beguil'd my hopes; nought but mine eye
    Could have persuaded me.
 Now I dare not say
    I have one friend alive: thou wouldst disprove me.

    The private wound is deepest.
 O time most accurst!
    'Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!
  PROTEUS.
 My shame and guilt confounds me.

    Forgive me, Valentine; if hearty sorrow
    Be a sufficient ransom for offence,
    I tender 't here; I do as truly suffer
    As e'er I did commit.
 Then I am paid;
    And once again I do receive thee honest.

    Who by repentance is not satisfied
    Is nor of heaven nor earth, for these are pleas'd;
    By penitence th' Eternal's wrath's appeas'd.

  JULIA.
 Look to the boy.

  VALENTINE.
 Why, boy! why, wag! how now!
    What's the matter? Look up; speak.

  JULIA.

  PROTEUS.
 Where is that ring, boy?
  JULIA.
 Here 'tis; this is it.

  PROTEUS.
 How! let me see.
 Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.
 O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook;
    This is the ring you sent to Silvia.

  PROTEUS.

  JULIA.
 And Julia herself did give it me;
    And Julia herself have brought it hither.

  PROTEUS.
 Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths,
    And entertain'd 'em deeply in her heart.
 Come, come, a hand from either.

  PROTEUS.
 Bear witness, heaven, I have my wish for ever.
 And I mine.


                Enter OUTLAWS, with DUKE and THURIO

  OUTLAW.
 Forbear, forbear, I say; it is my lord the Duke.

    Your Grace is welcome to a man disgrac'd,
    Banished Valentine.
 Sir Valentine!
  THURIO.
 Yonder is Silvia; and Silvia's mine.
 Thurio, give back, or else embrace thy death;
    Come not within the measure of my wrath;
    Do not name Silvia thine; if once again,
    Verona shall not hold thee.

  THURIO.
 Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I;
    I hold him but a fool that will endanger
    His body for a girl that loves him not.

    Now, by the honour of my ancestry,
    I do applaud thy spirit, Valentine,
    And think thee worthy of an empress' love.

    Know then, I here forget all former griefs,
    Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again,
    Plead a new state in thy unrivall'd merit,
    To which I thus subscribe: Sir Valentine,  
    Thou art a gentleman, and well deriv'd;
    Take thou thy Silvia, for thou hast deserv'd her.
 I thank your Grace; the gift hath made me happy.

  DUKE.
 I grant it for thine own, whate'er it be.
 These banish'd men, that I have kept withal,
    Are men endu'd with worthy qualities;
    Forgive them what they have committed here,
    And let them be recall'd from their exile:
    They are reformed, civil, full of good,
    And fit for great employment, worthy lord.

  DUKE.

    Come, let us go; we will include all jars
    With triumphs, mirth, and rare solemnity.

    What think you of this page, my lord?
  DUKE.
 I think the boy hath grace in him; he blushes.
  
  VALENTINE.

  DUKE.
 What mean you by that saying?
  VALENTINE.
 Please you, I'll tell you as we pass along,
    That you will wonder what hath fortuned.

    That done, our day of marriage shall be yours;
    One feast, one house, one mutual happiness!     Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>





1611

THE WINTER'S TALE

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  LEONTES, King of Sicilia
  MAMILLIUS, his son, the young Prince of Sicilia
  CAMILLO,    lord of Sicilia
  ANTIGONUS,    "   "     "
  CLEOMENES,    "   "     "
  DION,         "   "     "
  POLIXENES, King of Bohemia
  FLORIZEL, his son, Prince of Bohemia
  ARCHIDAMUS, a lord of Bohemia
  OLD SHEPHERD, reputed father of Perdita
  CLOWN, his son
  AUTOLYCUS, a rogue
  A MARINER
  A GAOLER
  TIME, as Chorus

  HERMIONE, Queen to Leontes
  PERDITA, daughter to Leontes and Hermione
  PAULINA, wife to Antigonus
  EMILIA, a lady attending on the Queen  
  MOPSA,   shepherdess
  DORCAS,        "

  Other Lords, Gentlemen, Ladies, Officers, Servants, Shepherds,
    Shepherdesses

                              SCENE:
                       Sicilia and Bohemia




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT I.
 SCENE I.

Sicilia.
 If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on the
    like occasion whereon my services are now on foot, you shall see,
    as I have said, great difference betwixt our Bohemia and your
    Sicilia.
 We will give you sleepy drinks, that your senses,
    unintelligent of our insufficience, may, though they cannot
    praise us, as little accuse us.
 You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.

  ARCHIDAMUS.
  
  CAMILLO.
 Sicilia cannot show himself overkind to Bohemia.
 They were
    train'd together in their childhoods; and there rooted betwixt
    them then such an affection which cannot choose but branch now.
 The heavens continue their
    loves!
  ARCHIDAMUS.
 You have an unspeakable comfort of your young
    Prince Mamillius; it is a gentleman of the greatest promise that
    ever came into my note.
 It is a
    gallant child; one that indeed physics the subject, makes old
    hearts fresh; they that went on crutches ere he was born desire
    yet their life to see him a man.

  ARCHIDAMUS.
 Would they else be content to die?
  CAMILLO.
 Yes; if there were no other excuse why they should desire  
    to live.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE II.

Sicilia.
 Time as long again
    Would be fill'd up, my brother, with our thanks;
    And yet we should for perpetuity
    Go hence in debt.
 And therefore, like a cipher,
    Yet standing in rich place, I multiply
    With one 'We thank you' many thousands moe
    That go before it.

  LEONTES.
 Stay your thanks a while,
    And pay them when you part.
 Sir, that's to-morrow.

    I am question'd by my fears of what may chance
    Or breed upon our absence, that may blow
    No sneaping winds at home, to make us say
    'This is put forth too truly.
' Besides, I have stay'd  
    To tire your royalty.

  LEONTES.
 We are tougher, brother,
    Than you can put us to't.

  LEONTES.
 One sev'night longer.

  LEONTES.
 Press me not, beseech you, so.

    There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' th' world,
    So soon as yours could win me.
 So it should now,
    Were there necessity in your request, although
    'Twere needful I denied it.
 To save both,
    Farewell, our brother.
 Say this to him,
    He's beat from his best ward.

  HERMIONE.
 To tell he longs to see his son were strong;
    But let him say so then, and let him go;
    But let him swear so, and he shall not stay;
    We'll thwack him hence with distaffs.

    [To POLIXENES]  Yet of your royal presence I'll
    adventure the borrow of a week.
 When at Bohemia
    You take my lord, I'll give him my commission
    To let him there a month behind the gest
    Prefix'd for's parting.
 No, madam.

  HERMIONE.
 I may not, verily.
 Verily!  
    You put me off with limber vows; but I,
    Though you would seek t' unsphere the stars with oaths,
    Should yet say 'Sir, no going.
 Will go yet?
    Force me to keep you as a prisoner,
    Not like a guest; so you shall pay your fees
    When you depart, and save your thanks.
 How say you?
    My prisoner or my guest? By your dread 'verily,'
    One of them you shall be.

  HERMIONE.
 Not your gaoler then,
    But your kind.
 Come, I'll question you
    Of my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys.

    You were pretty lordings then!
  POLIXENES.

  HERMIONE.

  POLIXENES.
 O my most sacred lady,
    Temptations have since then been born to 's, for
    In those unfledg'd days was my wife a girl;
    Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes
    Of my young playfellow.
  
  HERMIONE.
 Is he won yet?
  HERMIONE.

  LEONTES.

    Hermione, my dearest, thou never spok'st
    To better purpose.

  HERMIONE.
 Never?
  LEONTES.
 Never but once.

  HERMIONE.
 What! Have I twice said well? When was't before?
    I prithee tell me; cram's with praise, and make's
    As fat as tame things.
 O, would her name were Grace!
    But once before I spoke to th' purpose- When?
    Nay, let me have't; I long.

    Why, lo you now, I have spoke to th' purpose twice:
    The one for ever earn'd a royal husband;
    Th' other for some while a friend.

                                  [Giving her hand to POLIXENES]
  LEONTES.
 This entertainment  
    May a free face put on; derive a liberty
    From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom,
    And well become the agent.
 O, that is entertainment
    My bosom likes not, nor my brows! Mamillius,
    Art thou my boy?
  MAMILLIUS.
 I' fecks!
    Why, that's my bawcock.

    And yet the steer, the heifer, and the calf,
    Are all call'd neat.
- Still virginalling
    Upon his palm?- How now, you wanton calf,
    Art thou my calf?
  MAMILLIUS.
 Yes, if you will, my lord.
 Come, sir page,
    Look on me with your welkin eye.
 Sweet villain!
    Most dear'st! my collop! Can thy dam?- may't be?
    Affection! thy intention stabs the centre.
 What means Sicilia?
  HERMIONE.
  
  POLIXENES.

    Are you mov'd, my lord?
  LEONTES.
 No, in good earnest.

    How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
    This squash, this gentleman.
 No, my lord, I'll fight.
 You will? Why, happy man be's dole! My brother,
    Are you so fond of your young prince as we  
    Do seem to be of ours?
  POLIXENES.
 If at home, sir,
    He's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter;
    Now my sworn friend, and then mine enemy;
    My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all.

    He makes a July's day short as December,
    And with his varying childness cures in me
    Thoughts that would thick my blood.
 So stands this squire
    Offic'd with me.
 We two will walk, my lord,
    And leave you to your graver steps.
 Hermione,
    How thou lov'st us show in our brother's welcome;
    Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap;
    Next to thyself and my young rover, he's
    Apparent to my heart.
 Shall's attend you there?
  LEONTES.
  
    Go to, go to!
    How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!
    And arms her with the boldness of a wife
    To her allowing husband!

                      Exeunt POLIXENES, HERMIONE, and ATTENDANTS

    Gone already!
    Inch-thick, knee-deep, o'er head and ears a fork'd one!
    Go, play, boy, play; thy mother plays, and I
    Play too; but so disgrac'd a part, whose issue
    Will hiss me to my grave.
 Contempt and clamour
    Will be my knell.
 Go, play, boy, play.
 There have been,
    Or I am much deceiv'd, cuckolds ere now;
    And many a man there is, even at this present,
    Now while I speak this, holds his wife by th' arm
    That little thinks she has been sluic'd in's absence,
    And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by
    Sir Smile, his neighbour.
 Nay, there's comfort in't,
    Whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd,  
    As mine, against their will.
 Physic for't there's none;
    It is a bawdy planet, that will strike
    Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis pow'rfull, think it,
    From east, west, north, and south.
 Know't,
    It will let in and out the enemy
    With bag and baggage.

  LEONTES.

    What! Camillo there?
  CAMILLO.
 Ay, my good lord.

  LEONTES.
 Go play, Mamillius; thou'rt an honest man.

                                                  Exit MAMILLIUS
    Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.

  CAMILLO.
 You had much ado to make his anchor hold;
    When you cast out, it still came home.

  LEONTES.
 He would not stay at your petitions; made
    His business more material.
 Didst perceive it?
    [Aside]  They're here with me already; whisp'ring, rounding,
    'Sicilia is a so-forth.
- How came't, Camillo,
    That he did stay?
  CAMILLO.

  LEONTES.
 'At the Queen's' be't.
 'Good' should be pertinent;
    But so it is, it is not.

  CAMILLO.

  LEONTES.
 Ha?
  CAMILLO.
 Stays here longer.
  
  LEONTES.
 To satisfy your Highness, and the entreaties
    Of our most gracious mistress.

  LEONTES.
 I have trusted thee, Camillo,
    With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
    My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou
    Hast cleans'd my bosom- I from thee departed
    Thy penitent reform'd; but we have been
    Deceiv'd in thy integrity, deceiv'd
    In that which seems so.

  CAMILLO.
 Be it forbid, my lord!
  LEONTES.
 To bide upon't: thou art not honest; or,
    If thou inclin'st that way, thou art a coward,
    Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
    From course requir'd; or else thou must be counted
    A servant grafted in my serious trust,
    And therein negligent; or else a fool
    That seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn,  
    And tak'st it all for jest.
 In your affairs, my lord,
    If ever I were wilfull-negligent,
    It was my folly; if industriously
    I play'd the fool, it was my negligence,
    Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
    To do a thing where I the issue doubted,
    Whereof the execution did cry out
    Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear
    Which oft infects the wisest.
 But, beseech your Grace,
    Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass
    By its own visage; if I then deny it,
    'Tis none of mine.
  
  LEONTES.
 Ha' not you seen, Camillo-
    But that's past doubt; you have, or your eye-glass
    Is thicker than a cuckold's horn- or heard-
    For to a vision so apparent rumour
    Cannot be mute- or thought- for cogitation
    Resides not in that man that does not think-
    My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess-
    Or else be impudently negative,
    To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought- then say
    My wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name
    As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
    Before her troth-plight.
 Say't and justify't.

  CAMILLO.
 I would not be a stander-by to hear
    My sovereign mistress clouded so, without
    My present vengeance taken.
 Shrew my heart!
    You never spoke what did become you less
    Than this; which to reiterate were sin
    As deep as that, though true.
 Is whispering nothing?
    Is leaning cheek to cheek? Is meeting noses?  
    Kissing with inside lip? Stopping the career
    Of laughter with a sigh?- a note infallible
    Of breaking honesty.
 Horsing foot on foot?
    Skulking in corners? Wishing clocks more swift;
    Hours, minutes; noon, midnight? And all eyes
    Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
    That would unseen be wicked- is this nothing?
    Why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing;
    The covering sky is nothing; Bohemia nothing;
    My is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings,
    If this be nothing.
 Good my lord, be cur'd
    Of this diseas'd opinion, and betimes;
    For 'tis most dangerous.

  LEONTES.

  CAMILLO.
 It is; you lie, you lie.
 Were my wife's liver
    Infected as her life, she would not live
    The running of one glass.

  CAMILLO.
 Who does her?
  LEONTES.
 Why, he that wears her like her medal, hanging
    About his neck, Bohemia; who- if I
    Had servants true about me that bare eyes
    To see alike mine honour as their profits,
    Their own particular thrifts, they would do that
    Which should undo more doing.

  CAMILLO.
 Sir, my lord,
    I could do this; and that with no rash potion,
    But with a ling'ring dram that should not work  
    Maliciously like poison.

    I have lov'd thee-
  LEONTES.
 Make that thy question, and go rot!
    Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
    To appoint myself in this vexation; sully
    The purity and whiteness of my sheets-
    Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
    Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps;
    Give scandal to the blood o' th' Prince, my son-
    Who I do think is mine, and love as mine-
    Without ripe moving to 't? Would I do this?
    Could man so blench?
  CAMILLO.
 I must believe you, sir.
 Thou dost advise me
    Even so as I mine own course have set down.

    I'll give no blemish to her honour, none.
 My lord,
    Go then; and with a countenance as clear
    As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
    And with your queen.
 This is all:
    Do't, and thou hast the one half of my heart;
    Do't not, thou split'st thine own.

  CAMILLO.
 I'll do't, my lord.

  LEONTES.
 I will seem friendly, as thou hast advis'd me.
   Exit
  CAMILLO.
 O miserable lady! But, for me,
    What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
    Of good Polixenes; and my ground to do't
    Is the obedience to a master; one
    Who, in rebellion with himself, will have  
    All that are his so too.
 If I could find example
    Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
    And flourish'd after, I'd not do't; but since
    Nor brass, nor stone, nor parchment, bears not one,
    Let villainy itself forswear't.
 I must
    Forsake the court.
 To do't, or no, is certain
    To me a break-neck.
 This is strange.

  CAMILLO.
 Hail, most royal sir!
  POLIXENES.
 What is the news i' th' court?
  CAMILLO.
 None rare, my lord.
 The King hath on him such a countenance
    As he had lost some province, and a region  
    Lov'd as he loves himself; even now I met him
    With customary compliment, when he,
    Wafting his eyes to th' contrary and falling
    A lip of much contempt, speeds from me;
    So leaves me to consider what is breeding
    That changes thus his manners.
 I dare not know, my lord.

  POLIXENES.
 How, dare not! Do not.
 Good Camillo,
    Your chang'd complexions are to me a mirror
    Which shows me mine chang'd too; for I must be
    A party in this alteration, finding
    Myself thus alter'd with't.

  CAMILLO.
 There is a sickness
    Which puts some of us in distemper; but
    I cannot name the disease; and it is caught
    Of you that yet are well.
 How! caught of me?  
    Make me not sighted like the basilisk;
    I have look'd on thousands who have sped the better
    By my regard, but kill'd none so.
 Camillo-
    As you are certainly a gentleman; thereto
    Clerk-like experienc'd, which no less adorns
    Our gentry than our parents' noble names,
    In whose success we are gentle- I beseech you,
    If you know aught which does behove my knowledge
    Thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not
    In ignorant concealment.

  CAMILLO.

  POLIXENES.
 Dost thou hear, Camillo?
    I conjure thee, by all the parts of man
    Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least
    Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
    What incidency thou dost guess of harm
    Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near;
    Which way to be prevented, if to be;
    If not, how best to bear it.
  
  CAMILLO.
 Sir, I will tell you;
    Since I am charg'd in honour, and by him
    That I think honourable.

  POLIXENES.
 On, good Camillo.
 I am appointed him to murder you.
 By whom, Camillo?
  CAMILLO.

  POLIXENES.
 He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,
    As he had seen 't or been an instrument
    To vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queen
    Forbiddenly.

  POLIXENES.
 Swear his thought over
    By each particular star in heaven and
    By all their influences, you may as well
    Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
    As or by oath remove or counsel shake
    The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
    Is pil'd upon his faith and will continue
    The standing of his body.

  POLIXENES.
 How should this grow?
  CAMILLO.
 Be not uncertain,
    For, by the honour of my parents, I
    Have utt'red truth; which if you seek to prove,
    I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer
    Than one condemn'd by the King's own mouth, thereon
    His execution sworn.
 I do believe thee:
    I saw his heart in's face.
 My ships are ready, and
    My people did expect my hence departure
    Two days ago.
 This jealousy
    Is for a precious creature; as she's rare,
    Must it be great; and, as his person's mighty,
    Must it be violent; and as he does conceive
    He is dishonour'd by a man which ever
    Profess'd to him, why, his revenges must
    In that be made more bitter.
 Fear o'ershades me.

    Good expedition be my friend, and comfort  
    The gracious Queen, part of this theme, but nothing
    Of his ill-ta'en suspicion! Come, Camillo;
    I will respect thee as a father, if
    Thou bear'st my life off hence.
 Let us avoid.

  CAMILLO.
 Come, sir, away.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT II.

Sicilia.
 Take the boy to you; he so troubles me,
    'Tis past enduring.

  FIRST LADY.

  FIRST LADY.
 I love you better.
 And why so, my lord?
  MAMILLIUS.
 Not for because
    Your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,
    Become some women best; so that there be not
    Too much hair there, but in a semicircle
    Or a half-moon made with a pen.

  SECOND LADY.
 I learn'd it out of women's faces.

  FIRST LADY.

  SECOND LADY.
 She is spread of late
    Into a goodly bulk.
 Good time encounter her!
  HERMIONE.
 What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now
    I am for you again.

  MAMILLIUS.
 As merry as you will.

  MAMILLIUS.
 A sad tale's best for winter.
 I have one
    Of sprites and goblins.

  HERMIONE.
  
  MAMILLIUS.
 There was a man-
  HERMIONE.
 Nay, come, sit down; then on.

  MAMILLIUS.
 Dwelt by a churchyard- I will tell it softly;
    Yond crickets shall not hear it.

  HERMIONE.


             Enter LEONTES, ANTIGONUS, LORDS, and OTHERS

  LEONTES.
 Behind the tuft of pines I met them; never
    Saw I men scour so on their way.
 I ey'd them
    Even to their ships.

  LEONTES.
 How blest am I
    In my just censure, in my true opinion!
    Alack, for lesser knowledge! How accurs'd
    In being so blest! There may be in the cup
    A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart,
    And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge
    Is not infected; but if one present  
    Th' abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known
    How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
    With violent hefts.

    There is a plot against my life, my crown;
    All's true that is mistrusted.
 That false villain
    Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him;
    He has discover'd my design, and I
    Remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick
    For them to play at will.
 How came the posterns
    So easily open?
  FIRST LORD.

  LEONTES.
 I know't too well.

    Give me the boy.
 I am glad you did not nurse him;
    Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
    Have too much blood in him.
 What is this? Sport?
  LEONTES.
 Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her;  
    Away with him; and let her sport herself
                                          [MAMILLIUS is led out]
    With that she's big with- for 'tis Polixenes
    Has made thee swell thus.

  HERMIONE.
 But I'd say he had not,
    And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,
    Howe'er you lean to th' nayward.
'
    Praise her but for this her without-door form,
    Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight
    The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands
    That calumny doth use- O, I am out!-
    That mercy does, for calumny will sear
    Virtue itself- these shrugs, these hum's and ha's,
    When you have said she's goodly, come between,
    Ere you can say she's honest.
 But be't known,  
    From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,
    She's an adultress.

  LEONTES.
 I have said
    She's an adultress; I have said with whom.

    More, she's a traitor; and Camillo is
    A federary with her, and one that knows
    What she should shame to know herself
    But with her most vile principal- that she's
    A bed-swerver, even as bad as those
    That vulgars give bold'st titles; ay, and privy  
    To this their late escape.
 No, by my life,
    Privy to none of this.
 No; if I mistake
    In those foundations which I build upon,
    The centre is not big enough to bear
    A school-boy's top.

    He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty
    But that he speaks.

  HERMIONE.
 Good my lords,
    I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
    Commonly are- the want of which vain dew
    Perchance shall dry your pities- but I have
    That honourable grief lodg'd here which burns  
    Worse than tears drown.
  [To the GUARD]  Shall I be heard?
  HERMIONE.
 Do not weep, good fools;
    There is no cause; when you shall know your mistress
    Has deserv'd prison, then abound in tears
    As I come out: this action I now go on
    Is for my better grace.
 Adieu, my lord.

    I never wish'd to see you sorry; now
    I trust I shall.
 Go, do our bidding; hence!
                            Exeunt HERMIONE, guarded, and LADIES
  FIRST LORD.
 Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
    Prove violence, in the which three great ones suffer,
    Yourself, your queen, your son.
  
  FIRST LORD.

  LEONTES.
 Hold your peaces.
 Good my lord-
  ANTIGONUS.
 It is for you we speak, not for ourselves.

    You are abus'd, and by some putter-on
    That will be damn'd for't.
 Would I knew the villain!
    I would land-damn him.
 Be she honour-flaw'd-
    I have three daughters: the eldest is eleven;
    The second and the third, nine and some five;  
    If this prove true, they'll pay for 't.

  LEONTES.
 Cease; no more.

    You smell this business with a sense as cold
    As is a dead man's nose; but I do see't and feel't
    As you feel doing thus; and see withal
    The instruments that feel.

  ANTIGONUS.

  LEONTES.
 Why, what need we  
    Commune with you of this, but rather follow
    Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
    Calls not your counsels; but our natural goodness
    Imparts this; which, if you- or stupified
    Or seeming so in skill- cannot or will not
    Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves
    We need no more of your advice.
 The matter,
    The loss, the gain, the ord'ring on't, is all
    Properly ours.
 And I wish, my liege,
    You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
    Without more overture.

  LEONTES.
 Camillo's flight,
    Added to their familiarity-
    Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture,
    That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation
    But only seeing, all other circumstances
    Made up to th' deed- doth push on this proceeding.
  
    Yet, for a greater confirmation-
    For, in an act of this importance, 'twere
    Most piteous to be wild- I have dispatch'd in post
    To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,
    Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know
    Of stuff'd sufficiency.
 Have I done well?
  FIRST LORD.
 Well done, my lord.

  LEONTES.
 Though I am satisfied, and need no more
    Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
    Give rest to th' minds of others such as he
    Whose ignorant credulity will not
    Come up to th' truth.
 So have we thought it good
    From our free person she should be confin'd,
    Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
    Be left her to perform.
 Come, follow us;
    We are to speak in public; for this business
    Will raise us all.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE II.
 The keeper of the prison- call to him;
    Let him have knowledge who I am.
              Exit GENTLEMAN
    Good lady!
    No court in Europe is too good for thee;
    What dost thou then in prison?

                 Re-enter GENTLEMAN with the GAOLER

    Now, good sir,
    You know me, do you not?
  GAOLER.

  PAULINA.
 I may not, madam;
    To the contrary I have express commandment.

  PAULINA.
 I pray now, call her.

  PAULINA.
 Well, be't so, prithee.
                   Exit GAOLER
    Here's such ado to make no stain a stain
    As passes colouring.


                 Re-enter GAOLER, with EMILIA

    Dear gentlewoman,
    How fares our gracious lady?
  EMILIA.

  PAULINA.
 A boy?
  EMILIA.

    These dangerous unsafe lunes i' th' King, beshrew them!
    He must be told on't, and he shall.
  
  EMILIA.
 Most worthy madam,
    Your honour and your goodness is so evident
    That your free undertaking cannot miss
    A thriving issue; there is no lady living
    So meet for this great errand.

  PAULINA.
 Tell her, Emilia,
    I'll use that tongue I have; if wit flow from't
    As boldness from my bosom, let't not be doubted
    I shall do good.
 Now be you blest for it!
    I'll to the Queen.
 Please you come something nearer.
  
    This child was prisoner to the womb, and is
    By law and process of great Nature thence
    Freed and enfranchis'd- not a party to
    The anger of the King, nor guilty of,
    If any be, the trespass of the Queen.

  GAOLER.

  PAULINA.
 Do not you fear.
 Upon mine honour, I
    Will stand betwixt you and danger.
                    Exeunt




SCENE III.

Sicilia.
 The palace of LEONTES

Enter LEONTES, ANTIGONUS, LORDS, and SERVANTS

  LEONTES.
 Nor night nor day no rest! It is but weakness
    To bear the matter thus- mere weakness.
 Who's there?
  FIRST SERVANT.
 My lord?
  LEONTES.
 Go,
    See how he fares.
 Let him be,
    Until a time may serve; for present vengeance,
    Take it on her.
 Camillo and Polixenes
    Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow.

    They should not laugh if I could reach them; nor
    Shall she, within my pow'r.

  PAULINA.

    Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,
    Than the Queen's life? A gracious innocent soul,
    More free than he is jealous.
 That's enough.
 Madam, he hath not slept to-night; commanded
    None should come at him.
 'Tis such as you,
    That creep like shadows by him, and do sigh
    At each his needless heavings- such as you
    Nourish the cause of his awaking: I
    Do come with words as medicinal as true,
    Honest as either, to purge him of that humour
    That presses him from sleep.
 How!
    Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,
    I charg'd thee that she should not come about me;
    I knew she would.

  ANTIGONUS.
 I told her so, my lord,
    On your displeasure's peril, and on mine,
    She should not visit you.
  
  LEONTES.

  ANTIGONUS.
 La you now, you hear!
    When she will take the rein, I let her run;
    But she'll not stumble.

  PAULINA.
 Good my liege, I come-
    And I beseech you hear me, who professes
    Myself your loyal servant, your physician,
    Your most obedient counsellor; yet that dares
    Less appear so, in comforting your evils,
    Than such as most seem yours- I say I come
    From your good Queen.
 Good Queen, my lord, good Queen- I say good Queen;
    And would by combat make her good, so were I
    A man, the worst about you.
 Force her hence.
  
  PAULINA.
 Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
    First hand me.
 The good Queen,
    For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter;
    Here 'tis; commends it to your blessing.

                                         [Laying down the child]
  LEONTES.
 Out!
    A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o' door!
    A most intelligencing bawd!
  PAULINA.
 Not so.

  LEONTES.
 Traitors!
    Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard.

  PAULINA.
 For ever  
    Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou
    Tak'st up the Princess by that forced baseness
    Which he has put upon't!
  LEONTES.
 He dreads his wife.

  PAULINA.
 So I would you did; then 'twere past all doubt
    You'd call your children yours.
 I am none, by this good light.

  PAULINA.
 Nor I; nor any
    But one that's here; and that's himself; for he
    The sacred honour of himself, his Queen's,
    His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander,
    Whose sting is sharper than the sword's; and will not-
    For, as the case now stands, it is a curse
    He cannot be compell'd to 't- once remove
    The root of his opinion, which is rotten
    As ever oak or stone was sound.

  LEONTES.
 A callat
    Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband,
    And now baits me! This brat is none of mine;  
    It is the issue of Polixenes.

    Hence with it, and together with the dam
    Commit them to the fire.
 It is yours.

  ANTIGONUS.
 Hang all the husbands  
    That cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself
    Hardly one subject.

  LEONTES.
 Once more, take her hence.

  PAULINA.

  LEONTES.

  PAULINA.
 I care not.

    It is an heretic that makes the fire,
    Not she which burns in't.
 I'll not call you tyrant
    But this most cruel usage of your Queen-
    Not able to produce more accusation
    Than your own weak-hing'd fancy- something savours
    Of tyranny, and will ignoble make you,
    Yea, scandalous to the world.

  LEONTES.
 On your allegiance,
    Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
    Where were her life? She durst not call me so,
    If she did know me one.
 Away with her!
  PAULINA.
 I pray you, do not push me; I'll be gone.

    Look to your babe, my lord; 'tis yours.
 Jove send her  
    A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands?
    You that are thus so tender o'er his follies
    Will never do him good, not one of you.
 Farewell; we are gone.
 Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.

    My child! Away with't.
 Even thou, that hast
    A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence,
    And see it instantly consum'd with fire;
    Even thou, and none but thou.
 Take it up straight.
 If thou refuse,
    And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so;
    The bastard brains with these my proper hands
    Shall I dash out.

  ANTIGONUS.

    These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
    Can clear me in't.
 We can.
 My royal liege,  
    He is not guilty of her coming hither.

  LEONTES.
 You're liars all.

  FIRST LORD.

    Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel
    And call me father? Better burn it now
    Than curse it then.
 But be it; let it live.

    It shall not neither.
 Anything, my lord,  
    That my ability may undergo,
    And nobleness impose.
 At least, thus much:
    I'll pawn the little blood which I have left
    To save the innocent- anything possible.
 Swear by this sword
    Thou wilt perform my bidding.
 I will, my lord.

  LEONTES.
 Mark, and perform it- seest thou? For the fail
    Of any point in't shall not only be
    Death to thyself, but to thy lewd-tongu'd wife,
    Whom for this time we pardon.
 We enjoin thee,
    As thou art liegeman to us, that thou carry
    This female bastard hence; and that thou bear it
    To some remote and desert place, quite out
    Of our dominions; and that there thou leave it,
    Without more mercy, to it own protection
    And favour of the climate.
 As by strange fortune
    It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
    On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture,
    That thou commend it strangely to some place  
    Where chance may nurse or end it.

  ANTIGONUS.
 I swear to do this, though a present death
    Had been more merciful.
 Come on, poor babe.
 Sir, be prosperous
    In more than this deed does require! And blessing
    Against this cruelty fight on thy side,
    Poor thing, condemn'd to loss!           Exit with the child
  LEONTES.
 Please your Highness, posts
    From those you sent to th' oracle are come
    An hour since.
 Cleomenes and Dion,
    Being well arriv'd from Delphos, are both landed,
    Hasting to th' court.
  
  FIRST LORD.

  LEONTES.
 Twenty-three days
    They have been absent; 'tis good speed; foretells
    The great Apollo suddenly will have
    The truth of this appear.
 Leave me;
    And think upon my bidding.
                            Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT III.
 On the road to the Capital

Enter CLEOMENES and DION

  CLEOMENES.
 The climate's delicate, the air most sweet,
    Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
    The common praise it bears.

  DION.
 I shall report,
    For most it caught me, the celestial habits-
    Methinks I so should term them- and the reverence
    Of the grave wearers.
  
  CLEOMENES.
 The violent carriage of it
    Will clear or end the business.
 When the oracle-
    Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up-
    Shall the contents discover, something rare
    Even then will rush to knowledge.
 Go; fresh horses.

    And gracious be the issue!                            Exeunt




SCENE II.

Sicilia.
 A court of justice

Enter LEONTES, LORDS, and OFFICERS

  LEONTES.
 This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce,
    Even pushes 'gainst our heart- the party tried,
    The daughter of a king, our wife, and one
    Of us too much belov'd.
 It is his Highness' pleasure that the Queen
    Appear in person here in court.


         Enter HERMIONE, as to her trial, PAULINA, and LADIES

    Silence!
  LEONTES.
 Read the indictment.
 You, my lord, best know-
    Who least will seem to do so- my past life
    Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
    As I am now unhappy; which is more  
    Than history can pattern, though devis'd
    And play'd to take spectators; for behold me-
    A fellow of the royal bed, which owe
    A moiety of the throne, a great king's daughter,
    The mother to a hopeful prince- here standing
    To prate and talk for life and honour fore
    Who please to come and hear.
 For life, I prize it
    As I weigh grief, which I would spare; for honour,
    'Tis a derivative from me to mine,
    And only that I stand for.
 I appeal
    To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes
    Came to your court, how I was in your grace,
    How merited to be so; since he came,
    With what encounter so uncurrent I
    Have strain'd t' appear thus; if one jot beyond
    The bound of honour, or in act or will
    That way inclining, hard'ned be the hearts
    Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin
    Cry fie upon my grave!
  LEONTES.
 I ne'er heard yet  
    That any of these bolder vices wanted
    Less impudence to gainsay what they did
    Than to perform it first.

  HERMIONE.
 That's true enough;
    Though 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.

  LEONTES.
 You will not own it.

  HERMIONE.
 More than mistress of
    Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
    At all acknowledge.
 For Polixenes,
    With whom I am accus'd, I do confess
    I lov'd him as in honour he requir'd;
    With such a kind of love as might become
    A lady like me; with a love even such,
    So and no other, as yourself commanded;
    Which not to have done, I think had been in me
    Both disobedience and ingratitude
    To you and toward your friend; whose love had spoke,
    Ever since it could speak, from an infant, freely,
    That it was yours.

  LEONTES.
 You knew of his departure, as you know
    What you have underta'en to do in's absence.

    My life stands in the level of your dreams,
    Which I'll lay down.
 Your actions are my dreams.
 Sir, spare your threats.

    The crown and comfort of my life, your favour,
    I do give lost, for I do feel it gone,
    But know not how it went; my second joy
    And first fruits of my body, from his presence
    I am barr'd, like one infectious; my third comfort,
    Starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast-
    The innocent milk in it most innocent mouth-
    Hal'd out to murder; myself on every post
    Proclaim'd a strumpet; with immodest hatred
    The child-bed privilege denied, which 'longs
    To women of all fashion; lastly, hurried
    Here to this place, i' th' open air, before
    I have got strength of limit.
 Therefore proceed.

    But yet hear this- mistake me not: no life,
    I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour  
    Which I would free- if I shall be condemn'd
    Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else
    But what your jealousies awake, I tell you
    'Tis rigour, and not law.
 Your honours all,
    I do refer me to the oracle:
    Apollo be my judge!
  FIRST LORD.
 Therefore, bring forth,
    And in Apollo's name, his oracle.

                                         Exeunt certain OFFICERS
  HERMIONE.
 The Emperor of Russia was my father;
    O that he were alive, and here beholding
    His daughter's trial! that he did but see
    The flatness of my misery; yet with eyes
    Of pity, not revenge!

           Re-enter OFFICERS, with CLEOMENES and DION

  OFFICER.
 You here shall swear upon this sword of justice
    That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have  
    Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
    This seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd
    Of great Apollo's priest; and that since then
    You have not dar'd to break the holy seal
    Nor read the secrets in't.

  CLEOMENES, DION.
 All this we swear.

  OFFICER.
  [Reads]  'Hermione is chaste; Polixenes blameless;
    Camillo a true subject; Leontes a jealous tyrant; his innocent
    babe truly begotten; and the King shall live without an heir, if
    that which is lost be not found.
'
  LORDS.
 Now blessed be the great Apollo!
  HERMIONE.
 Hast thou read truth?
  OFFICER.
 Ay, my lord; even so
    As it is here set down.

  LEONTES.
 There is no truth at all i' th' oracle.

    The sessions shall proceed.


                        Enter a SERVANT  

  SERVANT.
 O sir, I shall be hated to report it:
    The Prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
    Of the Queen's speed, is gone.
 How! Gone?
  SERVANT.
 Is dead.
 Apollo's angry; and the heavens themselves
    Do strike at my injustice.
                 [HERMIONE swoons]
    How now, there!
  PAULINA.

  LEONTES.

    Her heart is but o'ercharg'd; she will recover.

                         Exeunt PAULINA and LADIES with HERMIONE
    Apollo, pardon  
    My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle.
 Woe the while!
    O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
    Break too!
  FIRST LORD.

    That thou betray'dst Polixenes, 'twas nothing;
    That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant,
    And damnable ingrateful.
 This is not, no,
    Laid to thy answer; but the last- O lords,
    When I have said, cry 'Woe!'- the Queen, the Queen,
    The sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead; and vengeance
    For't not dropp'd down yet.

  FIRST LORD.
 If word nor oath
    Prevail not, go and see.
 If you can bring
    Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye,
    Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you
    As I would do the gods.

  LEONTES.
 Go on, go on.

  FIRST LORD.
 Say no more;
    Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault
    I' th' boldness of your speech.

  PAULINA.

    All faults I make, when I shall come to know them.

    I do repent.
 Alas, I have show'd too much
    The rashness of a woman! He is touch'd
    To th' noble heart.
 Now, good my liege,
    Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman.

    The love I bore your queen- lo, fool again!
    I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children;
    I'll not remember you of my own lord,
    Who is lost too.
 Take your patience to you,
    And I'll say nothing.

  LEONTES.
 Thou didst speak but well
    When most the truth; which I receive much better
    Than to be pitied of thee.
 Prithee, bring me
    To the dead bodies of my queen and son.

    One grave shall be for both.
 Once a day I'll visit
    The chapel where they lie; and tears shed there
    Shall be my recreation.
 Come, and lead me
    To these sorrows.
                                     Exeunt




SCENE III.
 The sea-coast

Enter ANTIGONUS with the CHILD, and a MARINER

  ANTIGONUS.
 Thou art perfect then our ship hath touch'd upon
    The deserts of Bohemia?
  MARINER.
 In my conscience,
    The heavens with that we have in hand are angry
    And frown upon 's.
 I'll not be long before
    I call upon thee.

  MARINER.

  ANTIGONUS.

  MARINER.
 I am glad at heart  
    To be so rid o' th' business.
 Come, poor babe.
 I do believe
    Hermione hath suffer'd death, and that
    Apollo would, this being indeed the issue
    Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,
    Either for life or death, upon the earth
    Of its right father.
 Blossom, speed thee well!
                                         [Laying down the child]
    There lie, and there thy character; there these
                                          [Laying down a bundle]
    Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
    And still rest thine.
 The storm begins.
 Farewell!
    The day frowns more and more.
  [Noise of hunt within]  A savage
      clamour!
    Well may I get aboard! This is the chase;
    I am gone for ever.
                  Exit, pursued by a bear

                      Enter an old SHEPHERD

  SHEPHERD.
 I would there were no age between ten and three and
    twenty, or that youth would sleep out the rest; for there is
    nothing in the between but getting wenches with child, wronging
    the ancientry, stealing, fighting-  [Horns]  Hark you now! Would
    any but these boil'd brains of nineteen and two and twenty hunt
    this weather? They have scar'd away two of my best sheep, which I
    fear the wolf will sooner find than the master.
 Good luck, an't
    be thy will! What have we here?  [Taking up the child]  Mercy  
    on's, a barne! A very pretty barne.
 A boy or a child, I wonder? A
    pretty one; a very pretty one- sure, some scape.
 Though I am not
    bookish, yet I can read waiting-gentlewoman in the scape.
 This
    has been some stair-work, some trunk-work, some behind-door-work;
    they were warmer that got this than the poor thing is here.
 Hilloa, loa!
  SHEPHERD.
 What, art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talk on when
    thou art dead and rotten, come hither.
 What ail'st thou, man?
  CLOWN.
 I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land! But I am
    not to say it is a sea, for it is now the sky; betwixt the
    firmament and it you cannot thrust a bodkin's point.

  SHEPHERD.
 I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages, how it
    takes up the shore! But that's not to the point.
 O, the most
    piteous cry of the poor souls! Sometimes to see 'em, and not to  
    see 'em; now the ship boring the moon with her mainmast, and anon
    swallowed with yeast and froth, as you'd thrust a cork into a
    hogshead.
 And then for the land service- to see how the bear tore
    out his shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help, and said his
    name was Antigonus, a nobleman! But to make an end of the ship-
    to see how the sea flap-dragon'd it; but first, how the poor
    souls roared, and the sea mock'd them; and how the poor gentleman
    roared, and the bear mock'd him, both roaring louder than the sea
    or weather.

  SHEPHERD.
 Name of mercy, when was this, boy?
  CLOWN.
 I would you had been by the ship-side, to have help'd her;
    there your charity would have lack'd footing.
 Heavy matters, heavy matters! But look thee here, boy.

    Now bless thyself; thou met'st with things dying, I with things
    new-born.
 Here's a sight for thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for
    a squire's child! Look thee here; take up, take up, boy; open't.
 Gold! all gold!
  SHEPHERD.
 This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so.
 Up with't,
    keep it close.
 Let my sheep go.

    Come, good boy, the next way home.

  CLOWN.
 If there be any of him
    left, I'll bury it.
 That's a good deed.
 If thou mayest discern by that which
    is left of him what he is, fetch me to th' sight of him.

  CLOWN.
 'Tis a lucky day, boy; and we'll do good deeds on't.

                                                          Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT IV.
 Impute it not a crime
    To me or my swift passage that I slide
    O'er sixteen years, and leave the growth untried
    Of that wide gap, since it is in my pow'r
    To o'erthrow law, and in one self-born hour
    To plant and o'erwhelm custom.
 Let me pass
    The same I am, ere ancient'st order was
    Or what is now receiv'd.
 I witness to
    The times that brought them in; so shall I do
    To th' freshest things now reigning, and make stale
    The glistering of this present, as my tale
    Now seems to it.
 Your patience this allowing,
    I turn my glass, and give my scene such growing
    As you had slept between.
 Leontes leaving-
    Th' effects of his fond jealousies so grieving  
    That he shuts up himself- imagine me,
    Gentle spectators, that I now may be
    In fair Bohemia; and remember well
    I mention'd a son o' th' King's, which Florizel
    I now name to you; and with speed so pace
    To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
    Equal with wond'ring.
 A shepherd's daughter,
    And what to her adheres, which follows after,
    Is th' argument of Time.
 Of this allow,
    If ever you have spent time worse ere now;
    If never, yet that Time himself doth say
    He wishes earnestly you never may.

Bohemia.
 The palace of POLIXENES

Enter POLIXENES and CAMILLO

  POLIXENES.
 I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate: 'tis
    a sickness denying thee anything; a death to grant this.

  CAMILLO.
 It is fifteen years since I saw my country; though I have
    for the most part been aired abroad, I desire to lay my bones
    there.
 Besides, the penitent King, my master, hath sent for me;
    to whose feeling sorrows I might be some allay, or I o'erween to
    think so, which is another spur to my departure.

  POLIXENES.
 As thou lov'st me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of thy
    services by leaving me now.
 The need I have of thee thine own
    goodness hath made.
 Better not to have had thee than thus to want
    thee; thou, having made me businesses which none without thee can
    sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute them thyself, or
    take away with thee the very services thou hast done; which if I
    have not enough considered- as too much I cannot- to be more
    thankful to thee shall be my study; and my profit therein the
    heaping friendships.
 Of that fatal country Sicilia, prithee,
    speak no more; whose very naming punishes me with the remembrance  
    of that penitent, as thou call'st him, and reconciled king, my
    brother; whose loss of his most precious queen and children are
    even now to be afresh lamented.

  CAMILLO.

  POLIXENES.
 I have considered so much, Camillo, and with some care,
    so far that I have eyes under my service which look upon his
    removedness; from whom I have this intelligence, that he is
    seldom from the house of a most homely shepherd- a man, they say,
    that from very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his
    neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.
 I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a daughter of
    most rare note.
 That's likewise part of my intelligence; but, I fear, the  
    angle that plucks our son thither.
 Prithee be my
    present partner in this business, and lay aside the thoughts of
    Sicilia.

  CAMILLO.
 I willingly obey your command.

  POLIXENES.

                                                          Exeunt




SCENE III.

Bohemia.
 A road near the SHEPHERD'S cottage

Enter AUTOLYCUS, singing

      When daffodils begin to peer,
        With heigh! the doxy over the dale,
      Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year,
        For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale.


      The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
        With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing!
      Doth set my pugging tooth on edge,
        For a quart of ale is a dish for a king.


      If tinkers may have leave to live,
        And bear the sow-skin budget,
      Then my account I well may give
        And in the stocks avouch it.


    My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to lesser linen.

    My father nam'd me Autolycus; who, being, I as am, litter'd under
    Mercury, was likewise a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles.
 Gallows and knock are too powerful on the highway;
    beating and hanging are terrors to me; for the life to come, I
    sleep out the thought of it.
 A prize! a prize!

                            Enter CLOWN  

  CLOWN.
 Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every tod yields pound
    and odd shilling; fifteen hundred shorn, what comes the wool to?
  AUTOLYCUS.
  [Aside]  If the springe hold, the cock's mine.
 I cannot do 't without counters.
 Let me see: what am I to
    buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound of sugar, five
    pound of currants, rice- what will this sister of mine do with
    rice? But my father hath made her mistress of the feast, and she
    lays it on.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 I' th' name of me!
  AUTOLYCUS.
 Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to lay on  
    thee, rather than have these off.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 O sir, the loathsomeness of them offend me more than the
    stripes I have received, which are mighty ones and millions.

  CLOWN.
 Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a great
    matter.
 I am robb'd, sir, and beaten; my money and apparel ta'en
    from me, and these detestable things put upon me.
 What, by a horseman or a footman?
  AUTOLYCUS.
 A footman, sweet sir, a footman.

  CLOWN.
                                       [Helping him up]
  AUTOLYCUS.
 O, good sir, tenderly, O!
  CLOWN.
 Alas, poor soul!
  AUTOLYCUS.
 Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.
 I have a
    kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence, unto whom I was
    going; I shall there have money or anything I want.
 Offer me no
    money, I pray you; that kills my heart.

  CLOWN.
 What manner of fellow was he that robb'd you?
  AUTOLYCUS.
 A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about with
    troll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of the Prince.
 I cannot
    tell, good sir, for which of his virtues it was, but he was
    certainly whipt out of the court.

  CLOWN.
 They cherish it to make it stay there; and yet it will no
    more but abide.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 Vices, I would say, sir.
 I know this man well; he hath
    been since an ape-bearer; then a process-server, a bailiff; then
    he compass'd a motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's
    wife within a mile where my land and living lies; and, having
    flown over many knavish professions, he settled only in rogue.

  CLOWN.
 Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue that put
    me into this apparel.
 Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia; if you had but
    look'd big and spit at him, he'd have run.
 I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter; I am false
    of heart that way, and that he knew, I warrant him.
 How do you now?
  AUTOLYCUS.
 Sweet sir, much better than I was; I can stand and walk.

    I will even take my leave of you and pace softly towards my
    kinsman's.

  CLOWN.

  CLOWN.
 I must go buy spices for our
    sheep-shearing.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 Prosper you, sweet sir!                  Exit CLOWN
    Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.
 I'll be with
    you at your sheep-shearing too.
 If I make not this cheat bring
    out another, and the shearers prove sheep, let me be unroll'd,
    and my name put in the book of virtue!  
                                                         [Sings]
            Jog on, jog on, the footpath way,
              And merrily hent the stile-a;
            A merry heart goes all the day,
              Your sad tires in a mile-a.
                   Exit




SCENE IV.

Bohemia.

  PERDITA.
 Sir, my gracious lord,
    To chide at your extremes it not becomes me-
    O, pardon that I name them! Your high self,
    The gracious mark o' th' land, you have obscur'd
    With a swain's wearing; and me, poor lowly maid,
    Most goddess-like prank'd up.
 I bless the time
    When my good falcon made her flight across  
    Thy father's ground.

  PERDITA.
 Now Jove afford you cause!
    To me the difference forges dread; your greatness
    Hath not been us'd to fear.
 O, the Fates!
    How would he look to see his work, so noble,
    Vilely bound up? What would he say? Or how
    Should I, in these my borrowed flaunts, behold
    The sternness of his presence?
  FLORIZEL.
 Their transformations
    Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,
    Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires  
    Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts
    Burn hotter than my faith.

  PERDITA.

    One of these two must be necessities,
    Which then will speak, that you must change this purpose,
    Or I my life.

  FLORIZEL.
 Thou dearest Perdita,
    With these forc'd thoughts, I prithee, darken not
    The mirth o' th' feast.
 Or I'll be thine, my fair,
    Or not my father's; for I cannot be
    Mine own, nor anything to any, if
    I be not thine.
 Be merry, gentle;
    Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing
    That you behold the while.

    Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
    Of celebration of that nuptial which
    We two have sworn shall come.
 O Lady Fortune,
    Stand you auspicious!
  FLORIZEL.
 See, your guests approach.


        Enter SHEPHERD, with POLIXENES and CAMILLO, disguised;
                 CLOWN, MOPSA, DORCAS, with OTHERS

  SHEPHERD.
 You are retired,
    As if you were a feasted one, and not
    The hostess of the meeting.
 Pray you bid
    These unknown friends to's welcome, for it is  
    A way to make us better friends, more known.

    Come, quench your blushes, and present yourself
    That which you are, Mistress o' th' Feast.
  [To POLIXENES]  Sir, welcome.
  [To CAMILLO]
    You're welcome, sir.

    Give me those flow'rs there, Dorcas.

    Grace and remembrance be to you both!
    And welcome to our shearing.

  POLIXENES.
 Shepherdess-
    A fair one are you- well you fit our ages
    With flow'rs of winter.

  PERDITA.
 Of that kind
    Our rustic garden's barren; and I care not
    To get slips of them.
 Wherefore, gentle maiden,
    Do you neglect them?
  PERDITA.
 For I have heard it said
    There is an art which in their piedness shares
    With great creating nature.
 This is an art
    Which does mend nature- change it rather; but
    The art itself is nature.

  PERDITA.
 So it is.
  
  POLIXENES.
 Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,
    And do not call them bastards.

  PERDITA.
 I'll not put
    The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;
    No more than were I painted I would wish
    This youth should say 'twere well, and only therefore
    Desire to breed by me.
 Here's flow'rs for you:
    Hot lavender, mints, savory, marjoram;
    The marigold, that goes to bed wi' th' sun,
    And with him rises weeping; these are flow'rs
    Of middle summer, and I think they are given
    To men of middle age.
 Y'are very welcome.
 I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
    And only live by gazing.

  PERDITA.
 Out, alas!
    You'd be so lean that blasts of January
    Would blow you through and through.
 Now, my fair'st friend,
    I would I had some flow'rs o' th' spring that might
    Become your time of day- and yours, and yours,
    That wear upon your virgin branches yet  
    Your maidenheads growing.
 O Proserpina,
    From the flowers now that, frighted, thou let'st fall
    From Dis's waggon!- daffodils,
    That come before the swallow dares, and take
    The winds of March with beauty; violets, dim
    But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes
    Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses,
    That die unmarried ere they can behold
    Bright Phoebus in his strength- a malady
    Most incident to maids; bold oxlips, and
    The crown-imperial; lilies of all kinds,
    The flow'r-de-luce being one.
 What, like a corse?
  PERDITA.

    Methinks I play as I have seen them do
    In Whitsun pastorals.

  FLORIZEL.
 What you do
    Still betters what is done.
 When you speak, sweet,
    I'd have you do it ever.
 When you sing,
    I'd have you buy and sell so; so give alms;
    Pray so; and, for the ord'ring your affairs,
    To sing them too.
 When you do dance, I wish you
    A wave o' th' sea, that you might ever do
    Nothing but that; move still, still so,
    And own no other function.
 Each your doing,
    So singular in each particular,
    Crowns what you are doing in the present deeds,
    That all your acts are queens.
 O Doricles,
    Your praises are too large.
 But that your youth,
    And the true blood which peeps fairly through't,
    Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd,
    With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
    You woo'd me the false way.
 I think you have  
    As little skill to fear as I have purpose
    To put you to't.
 But, come; our dance, I pray.

    Your hand, my Perdita; so turtles pair
    That never mean to part.

  PERDITA.

  CAMILLO.
 He tells her something
    That makes her blood look out.
 Good sooth, she is
    The queen of curds and cream.

  CLOWN.
 Come on, strike up.

  DORCAS.
 Mopsa must be your mistress; marry, garlic,
    To mend her kissing with!
  MOPSA.
 Now, in good time!
  CLOWN.
 Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.

    Come, strike up.
 Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
    Which dances with your daughter?
  SHEPHERD.
 They call him Doricles, and boasts himself
    To have a worthy feeding; but I have it
    Upon his own report, and I believe it:
    He looks like sooth.

  SHEPHERD.
 O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the door, you
    would never dance again after a tabor and pipe; no, the bagpipe
    could not move you.
 I love a
    ballad but even too well, if it be doleful matter merrily set
    down, or a very pleasant thing indeed and sung lamentably.
 He hath songs for man or woman of all sizes; no milliner
    can so fit his customers with gloves.
 He has the prettiest
    love-songs for maids; so without bawdry, which is strange; with
    such delicate burdens of dildos and fadings, 'jump her and thump
    her'; and where some stretch-mouth'd rascal would, as it were,
    mean mischief, and break a foul gap into the matter, he makes the
    maid to answer 'Whoop, do me no harm, good man'- puts him off,
    slights him, with 'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.
'
  POLIXENES.
 This is a brave fellow.

    Has he any unbraided wares?
  SERVANT.
 He hath ribbons of all the colours i' th' rainbow; points,  
    more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can learnedly handle, though
    they come to him by th' gross; inkles, caddisses, cambrics,
    lawns.

  CLOWN.

  PERDITA.
 You have of these pedlars that have more in them than you'd
    think, sister.

  PERDITA.

           Come, buy.


  CLOWN.
 If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take no
    money of me; but being enthrall'd as I am, it will also be the
    bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.

  MOPSA.
 I was promis'd them against the feast; but they come not too
    late now.

  DORCAS.
 He hath promis'd you more than that, or there be liars.

  MOPSA.
 May be he has paid you
    more, which will shame you to give him again.

  CLOWN.

  MOPSA.
 I have done.
 Have I not told thee how I was cozen'd by the way, and lost
    all my money?
  AUTOLYCUS.

  CLOWN.
 Fear not thou, man; thou shalt lose nothing here.
 I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of
    charge.

  CLOWN.
 What hast here? Ballads?
  MOPSA.
 I love a ballad in print a-life, for
    then we are sure they are true.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 Here's one to a very doleful tune: how a usurer's wife
    was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at a burden, and how she
    long'd to eat adders' heads and toads carbonado'd.

  MOPSA.
 Is it true, think you?
  AUTOLYCUS.
 Very true, and but a month old.

  DORCAS.
 Bless me from marrying a usurer!  
  AUTOLYCUS.

  CLOWN.
 Come on, lay it by; and let's first see moe ballads; we'll
    buy the other things anon.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 It was thought she was a woman, and was turn'd into a cold
    fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that lov'd her.

    The ballad is very pitiful, and as true.
 Five justices' hands at it; and witnesses more than my
    pack will hold.

  CLOWN.
 Lay it by too.
 Another.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 Why, this is a passing merry one, and goes to the tune
    of 'Two maids wooing a man.
' There's scarce a maid westward but  
    she sings it; 'tis in request, I can tell you.

  MOPSA.
 can both sing it.
 We had the tune on't a month ago.


                        SONG

  AUTOLYCUS.
    Whither?
  MOPSA.
     It becomes thy oath full well
             Thou to me thy secrets tell.
    If to either, thou dost ill.
 Neither.
 Neither.

  DORCAS.
     Thou hast sworn it more to me.
 Come,
    bring away thy pack after me.
 Wenches, I'll buy for you both.

    Pedlar, let's have the first choice.
 Follow me, girls.

                                      Exit with DORCAS and MOPSA
  AUTOLYCUS.
 And you shall pay well for 'em.

                                         Exit AUTOLYCUS, Singing

             Will you buy any tape,
             Or lace for your cape,
           My dainty duck, my dear-a?
             Any silk, any thread,
             Any toys for your head,
           Of the new'st and fin'st, fin'st wear-a?  
             Come to the pedlar;
             Money's a meddler
           That doth utter all men's ware-a.


                   Re-enter SERVANT

  SERVANT.
 Master, there is three carters, three shepherds, three
    neat-herds, three swineherds, that have made themselves all men
    of hair; they call themselves Saltiers, and they have dance which
    the wenches say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are not
    in't; but they themselves are o' th' mind, if it be not too rough
    for some that know little but bowling, it will please
    plentifully.

  SHEPHERD.
 I know, sir, we weary you.

  POLIXENES.

  SERVANT.
 One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath danc'd
    before the King; and not the worst of the three but jumps twelve
    foot and a half by th' squier.

  SERVANT.
                     Exit

                    Here a dance of twelve SATYRS

  POLIXENES.
  [To SHEPHERD]  O, father, you'll know more of that
      hereafter.

    He's simple and tells much.
  [To FLORIZEL]  How now, fair
      shepherd!
    Your heart is full of something that does take
    Your mind from feasting.

  FLORIZEL.
 Old sir, I know
    She prizes not such trifles as these are.
 O, hear me breathe my life
    Before this ancient sir, whom, it should seem,
    Hath sometime lov'd.
 I take thy hand- this hand,
    As soft as dove's down and as white as it,
    Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd snow that's bolted
    By th' northern blasts twice o'er.

  POLIXENES.
 What follows this?
    How prettily the young swain seems to wash
    The hand was fair before! I have put you out.

    But to your protestation; let me hear
    What you profess.

  FLORIZEL.
 And this my neighbour too?
  FLORIZEL.
 But, my daughter,
    Say you the like to him?
  PERDITA.

    By th' pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
    The purity of his.
 Take hands, a bargain!
    And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to't:
    I give my daughter to him, and will make
    Her portion equal his.
  
  FLORIZEL.
 O, that must be
    I' th' virtue of your daughter.
 But come on,
    Contract us fore these witnesses.
 Come, your hand;
    And, daughter, yours.

  POLIXENES.
 Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;
    Have you a father?
  FLORIZEL.
 Knows he of this?
  FLORIZEL.
 Methinks a father
    Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
    That best becomes the table.
 Pray you, once more,
    Is not your father grown incapable
    Of reasonable affairs? Is he not stupid
    With age and alt'ring rheums? Can he speak, hear,
    Know man from man, dispute his own estate?
    Lies he not bed-rid, and again does nothing  
    But what he did being childish?
  FLORIZEL.
 No, good sir;
    He has his health, and ampler strength indeed
    Than most have of his age.
 Reason my son
    Should choose himself a wife; but as good reason
    The father- all whose joy is nothing else
    But fair posterity- should hold some counsel
    In such a business.

  FLORIZEL.
 I yield all this;
    But, for some other reasons, my grave sir,
    Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaint
    My father of this business.

  POLIXENES.
 Let him know't.

  POLIXENES.
 Prithee let him.
 No, he must not.

  SHEPHERD.

  FLORIZEL.

  POLIXENES.
  [Discovering himself]  Mark your divorce, young sir,
    Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base
    To be acknowledg'd- thou a sceptre's heir,
    That thus affects a sheep-hook! Thou, old traitor,
    I am sorry that by hanging thee I can but
    Shorten thy life one week.
 And thou, fresh piece
    Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know
    The royal fool thou cop'st with-
  SHEPHERD.
 O, my heart!
  POLIXENES.
 I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers and made
    More homely than thy state.
 Mark thou my words.

    Follow us to the court.
 Thou churl, for this time,  
    Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
    From the dead blow of it.
                                Exit
  PERDITA.
 Even here undone!
    I was not much afeard; for once or twice
    I was about to speak and tell him plainly
    The self-same sun that shines upon his court
    Hides not his visage from our cottage, but
    Looks on alike.
 Beseech you,
    Of your own state take care.
 This dream of mine-
    Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,
    But milk my ewes and weep.
 Why, how now, father!  
    Speak ere thou diest.

  SHEPHERD.
 I cannot speak nor think,
    Nor dare to know that which I know.
 What I was, I am:
    More straining on for plucking back; not following
    My leash unwillingly.
 Gracious, my lord,
    You know your father's temper.

  FLORIZEL.
 Even he, my lord.

  PERDITA.
 How often have I told you 'twould be thus!
    How often said my dignity would last
    But till 'twere known!
  FLORIZEL.
 I am- and by my fancy; if my reason
    Will thereto be obedient, I have reason;  
    If not, my senses, better pleas'd with madness,
    Do bid it welcome.

  CAMILLO.
 This is desperate, sir.
 So call it; but it does fulfil my vow:
    I needs must think it honesty.
 Therefore, I pray you,
    As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend,
    When he shall miss me- as, in faith, I mean not
    To see him any more- cast your good counsels
    Upon his passion.
 This you may know,
    And so deliver: I am put to sea
    With her who here I cannot hold on shore.
 What course I mean to hold  
    Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
    Concern me the reporting.

  CAMILLO.
 O my lord,
    I would your spirit were easier for advice.

  FLORIZEL.

  CAMILLO.
 He's irremovable,
    Resolv'd for flight.
 Now were I happy if
    His going I could frame to serve my turn,
    Save him from danger, do him love and honour,
    Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
    And that unhappy king, my master, whom
    I so much thirst to see.

  FLORIZEL.
 Now, good Camillo,
    I am so fraught with curious business that
    I leave out ceremony.

  CAMILLO.
 Sir, I think
    You have heard of my poor services i' th' love
    That I have borne your father?  
  FLORIZEL.
 Very nobly
    Have you deserv'd.

    If your more ponderous and settled project
    May suffer alteration, on mine honour,
    I'll point you where you shall have such receiving
    As shall become your Highness; where you may
    Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see,
    There's no disjunction to be made but by,
    As heavens forfend! your ruin- marry her;
    And with my best endeavours in your absence
    Your discontenting father strive to qualify,
    And bring him up to liking.
 How, Camillo,
    May this, almost a miracle, be done?  
    That I may call thee something more than man,
    And after that trust to thee.

  CAMILLO.
 Have you thought on
    A place whereto you'll go?
  FLORIZEL.

  CAMILLO.
 Then list to me.

    This follows, if you will not change your purpose
    But undergo this flight: make for Sicilia,
    And there present yourself and your fair princess-
    For so, I see, she must be- fore Leontes.

    She shall be habited as it becomes
    The partner of your bed.
 Methinks I see
    Leontes opening his free arms and weeping
    His welcomes forth; asks thee there 'Son, forgiveness!'
    As 'twere i' th' father's person; kisses the hands
    Of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him  
    'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness- th' one
    He chides to hell, and bids the other grow
    Faster than thought or time.
 Worthy Camillo,
    What colour for my visitation shall I
    Hold up before him?
  CAMILLO.
 Sent by the King your father
    To greet him and to give him comforts.
 I am bound to you.
 A course more promising
    Than a wild dedication of yourselves
    To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain  
    To miseries enough; no hope to help you,
    But as you shake off one to take another;
    Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
    Do their best office if they can but stay you
    Where you'll be loath to be.
 Besides, you know
    Prosperity's the very bond of love,
    Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
    Affliction alters.

  PERDITA.
 Yea, say you so?
    There shall not at your father's house these seven years
    Be born another such.

  FLORIZEL.

  CAMILLO.
 I cannot say 'tis pity
    She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress
    To most that teach.
 Your pardon, sir; for this
    I'll blush you thanks.

  FLORIZEL.
 My prettiest Perdita!
    But, O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo-
    Preserver of my father, now of me;
    The medicine of our house- how shall we do?
    We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son;
    Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
 I think you know my fortunes
    Do all lie there.
 It shall be so my care
    To have you royally appointed as if
    The scene you play were mine.
 For instance, sir,
    That you may know you shall not want- one word.

                                               [They talk aside]

                     Re-enter AUTOLYCUS

  AUTOLYCUS.
 Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his sworn
    brother, a very simple gentleman! I have sold all my trumpery;  
    not a counterfeit stone, not a ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch,
    table-book, ballad, knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet,
    horn-ring, to keep my pack from fasting.
 My
    clown, who wants but something to be a reasonable man, grew so in
    love with the wenches' song that he would not stir his pettitoes
    till he had both tune and words, which so drew the rest of the
    herd to me that all their other senses stuck in ears.
 You might
    have pinch'd a placket, it was senseless; 'twas nothing to geld a
    codpiece of a purse; I would have fil'd keys off that hung in
    chains.
 So that in this time of lethargy I pick'd and
    cut most of their festival purses; and had not the old man come
    in with whoobub against his daughter and the King's son and
    scar'd my choughs from the chaff, I had not left a purse alive in
    the whole army.

  FLORIZEL.
 And those that you'll procure from King Leontes?
  CAMILLO.
 Shall satisfy your father.

  AUTOLYCUS.
  [Aside]  If they have overheard me now- why, hanging.

  CAMILLO.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 I am a poor fellow, sir.

  CAMILLO.
 Why, be so still; here's nobody will steal that from thee.

    Yet for the outside of thy poverty we must make an exchange;
    therefore discase thee instantly- thou must think there's a
    necessity in't- and change garments with this gentleman.
 Though
    the pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee, there's
    some boot.
  [Aside]  I know ye well
    enough.

  CAMILLO.

  FLORIZEL.
 Dispatch, I prithee.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 Indeed, I have had earnest; but I cannot with conscience
    take it.

  CAMILLO.

  PERDITA.
 I see the play so lies
    That I must bear a part.
 No remedy.

    Have you done there?
  FLORIZEL.
 Should I now meet my father,
    He would not call me son.

  CAMILLO.

                                          [Giving it to PERDITA]
    Come, lady, come.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 Adieu, sir.
                       [They converse apart]
  CAMILLO.
  [Aside]  What I do next shall be to tell the King
    Of this escape, and whither they are bound;
    Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail
    To force him after; in whose company
    I shall re-view Sicilia, for whose sight
    I have a woman's longing.

                           Exeunt FLORIZEL, PERDITA, and CAMILLO
  AUTOLYCUS.
 I understand the business, I hear it.
 I see this is the time that the unjust man doth
    thrive.
 If I thought it were a piece of honesty to
    acquaint the King withal, I would not do't.
 I hold it the more
    knavery to conceal it; and therein am I constant to my
    profession.


                   Re-enter CLOWN and SHEPHERD

    Aside, aside- here is more matter for a hot brain.
 See, see; what a man you are now! There is no other way but
    to tell the King she's a changeling and none of your flesh and
    blood.

  SHEPHERD.
 Nay- but hear me.

  SHEPHERD.
 Go to, then.

  CLOWN.
 She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood
    has not offended the King; and so your flesh and blood is not to
    be punish'd by him.
 Show those things you found about her, those
    secret things- all but what she has with her.
 This being done,
    let the law go whistle; I warrant you.
 I will tell the King all, every word- yea, and his son's
    pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man, neither to his
    father nor to me, to go about to make me the King's
    brother-in-law.
 Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you could have
    been to him; and then your blood had been the dearer by I know
    how much an ounce.
 Well, let us to the King.
  [Aside]  I know not what impediment this complaint may
    be to the flight of my master.

  CLOWN.
 Pray heartily he be at palace.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 Let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement.

    [Takes off his false beard]  How now, rustics! Whither are you
    bound?
  SHEPHERD.
 To th' palace, an it like your worship.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition of
    that fardel, the place of your dwelling, your names, your ages,
    of what having, breeding, and anything that is fitting to be
    known- discover.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 A lie: you are rough and hairy.
 Let me have no lying; it
    becomes none but tradesmen, and they often give us soldiers the
    lie; but we pay them for it with stamped coin, not stabbing
    steel; therefore they do not give us the lie.

  CLOWN.
 Your worship had like to have given us one, if you had not  
    taken yourself with the manner.

  SHEPHERD.
 Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?
  AUTOLYCUS.
 Seest thou
    not the air of the court in these enfoldings? Hath not my gait in
    it the measure of the court? Receives not thy nose court-odour
    from me? Reflect I not on thy baseness court-contempt? Think'st
    thou, for that I insinuate, that toaze from thee thy business, I
    am therefore no courtier? I am courtier cap-a-pe, and one that
    will either push on or pluck back thy business there; whereupon I
    command the to open thy affair.
 My business, sir, is to the King.

  AUTOLYCUS.

  CLOWN.
 None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 How blessed are we that are not simple men!
    Yet nature might have made me as these are,
    Therefore I will not disdain.

  CLOWN.

  SHEPHERD.
 He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical.

    A great man, I'll warrant; I know by the picking on's teeth.
 The fardel there? What's i' th' fardel? Wherefore that
    box?
  SHEPHERD.
 Age, thou hast lost thy labour.
 Why, Sir?
  AUTOLYCUS.

  AUTOLYCUS.

  CLOWN.
 Think you so, sir?
  AUTOLYCUS.
 Draw our throne into a
    sheep-cote!- all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
 He has a son- who shall be flay'd alive; then 'nointed
    over with honey, set on the head of a wasp's nest; then stand
    till he be three quarters and a dram dead; then recover'd again
    with aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as he is,
    and in the hottest day prognostication proclaims, shall he be set
    against a brick wall, the sun looking with a southward eye upon
    him, where he is to behold him with flies blown to death.
 But
    what talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries are to be
    smil'd at, their offences being so capital? Tell me, for you seem
    to be honest plain men, what you have to the King.
 Being
    something gently consider'd, I'll bring you where he is aboard,  
    tender your persons to his presence, whisper him in your behalfs;
    and if it be in man besides the King to effect your suits, here
    is man shall do it.

  CLOWN.
 He seems to be of great authority.
 Close with him, give him
    gold; and though authority be a stubborn bear, yet he is oft led
    by the nose with gold.
 Remember- ston'd and flay'd
    alive.
 An't please you, sir, to undertake the business for us,
    here is that gold I have.
 I'll make it as much more, and leave
    this young man in pawn till I bring it you.
 After I have done what I promised?
  SHEPHERD.
 Ay, sir.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 Well, give me the moiety.
 Are you a party in this
    business?
  CLOWN.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 O, that's the case of the shepherd's son! Hang him,
    he'll be made an example.

  CLOWN.
 Comfort, good comfort! We must to the King and show our  
    strange sights.
 He must know 'tis none of your daughter nor my
    sister; we are gone else.
 Sir, I will give you as much as this
    old man does, when the business is performed; and remain, as he
    says, your pawn till it be brought you.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 Walk before toward the sea-side; go on
    the right-hand; I will but look upon the hedge, and follow you.

  CLOWN.
 We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.

  SHEPHERD.
 He was provided to do us
    good.
 If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would not
    suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth.
 There
    may be matter in it.
                                    Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC.
, AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.
  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.
>>



ACT V.
 The palace of LEONTES

Enter LEONTES, CLEOMENES, DION, PAULINA, and OTHERS

  CLEOMENES.

  LEONTES.
 Whilst I remember
    Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
    My blemishes in them, and so still think of
    The wrong I did myself; which was so much
    That heirless it hath made my kingdom, and
    Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man
    Bred his hopes out of.
 True, too true, my lord.

    If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
    Or from the all that are took something good
    To make a perfect woman, she you kill'd  
    Would be unparallel'd.
 Kill'd!
    She I kill'd! I did so; but thou strik'st me
    Sorely, to say I did.
 It is as bitter
    Upon thy tongue as in my thought.
 Not at all, good lady.
 You are one of those
    Would have him wed again.
 If you would not so,
    You pity not the state, nor the remembrance
    Of his most sovereign name; consider little
    What dangers, by his Highness' fail of issue,
    May drop upon his kingdom and devour
    Incertain lookers-on.
 What were more holy
    Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
    What holier than, for royalty's repair,  
    For present comfort, and for future good,
    To bless the bed of majesty again
    With a sweet fellow to't?
  PAULINA.

  LEONTES.

    No more such wives; therefore, no wife.
 Had she such power,
    She had just cause.

  LEONTES.

  PAULINA.
 I should so.

    Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'd bid you mark
    Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't  
    You chose her; then I'd shriek, that even your ears
    Should rift to hear me; and the words that follow'd
    Should be 'Remember mine.
'
  LEONTES.
 Will you swear
    Never to marry but by my free leave?
  LEONTES.
 Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!
  PAULINA.
 Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
 You tempt him over-much.
 Unless another,
    As like Hermione as is her picture,
    Affront his eye.

    Yet, if my lord will marry- if you will, sir,
    No remedy but you will- give me the office
    To choose you a queen.

  LEONTES.
 My true Paulina,
    We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.

  PAULINA.
 That
    Shall be when your first queen's again in breath;
    Never till then.


                       Enter a GENTLEMAN

  GENTLEMAN.

  LEONTES.
 What with him? He comes not
    Like to his father's greatness.
 His approach,
    So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us
    'Tis not a visitation fram'd, but forc'd
    By need and accident.
 What train?
  GENTLEMAN.
 But few,  
    And those but mean.

  LEONTES.
 His princess, say you, with him?
  GENTLEMAN.
 Ay; the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
    That e'er the sun shone bright on.

  PAULINA.
 O Hermione,
    As every present time doth boast itself
    Above a better gone, so must thy grave
    Give way to what's seen now! Sir, you yourself
    Have said and writ so, but your writing now
    Is colder than that theme: 'She had not been,
    Nor was not to be equall'd.
' Thus your verse
    Flow'd with her beauty once; 'tis shrewdly ebb'd,
    To say you have seen a better.
 Pardon, madam.
                        Exeunt
    Still, 'tis strange
    He thus should steal upon us.

  PAULINA.
 Had our prince,
    Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'd
    Well with this lord; there was not full a month
    Between their births.

  LEONTES.
 Thou know'st
    He dies to me again when talk'd of.


         Re-enter CLEOMENES, with FLORIZEL, PERDITA, and  
                            ATTENDANTS

    They are come.
 Were I but twenty-one,
    Your father's image is so hit in you
    His very air, that I should call you brother,
    As I did him, and speak of something wildly
    By us perform'd before.
 Most dearly welcome!
    And your fair princess- goddess! O, alas!
    I lost a couple that 'twixt heaven and earth
    Might thus have stood begetting wonder as
    You, gracious couple, do.
 And then I lost-
    All mine own folly- the society,
    Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
    Though bearing misery, I desire my life
    Once more to look on him.
 By his command
    Have I here touch'd Sicilia, and from him  
    Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,
    Can send his brother; and, but infirmity,
    Which waits upon worn times, hath something seiz'd
    His wish'd ability, he had himself
    The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his
    Measur'd, to look upon you; whom he loves,
    He bade me say so, more than all the sceptres
    And those that bear them living.

  LEONTES.
 O my brother-
    Good gentleman!- the wrongs I have done thee stir
    Afresh within me; and these thy offices,
    So rarely kind, are as interpreters
    Of my behind-hand slackness! Welcome hither,
    As is the spring to th' earth.
 My best train
    I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd;
    Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
    Not only my success in Libya, sir,
    But my arrival and my wife's in safety
    Here where we are.

  LEONTES.
 Where's Bohemia? Speak.

  LORD.
 Here in your city; I now came from him.

    I speak amazedly; and it becomes
    My marvel and my message.
 To your court
    Whiles he was hast'ning- in the chase, it seems,
    Of this fair couple- meets he on the way  
    The father of this seeming lady and
    Her brother, having both their country quitted
    With this young prince.

  FLORIZEL.

  LORD.
 Lay't so to his charge;
    He's with the King your father.
 Who? Camillo?
  LORD.
 Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now
    Has these poor men in question.
 Never saw I
    Wretches so quake.
 They kneel, they kiss the earth;
    Forswear themselves as often as they speak.

    Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
    With divers deaths in death.

  PERDITA.
 O my poor father!
    The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have
    Our contract celebrated.
 You are married?
  FLORIZEL.

    The odds for high and low's alike.

  LEONTES.

  LEONTES.
 That 'once,' I see by your good father's speed,
    Will come on very slowly.
 I am sorry,
    Most sorry, you have broken from his liking
    Where you were tied in duty; and as sorry
    Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
    That you might well enjoy her.

  FLORIZEL.
 Dear, look up.

    Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
    Should chase us with my father, pow'r no jot
    Hath she to change our loves.
 Beseech you, sir,
    Remember since you ow'd no more to time
    Than I do now.
 Would he do so, I'd beg your precious mistress,
    Which he counts but a trifle.
 Sir, my liege,
    Your eye hath too much youth in't.

  LEONTES.
 I thought of her
    Even in these looks I made.
  [To FLORIZEL]  But your petition
    Is yet unanswer'd.
 I will to your father.

    Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,
    I am friend to them and you.
         Exeunt




SCENE II.

Sicilia.
 Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the
    old shepherd deliver the manner how he found it; whereupon, after
    a little amazedness, we were all commanded out of the chamber;
    only this, methought I heard the shepherd say he found the child.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 I would most gladly know the issue of it.
 They seem'd almost, with staring on one another, to
    tear the cases of their eyes; there was speech in their dumbness,
    language in their very gesture; they look'd as they had heard of
    a world ransom'd, or one destroyed.
 A notable passion of wonder
    appeared in them; but the wisest beholder that knew no more but
    seeing could not say if th' importance were joy or sorrow- but in
    the extremity of the one it must needs be.


                    Enter another GENTLEMAN  

    Here comes a gentleman that happily knows more.
 The news, Rogero?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 Nothing but bonfires.
 Such a deal of wonder is broken out
    within this hour that ballad-makers cannot be able to express it.


                    Enter another GENTLEMAN

    Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward; he can deliver you more.

    How goes it now, sir? This news, which is call'd true, is so like
    an old tale that the verity of it is in strong suspicion.
 Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by
    circumstance.
 That which you hear you'll swear you see, there is
    such unity in the proofs.
 Did  
    you see the meeting of the two kings?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 No.
 There might you have beheld one joy crown
    another, so and in such manner that it seem'd sorrow wept to take
    leave of them; for their joy waded in tears.

    Our king, being ready to leap out of himself for joy of his found
    daughter, as if that joy were now become a loss, cries 'O, thy
    mother, thy mother!' then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then embraces
    his son-in-law; then again worries he his daughter with clipping
    her.
 I never heard of
    such another encounter, which lames report to follow it and
    undoes description to do it.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried
    hence the child?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN.
 Like an old tale still, which will have matter to
    rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear open: he was  
    torn to pieces with a bear.
 This avouches the shepherd's son, who
    has not only his innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but
    a handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 What became of his bark and his followers?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN.
 Wreck'd the same instant of their master's death,
    and in the view of the shepherd; so that all the instruments
    which aided to expose the child were even then lost when it was
    found.
 But, O, the noble combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was
    fought in Paulina! She had one eye declin'd for the loss of her
    husband, another elevated that the oracle was fulfill'd.

  FIRST GENTLEMAN.
 The dignity of this act was worth the audience of
    kings and princes; for by such was it acted.
 One of the prettiest touches of all, and that
    which angl'd for mine eyes- caught the water, though not the
    fish- was, when at the relation of the Queen's death, with the
    manner how she came to't bravely confess'd and lamented by the
    King, how attentivenes wounded his daughter; till, from one sign  
    of dolour to another, she did with an 'Alas!'- I would fain say-
    bleed tears; for I am sure my heart wept blood.
 Who was most
    marble there changed colour; some swooned, all sorrowed.
 If all
    the world could have seen't, the woe had been universal.
 No.
 The Princess hearing of her mother's statue,
    which is in the keeping of Paulina- a piece many years in doing
    and now newly perform'd by that rare Italian master, Julio
    Romano, who, had he himself eternity and could put breath into
    his work, would beguile nature of her custom, so perfectly he is
    her ape.
 He so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that they say
    one would speak to her and stand in hope of answer- thither with
    all greediness of affection are they gone, and there they intend
    to sup.

  SECOND GENTLEMAN.
 I thought she had some great matter there in
    hand; for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever since
    the death of Hermione, visited that removed house.
 Let's along.
 But 'tis all one
    to me; for had I been the finder-out of this secret, it would not
    have relish'd among my other discredits.

  SHEPHERD.

  CLOWN.
 You are well met, sir.
 See you these  
    clothes? Say you see them not and think me still no gentleman
    born.
 You were best say these robes are not gentlemen born.
 Give
    me the lie, do; and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.

  CLOWN.
 Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.

  SHEPHERD.

  CLOWN.
 So you have; but I was a gentleman born before my father;
    for the King's son took me by the hand and call'd me brother; and
    then the two kings call'd my father brother; and then the Prince,
    my brother, and the Princess, my sister, call'd my father father.

  SHEPHERD.
 We may live, son, to shed many more.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the faults I
    have committed to your worship, and to give me your good report
    to the Prince my master.

  SHEPHERD.
 Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are
    gentlemen.
  
  CLOWN.
 Thou wilt amend thy life?
  AUTOLYCUS.
 Ay, an it like your good worship.
 I will swear to the Prince thou art as
    honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.

  SHEPHERD.
 You may say it, but not swear it.
 Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and franklins
    say it: I'll swear it.
 And I'll swear to the Prince thou art a
    tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt not be drunk; but I
    know thou art no tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be
    drunk.
 But I'll swear it; and I would thou wouldst be a tall
    fellow of thy hands.

  AUTOLYCUS.
 If I do not wonder
    how thou dar'st venture to be drunk not being a tall fellow,
    trust me not.
 Hark! the kings and the princes, our kindred, are
    going to see the Queen's picture.
 Come, follow us; we'll be thy
    good masters.
                                         Exeunt




SCENE III.

Sicilia.
 A chapel in PAULINA's house

Enter LEONTES, POLIXENES, FLORIZEL, PERDITA, CAMILLO, PAULINA,
LORDS and ATTENDANTS

  LEONTES.
 O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
    That I have had of thee!
  PAULINA.
 All my services
    You have paid home; but that you have vouchsaf'd,
    With your crown'd brother and these your contracted
    Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,
    It is a surplus of your grace, which never
    My life may last to answer.

  LEONTES.
 Your gallery
    Have we pass'd through, not without much content
    In many singularities; but we saw not
    That which my daughter came to look upon,
    The statue of her mother.
  
  PAULINA.
 As she liv'd peerless,
    So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
    Excels whatever yet you look'd upon
    Or hand of man hath done; therefore I keep it
    Lonely, apart.
 But here it is.
 Prepare
    To see the life as lively mock'd as ever
    Still sleep mock'd death.
 Behold; and say 'tis well.

                [PAULINA draws a curtain, and discovers HERMIONE
                                         standing like a statue]
    I like your silence; it the more shows off
    Your wonder; but yet speak.
 Her natural posture!
    Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed
    Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she
    In thy not chiding; for she was as tender
    As infancy and grace.
 But yet, Paulina,
    Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
    So aged as this seems.

  POLIXENES.
 O, not by much!  
  PAULINA.
 So much the more our carver's excellence,
    Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her
    As she liv'd now.

  LEONTES.
 As now she might have done,
    So much to my good comfort as it is
    Now piercing to my soul.
 O, thus she stood,
    Even with such life of majesty- warm life,
    As now it coldly stands- when first I woo'd her!
    I am asham'd.
 And give me leave,
    And do not say 'tis superstition that
    I kneel, and then implore her blessing.
 O, patience!  
    The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's
    Not dry.
 My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,
    Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
    So many summers dry.
 Scarce any joy
    Did ever so long live; no sorrow
    But kill'd itself much sooner.

  POLIXENES.
 Dear my brother,
    Let him that was the cause of this have pow'r
    To take off so much grief from you as he
    Will piece up in himself.

  PAULINA.
 Indeed, my lord,
    If I had thought the sight of my poor image
    Would thus have wrought you- for the stone is mine-
    I'd not have show'd it.

  LEONTES.
 Do not draw the curtain.

  PAULINA.
 No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancy
    May think anon it moves.

  LEONTES.

    Would I were dead, but that methinks already-  
    What was he that did make it? See, my lord,
    Would you not deem it breath'd, and that those veins
    Did verily bear blood?
  POLIXENES.
 Masterly done!
    The very life seems warm upon her lip.
 I'll draw the curtain.

    My lord's almost so far transported that
    He'll think anon it lives.
 O sweet Paulina,
    Make me to think so twenty years together!
    No settled senses of the world can match
    The pleasure of that madness.
 I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you; but
    I could afflict you farther.

  LEONTES.
 Do, Paulina;
    For this affliction has a taste as sweet
    As any cordial comfort.
 Still, methinks,
    There is an air comes from her.
 What fine chisel  
    Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
    For I will kiss her.

  PAULINA.

    The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;
    You'll mar it if you kiss it; stain your own
    With oily painting.
 Shall I draw the curtain?
  LEONTES.
 So long could I
    Stand by, a looker-on.

  PAULINA.
 Either forbear,
    Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
    For more amazement.
 If you can behold it,
    I'll make the statue move indeed, descend,
    And take you by the hand, but then you'll think-
    Which I protest against- I am assisted
    By wicked powers.
 What you can make her do
    I am content to look on; what to speak
    I am content to hear; for 'tis as easy
    To make her speak as move.
  
  PAULINA.
 Then all stand still;
    Or those that think it is unlawful business
    I am about, let them depart.

  LEONTES.
 Proceed.

    No foot shall stir.

  PAULINA.
 Music, awake her: strike.
                     [Music]
    'Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach;
    Strike all that look upon with marvel.
 Stir; nay, come away.

    Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him
    Dear life redeems you.
 You perceive she stirs.

                         [HERMIONE comes down from the pedestal]
    Start not; her actions shall be holy as
    You hear my spell is lawful.
 Nay, present your hand.

    When she was young you woo'd her; now in age
    Is she become the suitor?
  LEONTES.
 O, she's warm!  
    If this be magic, let it be an art
    Lawful as eating.
 She embraces him.
 She hangs about his neck.

    If she pertain to life, let her speak too.

  POLIXENES.
 Ay, and make it manifest where she has liv'd,
    Or how stol'n from the dead.
 That she is living,
    Were it but told you, should be hooted at
    Like an old tale; but it appears she lives
    Though yet she speak not.
 Mark a little while.

    Please you to interpose, fair madam.
 Turn, good lady;
    Our Perdita is found.
 You gods, look down,
    And from your sacred vials pour your graces
    Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own,
    Where hast thou been preserv'd? Where liv'd? How found
    Thy father's court? For thou shalt hear that I,
    Knowing by Paulina that the oracle  
    Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserv'd
    Myself to see the issue.

  PAULINA.
 There's time enough for that,
    Lest they desire upon this push to trouble
    Your joys with like relation.
 Go together,
    You precious winners all; your exultation
    Partake to every one.
 I, an old turtle,
    Will wing me to some wither'd bough, and there
    My mate, that's never to be found again,
    Lament till I am lost.

  LEONTES.
 This is a match,
    And made between's by vows.
 Thou hast found mine;
    But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her,
    As I thought, dead; and have, in vain, said many
    A prayer upon her grave.
 Let's from this place.

    What! look upon my brother.
 Both your pardons,
    That e'er I put between your holy looks
    My ill suspicion.
 This your son-in-law,
    And son unto the King, whom heavens directing,
    Is troth-plight to your daughter.
 Good Paulina,
    Lead us from hence where we may leisurely
    Each one demand and answer to his part
    Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first
    We were dissever'd.
 Hastily lead away.
  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.

  Time had not scythed all that youth begun,
  Nor youth all quit, but spite of heaven's fell rage
  Some beauty peeped through lattice of seared age.


  Oft did she heave her napkin to her eyne,
  Which on it had conceited characters,
  Laund'ring the silken figures in the brine
  That seasoned woe had pelleted in tears,
  And often reading what contents it bears;  
  As often shrieking undistinguished woe,
  In clamours of all size, both high and low.


  Her hair, nor loose nor tied in formal plat,
  Proclaimed in her a careless hand of pride;
  For some, untucked, descended her sheaved hat,
  Hanging her pale and pined cheek beside;
  Some in her threaden fillet still did bide,
  And, true to bondage, would not break from thence,
  Though slackly braided in loose negligence.


  A thousand favours from a maund she drew  
  Of amber, crystal, and of beaded jet,
  Which one by one she in a river threw,
  Upon whose weeping margent she was set;
  Like usury applying wet to wet,
  Or monarchs' hands that lets not bounty fall
  Where want cries some, but where excess begs all.


  Of folded schedules had she many a one,
  Which she perused, sighed, tore, and gave the flood;
  Cracked many a ring of posied gold and bone,
  Bidding them find their sepulchres in mud;
  Found yet moe letters sadly penned in blood,
  With sleided silk feat and affectedly
  Enswathed and sealed to curious secrecy.


  So slides he down upon his grained bat,
  And comely distant sits he by her side;
  When he again desires her, being sat,
  Her grievance with his hearing to divide.

  If that from him there may be aught applied
  Which may her suffering ecstasy assuage,
  'Tis promised in the charity of age.


  'Father,' she says, 'though in me you behold  
  The injury of many a blasting hour,
  Let it not tell your judgement I am old:
  Not age, but sorrow, over me hath power.

  I might as yet have been a spreading flower,
  Fresh to myself, if I had self-applied
  Love to myself, and to no love beside.


  'But woe is me! too early I attended
  A youthful suit- it was to gain my grace-
  O, one by nature's outwards so commended
  That maidens' eyes stuck over all his face.

  Love lacked a dwelling and made him her place;
  And when in his fair parts she did abide,
  She was new lodged and newly deified.

  What's sweet to do, to do will aptly find:
  Each eye that saw him did enchant the mind;  
  For on his visage was in little drawn
  What largeness thinks in Paradise was sawn.


  'Small show of man was yet upon his chin;
  His phoenix down began but to appear,
  Like unshorn velvet, on that termless skin,
  Whose bare out-bragged the web it seemed to wear:
  Yet showed his visage by that cost more dear;
  And nice affections wavering stood in doubt
  If best were as it was, or best without.


  'His qualities were beauteous as his form,
  For maiden-tongued he was, and thereof free;
  Yet if men moved him, was he such a storm
  As oft 'twixt May and April is to see,
  When winds breathe sweet, unruly though they be.


  'But quickly on this side the verdict went:
  His real habitude gave life and grace
  To appertainings and to ornament,
  Accomplished in himself, not in his case,
  All aids, themselves made fairer by their place,
  Came for additions; yet their purposed trim
  Pierced not his grace, but were all graced by him.


  'So on the tip of his subduing tongue
  All kind of arguments and question deep,
  All replication prompt, and reason strong,
  For his advantage still did wake and sleep.

  Consents bewitched, ere he desire, have granted,
  And dialogued for him what he would say,
  Asked their own wills, and made their wills obey.


  'Many there were that did his picture get,
  To serve their eyes, and in it put their mind;
  Like fools that in th' imagination set
  The goodly objects which abroad they find
  Of lands and mansions, theirs in thought assigned;
  And labouring in moe pleasures to bestow them
  Than the true gouty landlord which doth owe them.


  'So many have, that never touched his hand,  
  Sweetly supposed them mistress of his heart.

  My woeful self, that did in freedom stand,
  And was my own fee-simple, not in part,
  What with his art in youth, and youth in art,
  Threw my affections in his charmed power
  Reserved the stalk and gave him all my flower.

  Experience for me many bulwarks builded
  Of proofs new-bleeding, which remained the foil
  Of this false jewel, and his amorous spoil.


  'For further I could say this man's untrue,
  And knew the patterns of his foul beguiling;
  Heard where his plants in others' orchards grew;
  Saw how deceits were gilded in his smiling;
  Knew vows were ever brokers to defiling;
  Thought characters and words merely but art,
  And bastards of his foul adulterate heart.


  'And long upon these terms I held my city,  
  Till thus he 'gan besiege me: "Gentle maid,
  Have of my suffering youth some feeling pity,
  And be not of my holy vows afraid.

  That's to ye sworn to none was ever said;
  For feasts of love I have been called unto,
  Till now did ne'er invite nor never woo.


  '"All my offences that abroad you see
  Are errors of the blood, none of the mind;
  Love made them not; with acture they may be,
  Where neither party is nor true nor kind.


  '"Look here what tributes wounded fancies sent me,
  Of paled pearls and rubies red as blood;
  Figuring that they their passions likewise lent me
  Of grief and blushes, aptly understood
  In bloodless white and the encrimsoned mood-
  Effects of terror and dear modesty,
  Encamped in hearts, but fighting outwardly.


  '"The diamond? why, 'twas beautiful and hard,  
  Whereto his invised properties did tend;
  The deep-green em'rald, in whose fresh regard
  Weak sights their sickly radiance do amend;
  The heaven-hued sapphire and the opal blend
  With objects manifold; each several stone,
  With wit well blazoned, smiled, or made some moan.


  '"Lo, all these trophies of affections hot,
  Of pensived and subdued desires the tender,
  Nature hath charged me that I hoard them not,
  But yield them up where I myself must render-
  That is, to you, my origin and ender;
  For these, of force, must your oblations be,
  Since I their altar, you enpatron me.


  '"O then advance of yours that phraseless hand
  Whose white weighs down the airy scale of praise;
  Take all these similes to your own command,
  Hallowed with sighs that burning lungs did raise;
  What me your minister for you obeys  
  Works under you; and to your audit comes
  Their distract parcels in combined sums.

  Religious love put out religion's eye.

  Not to be tempted, would she be immured,
  And now to tempt all liberty procured.


  '"My parts had pow'r to charm a sacred nun,
  Who, disciplined, ay, dieted in grace,
  Believed her eyes when they t'assail begun,
  All vows and consecrations giving place,
  O most potential love, vow, bond, nor space,  
  In thee hath neither sting, knot, nor confine,
  For thou art all, and all things else are thine.


  '"When thou impressest, what are precepts worth
  Of stale example? When thou wilt inflame,
  How coldly those impediments stand forth,
  Of wealth, of filial fear, law, kindred, fame!
  Love's arms are peace, 'gainst rule, 'gainst sense, 'gainst shame.

  And sweetens, in the suff'ring pangs it bears,
  The aloes of all forces, shocks and fears.

  O, how the channel to the stream gave grace!
  Who glazed with crystal gate the glowing roses
  That flame through water which their hue encloses.

  Against the thing he sought he would exclaim;
  When he most burned in heart-wished luxury,
  He preached pure maid and praised cold chastity.


  'Thus merely with the garment of a Grace  
  The naked and concealed fiend he covered,
  That th' unexperient gave the tempter place,
  Which, like a cherubin, above them hovered.


  'O, that infected moisture of his eye,
  O, that false fire which in his cheek so glowed,
  O, that forced thunder from his heart did fly,
  O, that sad breath his spongy lungs bestowed,
  O, all that borrowed motion, seeming owed,
  Would yet again betray the fore-betrayed,
  And new pervert a reconciled maid.
